parasites are the most abundant and diverse trophic group on the planet. they are ubiquitous in all natural populations and act as a fundamental driving force in mammalian ecology and evolution (barber and dingemanse 2010; tompkins et al. 2011; dunn et al. 2012) . human activities are drastically altering biotic communities via biodiversity loss and species invasions, including pathogens. anticipating and managing the resulting changes in disease dynamics is one of the most daunting challenges of our time. meeting this challenge will require continued progress in understanding disease processes in complex ecological communities. motivated by these urgent basic and applied questions, infectious disease ecology and evolution are experiencing rapid growth as areas of scientific enquiry. the biomedical sciences investigate host-pathogen interactions at suborganismal (cellular and molecular) scales with the aim of discovering targets for intervention that can modify these interactions to prevent pathogen invasion (e.g., vaccines) or promote their expulsion (e.g., antimicrobial drugs). ultimately, the goal is to help individual patients prevent or manage disease. by contrast, the role of disease ecological and evolutionary studies is to increase our understanding of the role that host-parasite interactions play in driving population and evolutionary dynamics and to apply these insights to disease management at the population scale, for biological conservation, veterinary health, and public health.disease ecologists ask fundamental questions about disease processes in host individuals, populations, and communities such as under what conditions can a given parasite invade a host population and how fast will it spread? how will a disease affect host population dynamics? how do host behavior, population dynamics, and physiology affect disease dynamics in natural populations? what roles do different host species play in spreading or attenuating infection? and how do host-parasite and parasite-parasite interactions at the molecular level scale up to affect population-level disease dynamics? consequently, variation among individuals and environments is of fundamental interest in disease ecology, whereas experimental approaches in biomedicine typically go to great lengths to limit such variability, in an effort to discern molecularlevel interactions more clearly. biomedicine has established a number of successful laboratory model systems, developing a sophisticated array of molecular and genetic tools that have transformed the study of disease processes at suborganismal scales. in this review, we argue that disease ecology, too, can benefit greatly from model study systems. model systems in disease ecology and evolution, however, must expressly incorporate individual variability in genotype, behavior, and physiology and be observable across meaningful environmental and temporal gradients and scales.animal models have been an important component of infectious disease research for decades. common models in disease research include small laboratory animals such as mice (mus musculus) and rats (rattus rattus- niewiesk and prince 2002; buer and balling 2003) , nonhuman primates such as macaques (macaca) and marmosets (callithrix-nath et al. 2000) , and other vertebrates such as pigs (sus scrofa domesticus) and zebra fish (danio rerio- lieschke and currie 2007; meurens et al. 2012) . these organisms all possess traits that make them well suited to studying host-pathogen interactions in captive settings. for example, small laboratory animals are often readily accessible, easily manipulated, and relatively simple and inexpensive to maintain under laboratory conditions. larger organisms such as macaques are more expensive to maintain in captivity, but share a high degree of genetic and physiological similarity to humans, making them an invaluable model for a number of human diseases (gardner and luciw 2008) . importantly, almost all of the common animal models are associated with a large repository of resources and tools that facilitate studies of infection and immunity at the molecular, genetic, and cellular levels. in the laboratory mouse for instance, decades of basic research on all aspects of biology, a sequenced genome, and an abundance of mutant strains form the backdrop of ever-expanding research into links between genes and disease (chinwalla et al. 2002; white et al. 2013b) .despite extensive insights derived from the use of animal models in biomedicine, the applicability of these models, particularly mouse models, to complex conditions in humans has come under recent scrutiny (coers et al. 2009; seok et al. 2013) . from an ecological and evolutionary perspective, this ongoing debate prompts even broader reflection about how studies of infectious diseases in laboratory and captive settings apply to natural populations in the real world. unlike the laboratory, the real world is complex and most animals, including humans, interact with parasites and pathogens in this highly variable context. this reality has fueled ideas that "wild" animal models may be as important as laboratory models in the study of infectious disease processes (wolfe et al. 1998; pedersen and babayan 2011) . whereas laboratory animal models have paved the way toward advancing our understanding of disease processes occurring at the genetic, molecular, and cellular levels, the promise of wild models lies in their potential to help define how mechanisms revealed in the laboratory operate within the genetic, phenotypic, and environmental contexts that characterize natural populations. the use of wild models may also facilitate the inclusion of a more diverse set of organisms in infectious disease research, allowing for increasingly powerful comparative studies. however, the challenge is to find wild study systems that will balance realistic complexity with tractability and can thus serve as effective models for discovering how infectious disease processes function in nature.if wild models can contribute to innovation in infectious disease research, a question that arises is, what types of organisms would make good wild animal models? if by definition model species in the laboratory setting are organisms that are simple, readily accessible, and easily manipulated, by extension, good wild models might be highly abundant, easy to find, and amenable to observational, experimental, or longitudinal studies. in addition, good wild models might be characterized by close genetic, physiological, or other similarity to humans or their domestic animals. moreover, if wild models are to act as bridges between the laboratory and the real world, the ideal wild models should be associated with resources and tools that allow for molecular-level approaches to be applied in the field. several groups of mammals squarely fit these criteria (e.g., wild rodents, wild primates). mammalogists are thus uniquely positioned to spearhead efforts to develop new wild models for disease ecological research. here, we focus on the ungulates as a mammalian group that has much to contribute to our understanding of infectious disease processes in the wild.terrestrial hoofed mammals (ungulates) from the orders cetartiodactyla (even-toed ungulates) and perissodactyla (oddtoed ungulates) are a diverse and widely distributed group.with between 250 and 450 species recognized (groves and grubb 2011) , ungulates occur in almost every terrestrial ecoregion, ranging from tropical forest to tundra. the wide distribution and abundance of many ungulates make them highly accessible for disease ecological research. the fact that rhesus macaques (macaca mulatta) are widely distributed across asia contributes to their use as the major nonhuman primate model of infectious disease (mitruka et al. 1976; e.g chenine et al. 2008; semenya et al. 2012) . likewise, the widespread occurrence of baboons (papio) in africa and the middle east, coupled with typically large population sizes, may explain the increasing number of field-based infectious disease studies focusing on this group (weyher et al. 2006; tung et al. 2009; drewe et al. 2012; akinyi et al. 2013) . importantly, numerous ungulate species share these characteristics-broad geographic range and large population sizes-making them easy to locate and observe. moreover, for some ungulate species like whitetailed deer (odocoileus virginianus), red deer (cervus elaphus), and wild boar (s. scrofa), a high level of accessibility coupled with an extensive knowledge base on basic behavior, ecology, life history, physiology, population dynamics, and evolution provide an attractive menu of candidate wild model systems that can be used to investigate questions about infectious diseases processes in a range of environments. another important criterion for a good animal model is tractability. in the context of a wild model, the organism must be amenable to studies that include repeated observation, direct manipulation, or both. the power of laboratory models has always been that they allow for direct manipulation and experimentation in controlled settings. given the inherent variability of natural environments, achieving fundamental insights from wild "model" organisms requires the ability to experimentally manipulate individuals in the field or to track individuals through time, both of which are techniques that maximize power for drawing inferences about disease processes in the wild. both approaches are challenging in natural populations, but recent studies of wild rodent systems in europe illustrate that key insights can be gained from applying these study designs in natural populations. for instance, telfer et al. (2010) used longitudinal studies of wild voles (microtus agrestis) to demonstrate that interactions among parasites occurring within hosts are as important as, if not more than, host and environmental factors in determining infection risk.ungulates are typically larger and more long-lived than rodents and some primates. this makes studying fitness consequences of infectious diseases a more substantial time commitment and attaining significant sample sizes more challenging. heritability and genetic selection pressure of pathogens are likewise more difficult to study in species with a long generation time, and capturing large animals can be difficult and time consuming, making longitudinal studies more costly. nonetheless, important insights into infectious disease processes have emerged from experimental and longitudinal studies of a growing number of free-ranging ungulates (table 1) . these case studies show that wild ungulate populations can be used to address topics ranging from the fitness consequence of infection in wild populations to the drivers of immunological variability in nature (table 1) . however, this type of work could expand to many more species. even though ungulates are much larger in size than rodents and longer lived, traits that make field studies more logistically challenging and expensive, these perceived disadvantages offer some important benefits. for instance, in studies where multiple physiological, immunological, and other variables among adult females, previous exposure to pneumonia was associated with a decrease in the risk of future disease-related mortality; however, a lamb's risk of dying was positively associated with its mother's previous exposuresuses individual-based data to reconstruct how hosts respond immunologically to an unknown causative agent plowright et al. (2013) must be tracked through time, the large body size of ungulates allows for the collection of sufficient sample volumes (e.g., blood, feces) from live animals, an objective that can be difficult to achieve using smaller study organisms. also, studying long-lived model species like ungulates makes it possible to examine links between life span and infectious disease processes, questions that are particularly relevant for understanding chronic diseases including many observed in human populations. finally, from a practical standpoint, the logistical difficulties of working with ungulates are tempered by the fact that this is the only mammalian group for which management of wild species is a worldwide phenomenon (apollonio et al. 2010) . ungulate management varies by species and geographic region but is typically managed by governmental wildlife organizations and may include controlled hunting, disease management, radiotracking, population censuses, and animal translocations. often, these management activities can go hand in hand with disease research, reducing the cost of accessing wild ungulates and enhancing study feasibility. indeed, collaboration between researchers and managers is routine in studies of ungulate ecology. recently, such collaborations have given rise to a number of important insights into the ecology and evolution of infectious disease in wild populations (jolles et al. 2005; robinson et al. 2012; schaschl et al. 2012) . thus, ungulate systems where ongoing management activities are taking place provide particularly attractive targets for disease ecological research.central to the tractability of using a wild species as a model of infectious disease is the availability of resources necessary for probing the mechanistic basis of host-pathogen interactions. these resources include, but are not limited to, diagnostic assays for identifying pathogen exposure and infection, molecular and immunological reagents for quantifying physiological, immunological, and biochemical responses of the host to infection, and drugs and vaccines that can be used for manipulating host susceptibility or infection status. many livestock species, including cattle (bos taurus), sheep (ovis aries), goats (capra hircus), pig (s. scrofa domesticus), and horses (equus caballus), serve as models of both human and animal diseases, and a plethora of resources have been developed for use in these species. for example, the genomes of the cow, sheep, pig, and horse have all been fully or partially sequenced (national animal genome research program 1998 -2014 , and the development of immunological reagents for veterinary species is a major focus of many biotechnology companies. importantly, the close phylogenetic relationships between wild and domesticated ungulates mean that many of the resources developed for livestock can be applied to studies of their free-ranging relatives with modest additional investment. indeed, there are an increasing number of examples where molecular, genetic, and immunological tools from livestock have been successfully adopted for use in their wild relatives (grobler et al. 2002; poissant et al. 2009; olsen and johnson 2012) . transferring molecular tools from livestock to related wild species does involve optimizing protocols to take account of species-specific concentrations of target substrates (e.g., beechler et al. 2012) or differences in reagent affinity for species-specific proteins (e.g., antibody affinity in enzyme-linked immunosorbent assays). the validity of diagnostic tests must be demonstrated in wildlife species (e.g., michel et al. 2011; gorsich et al. 2014) , and vaccine and drug efficacy carefully evaluated. while genetic resources from related domestic species are potentially valuable in analyzing genomic and transcriptomic data from wild ungulates, interspecific variation at genetic loci of interest can thwart attempts to identify target genes for important traits-such as disease resistance-in wildlife (brown et al. 2013 ). these caveats notwithstanding, modifying existing assays is typically a lesser hurdle than designing them from scratch: the transferability of molecular and genetic tools from domestic species makes wild ungulates one of only a few mammalian groups where cuttingedge research at the interface of ecological and biomedical sciences can take place.studies conducted on wild ungulates are addressing some of the major current challenges in infectious disease ecology and evolution (table 1 ). below we showcase 3 examples that illustrate how this group is contributing to fundamental insights in the field: longitudinal and experimental studies in soay sheep (o. aries) are uncovering linkages across organizational levels, from host genetics and immunity to population-level disease outcomes; research in arctic ungulates is revealing striking sensitivity of host-parasite interactions to climate change, and the central position of ungulates in terrestrial food webs is enabling insights into the role of ungulate infections as drivers and outcomes of trophic cascades.from genes to populations: toward a systems biology of infectious disease.-"systems biology" seeks to combine detailed knowledge of the components involved in a biological system and their interactions, with mathematical models to enable us to understand the emergent properties of the system as a whole (ideker et al. 2001; kitano 2002) . the approach has been applied primarily to suborganismal biological systems, such as cells or tissues (e.g., cancer biology- wang et al. 2013 ; cancer and personalized medicine-benes 2013; viral pathogenesis- law et al. 2013 ; human microbiome-weinstock 2012), but it is just as relevant in disease ecology (fig. 1) . in the face of rapid environmental change, a mechanistic understanding of disease dynamics as emerging from the interplay of genetic, environmental, immunologic, and behavioral factors that define host-parasite interactions is urgently needed to improve our ability to anticipate and manage shifts in infectious diseases. this is a formidable challenge that cannot be addressed adequately in laboratory-based systems because host genetics and environmental variation are likely to interact in shaping immunity and host behavior (fig. 1, arrows 1-4) . host behavior defines the opportunities for parasite transmission through contacts among hosts, with vectors, or with environmental reservoirs of infectious material. immunity then determines which contacts between hosts and parasites actually lead to infection and how infections progress within the host. ultimately, the host-parasite interaction results in fitness effects on hosts and parasites, which scale up to shape population dynamics for both (fig. 1 , arrows 5-8). when these interaction mechanisms are poorly understood, our predictions of disease dynamics under changing biotic and abiotic environmental conditions rely on statistical extrapolation from current and past conditions. however, given potentially new parameter combinations and nonlinear functional relationships between environmental drivers and host immunologic or behavioral responses, such predictions must be viewed with caution. a mechanistic framework linking host genetics and environmental variation with immunologic and behavioral responses that determine disease dynamics could complement statistical approaches, improving our ability to predict how infectious disease patterns are likely to change when host population or environmental parameters are pushed outside previously observed conditions by anthropogenic forcing.disease studies in feral soay sheep have been at the forefront of progress toward addressing this formidable challenge (fig. 2) . the soay sheep study population is located in the island of hirta (636 ha) in the st. kilda archipelago in the united kingdom. the population was founded in 1932 when 107 sheep were introduced from the neighboring island of soay. the population is unmanaged and fluctuates between 600 and 2,000 individuals. sheep are parasitized by gastrointestinal helminths (primarily teladorsagia circumcincta, trichostrongylus axei, and trichostrongylus vitrinus- craig et al. 2006) , several species of parasitic protozoa (craig et al. 2007) , and ectoparasitic sheep keds (the dipteran melophagus ovinus- wilson et al. 2004 ). long-term population monitoring of soay sheep, quantifying individual fitness, parasite burdens, and immunity (clutton-brock and pemberton 2004), has been combined with parasite removal experiments and detailed genetic analyses. these studies have established many of the mechanistic details underpinning the population dynamics of sheep and their parasites.strong environmental variation has allowed detection of links between genes, environment, and immunity in soay sheep (arrows 1 and 3 in fig. 2) . soay sheep population dynamics are driven strongly by nutritional restriction during harsh winters. mortality risk during these events varies with parasite burdens, which depend on genetic background (paterson et al. 1998; coltman et al. 1999; coltman et al. 2001a ). variation in parasite resistance in soay lambs is moderately heritable. however, in adult sheep, the evidence for heritable variation in parasite burdens is weak (beraldi et al. 2007) , suggesting that environmental factors and infection history may outweigh host genetic background in determining parasite burdens throughout the lifetime of the sheep. consistent with this, cumulative environmental stress (hayward et al. 2009 ) and season (hazlerigg et al. 2013 ) have both been shown to affect parasite resistance in soays. a recent study (brown et al. 2013) attempted to identify genes associated with variation in parasite burdens and immune traits in soay sheep, using a candidate gene approach. genes known to be involved in parasite resistance in domestic sheep and cattle were evaluated. while several genes did show significant associations with parasite burden, these associations were no more common in candidate genes than in randomly selected "control" genes. the genetic basis for parasite resistance may thus not match for domestic and natural populations.studies of parasite resistance in soay sheep have revealed context-dependent fitness consequences of immunogenetic variation (arrow 5 in fig. 2) . population-level variation in genes associated with parasite resistance may be maintained by tradeoffs, if parasite immunity is costly to the animal and if environmental variation or animal characteristics such as age and sex modify the fitness effects of different alleles. investigations into the genetic basis for parasite resistance in soay sheep have demonstrated such context-dependent trade-offs between parasite resistance and fitness: high antibody responsiveness was shown to be heritable in soays and associated with improved survival of female sheep during harsh winters (graham et al. 2010) . however, balancing this apparent benefit, heritable high antibody responsiveness also correlated with reduced reproduction. thus, for female soays, the "optimal" level of antibody responsiveness depends on winter conditions, which vary enormously from year to year. interestingly, rams with highly reactive antibodies reap no survival benefit, and an earlier study found that rams with high parasite resistance do not appear to pay a price in terms of growth or adult body size (coltman et al. 2001b ). trade-offs maintaining immunoheterogeneity in the soay sheep population may thus be driven disproportionately by female rather than male sheep.in addition to immunogenetic variation, age and sex-dependent avoidance of pasture contaminated with parasite infectious stages contributes to variability in parasite burdens (arrows 4 and 8 in fig. 2 ; hutchings et al. 2002a hutchings et al. , 2002b . however, the extent to which variation in behavioral avoidance of parasites is heritable (arrow 2 in fig. 2 ) and the fitness costs of pasture "selectivity" are as yet unclear (arrow 7 in fig. 2) , and more studies are needed.two decades of intensive, individual-based research on the soay sheep population of hirta have elucidated many of the mechanisms connecting environmental variation with host genetics, immunity and behavior, parasitic infections, and their fitness consequences (fig. 2) . soay sheep are thus a wild model system that is advancing toward understanding emergent properties of the whole system, such as the ecological and evolutionary dynamics of host and parasite populations. the suitability of soay sheep as a wild model for research on the systems biology of infectious disease is due to several population traits: the sheep are highly observable because they habituate readily and their environment is sparsely vegetated. population size is relatively easy to assess, because the sheep occur on an island, which limits population size and prevents migration. the biotic context for disease studies is comparatively simple, with no other ungulate species, no predators, and a limited number of parasite species in the community. parasite effects on hosts are thus not obscured by predation or interspecific competition. strong environmental variability sets the stage for fluctuating selective pressures, and genetic resources, diagnostic methods, and antiparasitic drugs developed for domestic sheep can be applied to feral soays with minimal modification. individualbased longitudinal and experimental studies in other natural ungulate populations, comprising a range of environmental conditions, will be needed to test the generality of findings from this unusually tractable model system.effects of climate change on infectious disease dynamics.-there can be little doubt that the current rapid change in global climates will affect infectious disease dynamics, since climatic conditions underpin the geographic ranges, behavior, physiology, and reproductive rates of organisms-including hosts, vectors, and parasites. however, in contrast to the earlier view that climate warming should generally result in a sicker world (harvell et al. 2002; patz et al. 2005; mcmichael et al. 2006) , current evidence points to complex relationships between climate and disease that may be driven by both abiotic and biotic components of the focal systems and that can result in positive or negative associations between climate change and disease, depending on the thermal tolerances of hosts, vectors, and pathogens (altizer et al. 2013) . host-parasite interactions involving ectothermic hosts and vector-borne or environmentally transmitted parasites are likely to be intrinsically more sensitive to temperature fluctuations than directly transmitted infections of endothermic hosts (rohr et al. 2011) . variation among species in temperature sensitivity of immunity may introduce significant noise into these simple contrasts, and disease emergence at the leading edge of vector and parasite range shifts may be balanced by reductions in cases at the receding edge (harvell et al. 2009 ).while general predictions concerning the response of infectious disease dynamics to climate change are thus elusive and vigorously debated, significant progress is emerging from studies of arctic ungulates and their parasites, paired with innovative theoretical approaches. arctic ecosystems present tractable study systems for climate-disease research because temperature warming in the arctic is proceeding most rapidly (klein et al. 2008; post et al. 2009 ), host and parasite communities are comparatively simple, and organismal range shifts occur overwhelmingly from south to north rather than in both directions.ungulates are prominent players in arctic regions, both in terms of their ecological function, and as sources of food and animal products for human populations (kutz et al. 2012) . as such, shifts in parasite dynamics in wild ungulates due to climate change may jeopardize regional food security and increase zoonotic disease risk as well as affect the health and viability of the wildlife populations themselves (davidson et al. 2011; jenkins et al. 2011) .evidence for changes in disease dynamics due to climate change is accumulating for multiple arctic ungulate species. for example, musk oxen (ovibos moschatus) are experiencing unprecedented outbreaks of pneumonia, both verminous (caused by lungworms) and bacterial (caused by pasteurella- ytrehus et al. 2008) . several mechanisms driven by climate warming appear to be important in causing these outbreaks. musk oxen die-offs due to pasteurellosis have been associated with warm weather events, prompting the hypothesis that increased respiration in an effort to achieve cooling may have allowed more bacteria to enter the lung. stress-induced immunosuppression may then have allowed these opportunistic pathogens to proliferate to the point of clinical disease (ytrehus et al. 2008 ). in the case of lungworms, longer warmer summers appear to have allowed larval development time to accelerate from a 2-year to a 1-year cycle, greatly exacerbating parasite exposure risk to the musk oxen (kutz et al. 2004 (kutz et al. , 2005 . mathematical modeling approaches combining conventional compartment models for macroparasite-host dynamics may 1978, 1991; dobson and hudson 1992) with temperature responses of larval survival and development according to the metabolic theory of ecology (gillooly et al. 2001; brown et al. 2004; mccoy and gillooly 2008; munch and salinas 2009) can reproduce these shifts in helminth life cycles (molnar et al. 2013) , providing theoretical validation for the idea that temperature dependency of parasite life cycles is sufficient to cause the observed shifts in infection patterns.similarly, northward range expansions of protostrongylid nematodes (muscleworms and lungworms) and filarioid nematodes (legworms) are exposing populations of caribou (rangifer tarandus), dall's sheep (ovis dalli), and moose (alces americanus) to new or increased infectious disease burdens (jenkins et al. 2006; laaksonen et al. 2010; halvorsen 2012; verocai et al. 2012) . in some cases, effects of the parasites themselves on host health may be exacerbated by reduced foraging time due to harassment by insect vectors, which increase during warmer weather (witter et al. 2012a (witter et al. , 2012b . emergence and reemergence of infectious diseases in the wake of climate change are by no means limited to the arctic (e.g., global changes in distribution of orbiviruses-maclachlan and guthrie 2010; falconi et al. 2011) , but owing to more pronounced temperature increases at high latitudes, arctic wildlife serves as a sensitive sentinel for impacts of climate change on wildlife disease dynamics, zoonoses, and human health (hoberg et al. 2008; kutz et al. 2012) . empirical and theoretical studies focusing on arctic ungulates are providing some of the most compelling documentation of changing host-parasite relationships in response to climate change. cutting-edge work connecting physiological mechanisms with outcomes for disease dynamics at the population level is feasible in arctic ungulate study systems due to highly observable host animals and relatively simple parasite communities coupled with a strong regional climate signal.disease, trophic cascades, and ecosystem outcomes.-the ubiquity and sheer abundance of parasites in ecological communities begs the question of what role infectious agents play in structuring communities and mediating ecosystem-level fluxes of energy and nutrients. in light of this, parasites are a surprisingly recent addition to trophic web analyses (sukhdeo 2012) , and the majority of such studies have focused on a few wellresolved aquatic and marine food webs (dunne et al. 2013) . in terrestrial ecosystems dominated by large mammals, ungulates occupy a central position as important consumers of primary production and as prey base for a broad range of medium-to large-sized predators (drent and olff 1999) . as such, both bottom-up and top-down mechanisms may play a role in regulating ungulate populations (sinclair et al. 2003; fritz et al. 2011; hopcraft et al. 2012 ). dynamics and ecosystem-level impacts of ungulate infectious diseases, then, should vary with the host species' roles in the food web. where ungulate populations exert intense pressure on their food, infectious diseases that reduce animal numbers may release vegetation from curbs on recruitment imposed by ungulate consumption. such trophic cascades should be especially pronounced where diseases take a large net toll, as may be expected under low predation pressure (due to predator extirpation or large ungulate body size) where disease acts as an independent mortality factor.infectious disease studies of ungulates based on 2 ecosystems boasting diverse ungulate and predator assemblages-the greater yellowstone ecosystem in the western united states and east africa's serengeti-mara ecosystem-are providing tests of 2 central ideas: enhancing predator populations may offer innovative options for disease control through competitive interactions between predators and pathogens and diseases may drive ecosystem dynamics by mediating recruitment limitation of woody plants.a recent increase in brucellosis prevalence in elk (c. elaphus) herds in the greater yellowstone ecosystem is serious cause for concern (cross et al. 2010a ). brucellosis (pathogen: brucella abortus) is a bacterial infection that causes morbidity and abortions in a broad range of host species including cervid and bovid ungulates as well as humans. preventing spillover of the infection from elk to cattle is likely to prove even more challenging than limiting disease spread from bison because elk are far more abundant than bison and range freely over large swathes of the landscape. the observed increase in brucellosis has been linked to increases in elk population density over the past 20 years and massive expansion of elk winter aggregations coinciding with the seasonal transmission peak for b. abortus (cross et al. 2010a (cross et al. , 2010b . these increases in elk density and b. abortus seroprevalence have occurred in elk populations outside yellowstone national park. at the same time, elk populations inside the park (white et al. 2012 ) and migratory elk that spend part of the year in the park (middleton et al. 2013a ) have experienced low recruitment and declines in numbers and group size. direct and indirect effects of predation by wolves and grizzly bears in yellowstone national park, climate-driven changes in plant phenology, and competition with elk feeding on irrigated pasture on private land have been implicated as mechanisms driving poor performance of elk in the park (creel et al. 2011; griffin et al. 2011; middleton et al. 2013a middleton et al. , 2013b wilmers and levi 2013) . brucellosis in elk in the park remained stable at low prevalence (barber-meyer et al. 2007) , and elk declines in the park have been accompanied by increased recruitment of woody vegetation (ripple and beschta 2012) . while more work is needed to understand the causes underlying elk population dynamics in yellowstone national park (massey et al. 2013) , these correlations suggest that predator protection may be effective as part of a strategy both for limiting the spread of brucellosis in elk and for restoring western deciduous woodlands in the united states. ongoing efforts to restore predators to western united states wild lands and elsewhere may provide opportunities for studying the effects of predators on ungulate disease dynamics through a series of natural experiments.ungulate-pathogen-vegetation dynamics in the serengeti-mara ecosystem present a contrasting picture. the serengeti-mara ecosystem comprises a dynamic patchwork of grassland and wooded habitats. biotic (herbivores, including elephants) and abiotic (fire, rainfall) drivers influence grassland-woodland dynamics in african savannas (sankaran et al. 2005; bucini and hanan 2007; bond 2008) . in the serengeti-mara ecosystem, it is indirect effects of rinderpest, an infectious disease of artiodactyls (even-toed ungulates), that act as a dominant driver of woody plant dynamics (holdo et al. 2009 ). rinderpest is caused by a morbillivirus that was introduced into the serengeti-mara ecosystem with european cattle in the late 19th century. the disease decimated wild bovid populations until the early 1960s, when it disappeared from wildlife, following vaccination of cattle in surrounding areas (mcnaughton 1992) . the irruption of wildebeest (connochaetes taurinus) in this ecosystem following rinderpest eradication caused a sharp reduction in fuel load due to increased grazing, which in turn reduced fire frequency and intensity. this promoted woody plant recruitment, shifting more area from grassland to woodland and altering ecosystemwide nutrient dynamics (holdo et al. 2009 ). infectious diseases can thus play contrasting roles as causes or consequences of trophic cascades in different ecosystems, depending on the interplay between disease and predation, the trophic niche of the host (grazer or browser), and the abiotic context that underlies ecosystem dynamics. ungulates have proven to be ideal models for exploring these types of dynamics.both past and current works highlight the point that ungulate model systems are poised to help pave the way forward in disease ecology and evolution. there are also clear opportunities for the future where ungulates may provide fundamental insight. for example, emerging infectious diseases are one of the most pressing public health concerns of our time (jones et al. 2008) , and in a now classic assessment of the characteristics of emerging pathogens of humans, taylor et al. (2001) estimated that over 60% of human emerging infectious diseases are transmissible between humans and animals, and 57% of these emerging zoonoses were linked to wild ungulate hosts (cleaveland et al. 2001) . these statistics suggest that wild ungulates are an important conduit of pathogens to humans making them a relevant focus group for pathogen discovery studies, similar to current work being done in wild primates (calvignac-spencer et al. 2012) . future studies investigating the diversity of infectious agents in wild ungulate populations may shed light on likely taxonomic and geographic sources of new pathogens. because one explanation for why wild ungulates are such an important source of human pathogens is their relatedness to livestock species (wolfe et al. 2007 ), studies of wild ungulates are also well poised to provide insights into the drivers of emergence. for instance, are contact rates between wild and domestic ungulates important predictors of novel pathogen spillover into human populations?in a translational context, wild model systems have much to contribute to the discovery of new approaches to reduce the global impact of disease in human populations, impacts that might come about via direct effects of disease on human health or indirect effects mediated by economic losses (e.g., via livestock production). wild animals contend with a diverse suite of parasites and pathogens under a range of environmental conditions, and studying model organisms in their natural environment may unveil new mechanisms by which hosts resist and tolerate infection. studying ungulates in particular could inform disease control and prevention in livestock species. overall, insights from wild mammal systems are fueling new discoveries and driving new paradigms in many fields in the biological sciences (manceau et al. 2011; seifert et al. 2012) . for scientists focused on the study of infectious diseases, the utility of using natural systems to probe complex interactions between hosts and pathogens is increasingly recognized (jackson et al. 2011) . the skill sets and knowledge of disease ecologists and mammalogists are highly complementary and present strong opportunities for collaborative research aimed at understanding disease processes in natural populations: disease ecologists study parasite population dynamics and offer experimental and quantitative skills to develop and parameterize mathematical models that represent disease dynamics. mammalogists bring to the table in-depth knowledge about the biology of mammalian host populations as well as essential skills for working with free-ranging mammals and analyzing the resulting complex data sets. the time is ripe, therefore, for mammalogists and disease ecologists to join forces and develop a range of wild ungulate systems as new wild models of infectious disease.thoracic outlet syndrome (tos) refers to a group of conditions in which the neurovascular 2 structures that serve the upper extremity are subject to extrinsic compression as they pass 3 through the base of the neck, underneath the clavicle, over the first rib, and extending to the 4 subcoracoid space. 1 standards of the society for vascular surgery. 2 16 17 in december 2019, clustered cases of a severe atypical pneumonia were first observed in wuhan, 18 china, which were subsequently attributed to a novel coronavirus designated sars-cov-2. 3-5 19 by march 2020, rapid worldwide spread of sars-cov-2 infection led the world health 20organization to declare a public health emergency of international concern and a global 21 pandemic. 6 the first case of covid-19 in the united states was reported on january 20, 2020, 22 followed by evidence for person-to-person transmission and community spread. 7, 8 travel 23 6 restrictions were implemented in the united states in february 2020 and public health 1 containment and mitigation measures quickly followed. in early march 2020, the centers for 2 disease control and prevention recommended that hospitals and medical practitioners prepare 3 for a surge in covid-19 cases that threatened to overwhelm medical resources. tiered 4 frameworks to guide non-emergency surgery were independently developed by the centers for 5medicare & medicaid services, the american college of surgeons (acs), the society for 6 vascular surgery (svs) and the vascular and endovascular surgical society (vess). 9-16 on 7march 13, 2020, the acs advised members against performing elective scheduled procedures in 8 order to minimize the use of essential personal protective equipment (ppe), intensive care unit 9 (icu) beds, and ventilators. 11-14 with regard to the management of tos, the acs and svs 10 guidelines designated surgical treatment for neurogenic tos in tier 1 (postpone), other venous 11 tos in tier 2a (consider postponing), and symptomatic venous tos with acute occlusion and 12 marked swelling, arterial tos with thrombosis, and thrombolysis (arterial and venous) all in tier 13 2b (postpone if possible). 14, 15 although these recommendations relate to non-emergency 14 operations they do not address the overall evaluation and treatment for tos, suggesting that 15 more comprehensive guidelines would be of use. 16many physicians are uncertain about the most appropriate approaches to be taken in evaluating 18 patients for suspected tos. there are also variations and nuances in the approaches taken to 19 clinical evaluation and management of tos and marked differences in the care provided for 20 these conditions in different clinical settings. these concerns have all been magnified as a result 21 of restricted access to specialists and uncertainty about the most appropriate patient care during 22 the sars-cov-2/covid-19 pandemic. because much of the care for patients with tos is 23 considered "elective," in most areas physicians have postponed or cancelled in-person office 1 evaluations and follow-up visits, physical therapy, pain management, imaging and other testing, 2 and the conduct of surgical and interventional procedures. nonetheless, there remain situations in 3 which patient care must be provided, expertise obtained, and (in some cases) interventions and 4 surgical treatment conducted, depending on the specific clinical situation and the local phase of 5 pandemic response at a given time. the purpose of this report is to describe the approaches that a 6 group of tos specialists has taken for the evaluation and treatment of tos during the global 7 sars-cov-2/covid-19 pandemic, in an effort to offer more detailed guidelines and 8 recommendations for other physicians and specialists. transitions between phases are dependent on local-regional covid-19 case numbers and 9 hospital resources, and decisions to transition from phase iii towards a gradual easing of social 10 distancing and travel restrictions are made at the hospital, community and state-wide levels. conditions and governmental regulations will also influence the incidence and prevalence of the 16 disease, along with potential fluctuations in resources. it is also foreseeable that conditions may 17 arise during any easing of restrictions that will require transitions back to higher-level phases of 18 pandemic response. as restrictions are eased and hospitals transition back from phase iii towards 19 phase ii and phase i conditions, interventional and surgical treatment for patients with tos may 20 emerge with a relatively high priority based on published scoring systems. 18 this is based on the 21 recognition that patients with these conditions are often substantially disabled but generally 22 young, active, and otherwise healthy, and that the procedures involved are generally associated 1 with minimal morbidity, no intensive care utilization, and short hospital stays. all surgical procedures related to neurogenic tos should generally be postponed until the 1 resolution of pandemic conditions. during pandemic phase i, treatment may be considered in 2 exceptional cases of neurogenic tos with severe, unrelenting, pain, neurological dysfunction, 3 and pronounced functional disability, such as those with disability of the arm, shoulder, and 4hand (dash) scores > 90. 2 it is still recommended that surgery be postponed even for patients 5 with more chronic pain and neurological symptoms in the presence of a cervical rib and 6 thenar/hypothenar muscle atrophy (gilliat-sumner hand), which is unlikely to change outcomes 7 in the span of several months given the chronic nature of the clinical presentation. as the diagnosis of arterial tos involves comprehensive evaluation in accord with established 20 criteria, it is recommended that patients with suspected arterial tos be referred to a specialist 21 with expertise in management of this condition. 1,2 arterial tos involves subclavian artery 22 pathology in the presence of a bony abnormality, such as a cervical rib or anomalous first rib, 23 with subclavian artery stenosis and aneurysm formation which may lead to acute 1 thromboembolism and limb-threatening ischemia. it is important to emphasize that positional 2 absence or dampening of the upper extremity arterial pulses during arm elevation, in the 3 presence of normal arterial pulses with the arm at rest and in the absence of thromboembolism or 4 subclavian artery pathology (thrombosis or aneurysm), does not represent arterial tos. 5additionally, recognition of a cervical rib (via plain film x-rays of the chest or cervical spine), 6should prompt further axial imaging to evaluate the potential for a subclavian artery aneurysm. 7prompt diagnosis, intervention and surgical treatment for acute upper extremity ischemia related 8 to arterial tos is considered necessary given the potential for limb-threatening complications. in 9 such situations, treatment of arterial tos is directed toward limb salvage and achieving optimal 10 upper extremity function, and is thereby considered "urgent" or "emergent" even under 11 pandemic conditions. arterial tos in the absence of acute upper extremity ischemia, such as 12 with digital embolization and subclavian artery aneurysm, has the potential to progress to more 13 severe, limb-threatening, ischemia that may lead to the need for urgent or emergency treatment. 14 such situations thereby warrant urgent evaluation and appropriate treatment considerations to 15 prevent progression, even if not providing definitive management. 16in-person routine office evaluations for new patients with suspected arterial tos without 18 evidence of distal embolic disease are not conducted, but are deferred until the resolution of 19 pandemic conditions; however, it is recommended that initial patient-physician interaction be 20 offered by telephone/telemedicine at the discretion of the tos specialist, to offer education and 21 help alleviate patient anxiety, with the recognition that definitive clinical diagnosis of arterial 22 tos requires in-person physical examination and appropriate vascular imaging studies (eg, 23duplex ultrasound, ct angiography, mr angiography, or catheter-based arteriography). 2, 19 1 prescriptions for outpatient oral antiplatelet or anticoagulation treatment (with a noac or 2 injectable heparin to avoid the need for laboratory blood testing with warfarin) may be 3 recommended or written by the tos specialist, based on an adequate telemedicine consultation 4 and a presumptive clinical or radiographic diagnosis of subclavian artery aneurysm. it is also 5 recommended that patients with a presumptive diagnosis of arterial tos have restrictions placed 6 on elevated arm activity with the affected upper extremity. the sars-cov-2/covid-19 pandemic has placed enormous and unprecedented strain on 2 medical care systems across the globe. with emergency room, hospital, and intensive care 3 utilization rapidly outstripping the available resources, one of the primary goals of physicians 4 and surgeons during this time is to preserve and expand hospital resources ("staff, space, and 5 stuff"). 21-23 the management of tos varies according to the particular type, but surgical therapy 6 of neurogenic and venous tos should generally not be offered due to the risks of sars-cov- 2 7 infection and transmission, as well as the need to limit exposure of medical personnel and the 8 consumption of hospital resources. surgical treatment for arterial tos should also be limited as 9 much as possible, and when necessary for limb salvage, should be largely confined to brachial-10 based interventions. in most cases, more definitive surgical treatment for all forms of tos is 11 deferred or postponed until the easing of restrictions and resolution of pandemic conditions. 12regrettably, it is foreseeable that future infectious disease pandemics will arise that may once 13 again threaten to overwhelm regional and national health care infrastructures, for which we hope 14 these guidelines will be of value as a framework for evaluation and management of patients with 15 tos. 16 neonatal calf septicemia causes high morbidity and mortality and is one of the leading and most significant difficulties in raising cattle. calf septicemia is the main cause of death in the neonatal period [1] . its etiology involves bacteria (commonly escherichia coli), viruses (rota and coronavirus), parasites, and other factors. as the disease progresses quickly and is lethal, diagnosis and treatment should be initiated as quickly as possible [2] .hepcidin is a low molecular weight, antimicrobial peptide hormone and was first discovered in human urine [3] . it is produced by the liver as a firstline response to inflammatory reactions and high fe concentrations [4, 5] . hepcidin plays a fundamental role in the regulation of fe metabolism [6] , which is a part of foundational cellular functions and thus of vital importance. on the other hand, by participating in redox reactions leading to the production of reactive oxygen species (ross), fe also causes oxidative stress. therefore, fe has been regarded as a potentially toxic element to cells [7] . fe also plays an important role in pathogenesis of bacterial infections as bacteria utilize fe for survival, growth and proliferation; therefore, it is of paramount importance to control the fe metabolism [6] . it is well known that the abundance of fe suppresses defense system leading host vulnerable to infections. there is a significant relationship between hepcidin, fe metabolism, inflammation, and the immune system. the fact that hepcidin plays an active role in the regulation of fe release from macrophages and in the control of excessive fe absorption from the duodenum is well documented [6] . hepcidin is a part of the natural defense mechanism, thus it limits the amount of fe that can be utilized by pathogens [8] . in inflammatory conditions, hypoferremia is an important first-line protective mechanism in response to infections [9] . fe also participates in redox reactions, causing the production of ros, and thus leading to oxidative stress [7] . free radicals play a significant role in the pathogenesis of many diseases [10] . newborns are subject to oxidative stress during birth. it is also reported that in livestock diseases, especially enteritis and pneumonia, antioxidant capacity is efficacious [11] .this study was designed to determine the clinical significance of hepcidin in calves with suspected neonatal septicemia by evaluating serum hepcidin, total antioxidant status (tas), total oxidant status (tos), and fe levels in calves suspected of neonatal septicemia before and after treatment.this study was conducted after obtaining approval from the mehmet akif ersoy university animal experiments local ethics committee (maku-hadyek-submission: 2014/77).the study consisted of 15 calves with suspected neonatal septicemia aged between 1 and 10 days old admitted to the teaching hospital of veterinary medicine. suspected septicemia was diagnosed based on clinical (diarrhea, weakness in or absence of sucking reflex, the calf being in a supine position on the ground or being unable to stand, severe dehydration, abnormal rectal temperature [hypo-or hyperthermia], mucosal hyperemia, and full sclera) and hematological (increase in white blood cell [wbc] count) examinations; the animals were suspected to have septicemia [12, 13] . the animals were given standard treatment (antibiotic, nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, vitamin c, fluid therapy, and intestinal astringent). for determination of serum hepcidin, tas, tos, fe levels, and hematological parameters; blood samples were taken before and after treatment in all cases. 8.5 ml of blood was taken from the jugular vein of each animal into coagulant tubes for biochemical analysis, and 3 ml blood was taken into etda tubes for hematological analysis. samples were centrifuged at 3000 rpm for 10 min, and the serum was harvested and kept at 20c until the analysis. serum hepcidin (mybiosource  ), tas (rel assay diagnostics  ), and tos (rel assay diagnostics  ) were determined using commercial elisa kits, and fe value was measured spectrophotometrically. hematological (wbc, lymphocyte [lym], red blood cells [rbc], mean corpuscular volume (mcv), and hematocrit [hct]) analysis was performed on blood counter (vg-ms4e  , melet schloesng, france).the results were evaluated using the t-test in the spss  (spss 20, usa) statistical package program to determine the differences between values before and after treatment.calves with suspected septicemia exhibited clinical signs of loss of appetite, fatigue, indifference to surroundings, reduced/absence of sucking reflex, cool extremities, inability to stand, diarrhea, eye sinking into their sockets, and hyperemia in the conjunctiva. the average body temperature, heart rate, and respiratory rates of the animals were 37.180.13c, 1044.33/min, and 28.860.75/min pre-treatment; and 38.540.1c, 107.532.20/min and 26.400.36/min post-treatment, respectively.the changes in hepcidin, tas, tos and fe levels in the calves with suspected septicemia before and after treatment are given in table- 1. after treatment, serum hepcidin and tos levels were significantly lower than before treatment in calves. on contrary, serum tas and fe levels were significantly higher than before treatment (table-1 ).the treatment of calves resulted in significant changes in the hematological parameters that were examined except for rbc. the wbc count, lym count, mcv and hct significantly changed after treatment when compared to values obtained before treatment (table-2 ).this study aimed to determine the clinical importance or use of hepcidin by comparing the values of serum hepcidin, tas, tos and fe levels in calves with suspected neonatal septicemia before and after treatment.clinicians rely on clinical and laboratory examinations of patients to form a working diagnosis, so hematological and serum biochemical parameters are usually used for this purpose [14] . the hematological parameters (wbc, hct, lym, and mcv) evaluated in this study were comparable with those reported by others in neonatal calves with diarrhea and suspected septicemia [15] [16] [17] . treatment significantly corrected to normal values the hematological parameters that were examined with the exception of rbc. pretreatment leukocyte count was high because of the inflammation that occurred in the organism, and that the hct levels were high due to the dehydration that occurred due to diarrhea. hepcidin is controlled by the presence of inflammation in the body, fe storage, and erythropoietic activity in the bone marrow and plays a primary role in the homeostasis of fe [4] . the increase in tissue and plasma fe levels stimulates the synthesis of hepcidin and reduces fe release and enteric fe absorption from macrophages and hepatocytes [18] . increased hepcidin concentrations during inflammation and infection reduce serum fe levels by decreasing fe release from macrophages and hepatocytes, and thus fe required for microorganisms and tumor cells is restricted [19] .serum hepcidin levels in calves with suspected septicemia were significantly high before treatment when compared to after treatment; also fe levels were lower before treatment when compared to after treatment in this study. this situation could be related to the interaction between hepcidin and fe and also gives credence to the role of hepcidin in the hemostasis of fe during inflammation and infection. as in our study, fe levels are well known to decrease in diarrheic calves when compared to healthy calves [20, 21] . although no study exists reporting hepcidin concentration in diseased calves, studies in human subjects show that cord blood hepcidin levels might be an important indicator in diagnosing early-onset of neonatal sepsis. the cord blood hepcidin levels of neonatal infants with sepsis varied between 118.1 and 8400 ng/ml and were significantly higher than the healthy infants [22] . a similar result was reported that hepcidin concentrations in neonatal infants with sepsis were significantly higher than in healthy infants [23] . these findings along with our results add credence to the idea that hepcidin-fe interaction may play a role in the pathogenesis of septicemia.the production of free oxygen species causes alterations in protein, lipid, and dna during oxidative stress and leads to the development of lesions in the organs [24] . free iron has toxic characteristics as it catalyses the production of ross [25] and thus causes oxidative stress [26] . the role of fe in the development of oxidative stress may once more show the importance of hepcidin, as an important fe regulator, with regard to enhancing antioxidant capacity through inhibiting utilization of fe by the organism as well as the host cells.the antioxidant and oxidative system are in a constant state of balance in the organism. any event breaking up this balance in favor of the oxidative stress molecules will cause cell damage [27, 28] . the host cells initiate the antioxidant system in case of exposure to oxidative stress [27] . kabu et al. [16] reported tos and tas values in neonatal calves with diarrhea as 13.470.81 mol h 2 o 2 /l and 0.510.02 mmol trolox-equivalent/l, respectively, and treatment of these calves caused changes in these values of 11.210.26 mol h 2 o 2 /l and 0.550.02 mmol troloxequivalent/l, respectively. studies also reported that parameters used for oxidative stress (malondialdehyde) were higher [29] and antioxidant parameters (superoxide dismutase [21] , tas) were lower in diarrheic calves [29] . similarly, in our study, tas level was significantly lower and tos level was significantly higher in diarrheic calves before treatment, and treatment caused corrections in these parameters. decrease in tas and increase in tos levels demonstrated that oxidative stress was evident in the diseased calves in our study. increased tos and hepcidin levels before treatment are thought that associated with inflammation. after treatment increased tas and decreased hepcidin levels support this opinion.hepcidin may play an important part in non-specific immunity and is a key molecule that plays a role in the pathogenesis of diseases by enhancing the development of antioxidant system. however, more detailed studies are needed on the role of hepcidin in the pathogenesis of septicemia.this work was carried out in collaboration between all authors. eee, hme and ahk: designed the experimental procedures. eee, eg and mk: conducted the research work. eee, ahk, mo and ak: helped in laboratory analysis. all authors read and approved the final manuscript.la va area se divide en superior e inferior, tomando el cartlago cricoides como punto de divisin. la trquea es el inicio de la va area inferior, y forma parte de la zona de conduccin que incluye desde la trquea hasta las primeras 16 divisiones en bronquios principales, bronquios lobares, bronquios segmentarios, bronquiolos, bronquiolos lobulillares y terminales.la traquetis es la infeccin aguda de la trquea, patologa que es ms frecuente en los nios 1 . el trmino crup se refiere a la clnica originada de la inflamacin en la laringe y la va area subgltica. sin embargo, este trmino se ha utilizado para describir una variedad de afecciones respiratorias en ni-os que incluyen laringitis, laringotraquetis, laringotraqueobronquitis, traquetis bacteriana o crup espasmdico 1,2 .se recoge en la tabla 1.distinguimos los siguientes tipos:1. parainfluenza tipo 1, esta es la causa ms comn de laringotraquetis aguda, especialmente durante las epidemias de otoo e invierno.2. parainfluenza tipo 2, puede causar algunos brotes, pero generalmente la clnica es ms leve que la de parainfluenza tipo 1.3. parainfluenza tipo 3, los brotes son an ms espordicos, pero los cuadros suelen ser ms graves que los debidos a parainfluenza tipo 1 y 2.4. parainfluenza tipo 4, es el menos probable de todos, pero tambin puede asociarse.aunque los virus parainfluenza son los asociados con ms frecuencia a las traquetis, otros virus que tpicamente suelen asociarse a infecciones del tracto respiratorio inferior pueden causar sntomas en la va area superior, como son:1. virus sincitial respiratorio (vsr). 2. adenovirus, herpes simple. estos dos son bastantes frecuentes.3. coronavirus humano. los coronavirus humanos probablemente representan del 5 al 10% de todas las infecciones agudas de las vas respiratorias superiores en adultos, con brotes durante los cuales del 25 al 35% de las infecciones respiratorias se pueden atribuir a una sola especie. sin embargo, los estudios que incluyen nios asintomticos indican que los coronavirus a menudo se encuentran en ausencia de sntomas, lo que sugiere que, aunque es comn, su patogenicidad en lactantes y nios sanos puede ser baja. las cepas de coronavirus humano (hcov) hcov-oc43, hcov-nl63, hcov-229e y hcov-hku1 parecen predominar de manera impredecible en ciertos aos y en ciertas partes del mundo. hcov-oc43 es probablemente la ms comn de las cuatro cepas, seguida por hcov-nl63, pero la prevalencia de las diversas cepas en cualquier ao en particular es impredecible.4. paramixovirus. virus del sarampin, es una causa importante de traquetis, en zonas donde la prevalencia an es alta. lo mismo ocurre con la varicela zoster. 5. el virus influenza es poco frecuente, pero se ha visto que, en estos casos, los nios hospitalizados requieren ingresos ms prolongados y tienen mayor riesgo de reingreso.6. los rinovirus, los enterovirus (especialmente los tipos coxsackie a9, b4 y b5 y los tipos de echovirus 4, 11 y 21) y el virus del herpes simple son ocasionalmente causas de casos espordicos de crup y generalmente son leves.7. los metaneumovirus, aunque con ms frecuencia son responsables de infecciones de las vas respiratorias bajas como el vsr, tambin se han asociado en algunos pacientes a manifestaciones clnicas de la va area superior.mycoplasma pneumoniae se asocia a casos leves.las infecciones secundarias tambin pueden ocurrir en nios con laringotraquetis, laringotraqueobronquitis o laringotraqueobronconeumonitis. los patgenos bacterianos secundarios ms comunes incluyen: staphylococcus aureus, el agente ms comn, incluyendo al staphylococcus aureus meticilin resistente 2 ; streptococcus pneumoniae; streptococcus pyogenes: moraxella catarrhalis y haemophilus influenzae tipo b.otras menos frecuentes son: pseudomonas aeruginosa; escherichia coli; klebsiella pneumonia; bacterias anaerobias y corinebacteruium asociado a casos de traquetis pseudomembranosa.la etiologa en estos pacientes es muy distinta, por lo que se debe describir aparte. la mayora son de origen bacteriano, siendo las ms frecuentes pseudomonas aeruginosa, staphylococcus aureus y acinetobacter baumannii. los organismos vricos tambin pueden ser causantes de traquetis, como el virus del herpes simple. se han descrito algunos hongos como candida y aspergillus, pero su papel como agentes patgenos no est claro.se resumen en la tabla 2.presentacin tpica en nios con edades comprendidas entre 3 meses y tres aos. se caracteriza por una clnica de inicio gradual, comenzando con sntomas de rinorrea, congestin nasal y coriza, que progresa en las siguientes 12 a 48 horas a tos sin expectoracin, disfona, fiebre y estridor 3,4 . la dificultad respiratoria ir aumentando en funcin de que vaya aumentando la obstruccin de la va area superior. la aparicin de sntomas de afectacin de va area inferior y la rapidez de la progresin sugieren mayor gravedad 2 . el tiempo de resolucin suele ser de 3 a 7 das 3-5 .la caracterstica anatmica distintiva de estas enfermedades es el estrechamiento de la va area subgltica (la zona de la laringe inmediatamente debajo de las cuerdas vocales) 3 . ocurre cuando la inflamacin se extiende a los bronquios, produciendo signos caractersticos en las vas respiratorias inferiores, generalmente es una enfermedad ms grave que la laringotraquetis sola 5 . en ocasiones incluso puede avanzar hasta neumonas. es frecuente que este trmino se use indistintamente con la laringotraquetis, siendo con frecuencia difcil de distinguir clnicamente.tambin llamada crup bacteriano, es la afectacin bacteriana de la trquea que, al producir un exudado espeso y purulento causa sntomas de obstruccin de la va area superior. como ya se ha dicho, el origen ms frecuente suele ser la sobreinfeccin bacteriana tras una infeccin vrica; pero no es extrao que se presente como una infeccin bacteriana primaria, sobre todo en pacientes que han requerido intubacin endotraqueal o traqueostomas 3,4 .es una de las formas clnicas de la traquetis, incluida por algunos a su vez en la traquetis bacteriana, ya que es causada con ms frecuencia por infecciones bacterianas, pero tambin se han descrito casos por hongos. se caracteriza por una pseudomembrana que cubre parcial o completamente el rbol traqueobronquial y que produce una mayor obstruccin de la va area. suele presentarse en pacientes inmunodeficientes. los patgenos asociados suelen ser: aspergillus, candida, cryptococcus, rhizopus y mucorales. en casos ms raros, la traquetis pseudomembranosa puede ser causada por patgenos bacterianos invasivos como bacillus cereus.en ocasiones tambin llamada traqueobronquitis nosocomial, ha sido descrita como una entidad clnica distinta, y probablemente precursora de la neumona asociada a la ventilacin 6,7 .es la que ocurre en pacientes con tubos de traqueostoma sin ventilacin mecnica.se recogen en la tabla 3.la clnica suele ser gradual. inicialmente se trata de una clnica de la va area superior, como rinorrea, congestin nasal, pudiendo en ocasiones presentar faringitis, que tras 12-48 horas progresa a disfona, tos seca y estridor a medida que aumenta el grado de obstruccin de la va area superior. si la obstruccin sigue progresando, puede presentar taquipnea con fase inspiratoria prolongada.los sntomas suelen resolverse entre los 3 y 7 das. sin embargo, si la obstruccin de la va area sigue progresando, el estridor bifsico (estridor escuchado tanto en la inspiracin como en la espiracin) se har presente incluso en reposo, siendo un signo de alarma y gravedad. en los nios suelen presentar inquietud y ansiedad.a medida que va evolucionando la gravedad de la obstruccin, puede presentarse trabajo respiratorio, taquipnea, retracciones supraesternales, subcostales e intercostales. incluso presentando hipoxia, cianosis. en los casos ms graves, fatiga y disminucin del nivel de consciencia.en esta forma clnica, adems de los sntomas descritos en la laringotraquetis, encontraremos sntomas y signos de afectacin bronquial como sibilancias, mayor disnea y taquipnea, pudiendo presentar crepitantes y roncus. la afectacin clnica suele ser mayor que en la laringotraquetis; sin embargo, la mayora de las veces la distincin clnica entre ellas es muy difcil.se suele iniciar con la misma clnica de afectacin de la va area superior que en las anteriores, durante unos 3 das, y posteriormente aparecen los signos de gravedad como estridor, tos, dificultad respiratoria, hipoxemia, fiebre 4,5 .en una minora de nios, el inicio es fulminante, progresando en menos de 24 horas, donde los nios se presentan con apariencia txica y fiebre. esta presentacin est principalmente asociada a la traquetis bacteriana primaria.otros sntomas menos frecuentes son dolor cervical, ortopnea, disfagia y sncope.los sntomas de gravedad en los nios son cianosis, somnolencia o disminucin del nivel de consciencia y agitacin (relacionado con la hipoxemia y/o hipercapnia) 1,5,8 .la clnica es similar a la de la traquetis bacteriana pero ms grave, con mayor dificultad respiratoria, fiebre con temperatura alta, aspecto txico, estridor inspiratorio y espiratorio, hipoxemia, cianosis, mayor taquipnea, pudiendo llegar a causar disminucin del nivel de consciencia.la clnica en estos pacientes suele ser difcil de diferenciar de las neumonas asociadas de ventilacin mecnica. suelen presentar fiebre, cambios de color, viscosidad y olor de las secreciones traqueales, aumento en la frecuencia de las aspiraciones (ya que sugiere un aumento de produccin o volumen), aumento de los requerimientos de fio 2 (fraccin inspirada de oxgeno) y aumento del trabajo respiratorio. en la auscultacin se observan crepitantes, roncus y/o sibilancias 7,9 .la misma clnica la pueden presentar los pacientes con neumona asociada a la ventilacin mecnica, por lo que la diferencia la realizar la radiografa de trax 6 .la presentacin clnica de la traquetis, traqueobronquitis y traquetis bacteriana depende de la forma clnica especfica y del grado de obstruccin de la va area superior.en los casos de traquetis suelen ser autolimitados, con posterior recuperacin completa.si hay sobreinfeccin bacteriana, entonces puede evolucionar a una laringotraquetis bacteriana que, como ya hemos descrito, tiene una clnica ms grave que puede tener ms complicaciones, entre ellas la formacin de pseudomembranas que pueden cubrir parte de la va area superior y de la trquea, incluso afectar a los bronquios.hay que recordar que la traquetis bacteriana tambin tiene una presentacin ms grave que desde el inicio presenta sntomas y signos de gravedad, y que la causa suele ser bacteriana primaria.cuando la afectacin es mayor e incluye bronquios, entonces hablamos de traqueobronquitis, forma clnica que suele ser difcil de diferenciar clnicamente de la neumona; hacindose necesario el uso de tcnicas diagnsticas (radiografa de trax) para la confirmacin del diagnstico.sin embargo, casi todas suelen comenzar con una clnica de unos 3-5 das de evolucin caracterstica de va area superior, fase en la que los virus infectan el epitelio de la mucosa nasal y farngea y luego se diseminan localmente a lo largo del epitelio respiratorio hasta la laringe, la trquea e incluso los bronquios.la caracterstica anatmica distintiva de estas enfermedades es el estrechamiento de la va area subgltica (la zona de la laringe inmediatamente debajo de las cuerdas vocales) 3 . el cartlago cricoides de la subglotis es un anillo cartilaginoso completo, a diferencia de los anillos traqueales que tienen forma de herradura, por lo que no puede expandirse, lo que causa un estrechamiento significativo cuando hay inflamacin en dicha zona. adems de esta obstruccin que es fija, tambin se va a producir una obstruccin dinmica de la trquea extratorcica, debajo del anillo cartilaginoso, sobre todo cuando el nio lucha, llora o se agita. esto se produce como resultado de la combinacin de una presin negativa alta en la trquea extratorcica distal y la malacia de la pared traqueal en los nios. el estridor es el signo de esta obstruccin 2 .en la traquetis aguda, se podr observar un enrojecimiento e inflamacin en el rea justo debajo de las cuerdas vocales que, en casos graves, puede reducir el dimetro hasta solo 1 o 2 mm. adems del edema y la inflamacin de la mucosa, pueden acumularse exudados fibrinosos y, ocasionalmente, pseudomembranas en las superficies traqueales y contribuir al estrechamiento de las vas respiratorias 2,10 . esto ltimo correspondiente a la forma pseudomembranosa 11 .se recoge en la tabla 4.se debe realizar una evaluacin rpida inicial de la apariencia, signos vitales, sntomas de alarma como estridor en repo- so y alteracin del nivel de consciencia, ya que es necesario identificar a los pacientes que precisan un tratamiento inmediato. una vez establecida la estabilidad, se puede proceder a realizar la historia clnica, haciendo hincapi en la aparicin de los sntomas, presencia de estridor, episodios previos similares, anomalas de la va area superior o patologa que predispongan a una insuficiencia respiratoria como las enfermedades neuromusculares 2 . adems, una detallada exploracin fsica que debe incluir una exploracin de la faringe. existe controversia sobre si el examen de la orofaringe, en pacientes con obstruccin de la va area superior y posible epiglotitis, pudiese precipitar un paro cardiorrespiratorio; sin embargo, hay estudios 12,13 de series con ms de 200 pacientes con epiglotitis, en los que el examen directo de la orofaringe no se asoci a complicaciones.no estn indicadas inicialmente si el diagnstico clnico es claro.la evaluacin radiolgica de trax y trquea se realizar cuando la presentacin tiene un curso atpico, cuando se sospecha presencia de cuerpo extrao, cuando la clnica es recurrente o cuando no hay respuesta al tratamiento. tambin se realizar en el caso de traqueobronquitis para descartar neumona.usualmente no muestra alteraciones. se debe hacer ante la sospecha de neumona. en casos de traquetis bacteriana y pseudomembranosa podrn observarse membranas intraluminales o irregularidades de la pared traqueal.radiografa de cuello. en la proyeccin posteroanterior, se podr observar un estrechamiento subgltico comnmente denominado signo del campanario ( fig. 1 ). en la proyeccin lateral puede mostrar una sobredistensin de la hipofaringe durante la inspiracin y una turbidez subgltica ( fig. 2) .en los casos de traquetis bacteriana, pseudomembranosa, en la proyeccin lateral podrn observarse las membranas intraluminales o irregularidades de la pared traqueal ( fig. 3 ).su utilidad es limitada, salvo en los casos graves y en las traquetis asociadas a ventilacin mecnica.exmenes de sangre. los leucocitos pueden estar en rango normal, bajo o elevado, con predominio de neutrfilos o linfocitos. el predominio de neutrfilos es sugestivo de infeccin bacteriana primaria o secundaria.microbiologa. la confirmacin etiolgica no es necesaria para la mayora de los pacientes, ya que suele ser una enfermedad autolimitada que solo requiere tratamiento sintomtico. pero cuando es preciso un diagnstico etiolgico, como en las presentaciones ms graves, cuando no responden a tratamiento, en las asociadas a ventilacin en pacientes intubados, en pacientes que requieren hospitalizacin y se deben tomar decisiones en relacin con el aislamiento, se realizan cultivos vricos y pruebas rpidas de deteccin de antgenos vricos en secreciones nasofarngeas. adems, cada vez estn ms disponibles las pruebas multiplex que evalan la presencia de mltiples agentes al mismo tiempo, as como las pruebas basadas en la reaccin en cadena de la polimerasa (pcr). sin embargo, estos no deben retrasar el inicio del tratamien- to antibitico o antivrico, en caso de tener criterios para inicio del mismo.distinguimos los siguientes 2 .debido al uso de vacuna contra haemophilus influenzae tipo b es poco frecuente. se distingue por la ausencia de tos perruna y la presencia de ansiedad desproporcionada con el grado de dificultad respiratoria. su inicio es rpido y debido a la bacteriemia el nio suele estar febril, txico y con mal estado general. adems, suele asociarse dificultad para la deglucin, por lo que es frecuente el babeo.no suelen presentar tos. pueden presentar fiebre, babeo, rigidez cervical, adenopatas y aspecto txico.suele tener un inicio repentino, en un nio que previamente estaba sano. la clnica depender del nivel en el que se encuentre el cuerpo extrao. por ejemplo, si se aloja en la faringe presentar ronquera y estridor; si se aloja en esfago superior, al producir una distorsin de la trquea extratorcica blanda adyacente producir tos y estridor inspiratorio.inicio rpido, sin clnica previa de va area superior ni fiebre. los sntomas suelen ser inflamacin de labios y lengua, erupcin urticarial y disfagia, sin ronquera ni tos. pueden existir antecedentes previos o historia de alergia.est relacionada con el antecedente de exposicin a humo o quemaduras trmicas o qumicas. no presenta clnica de infeccin de la va area respiratoria superior, ni fiebre.anomalas de la va area que puedan causar tos y estridor, como velos larngeos, estenosis subgltica congnita, hemangioma subgltico, papilomas larngeos, laringotraqueobronquiomalacia. todos con un curso ms crnico, a menos que la presentacin sea en el contexto de una infeccin respiratoria.a veces es difcil diferenciarla de la traqueobronquitis. el diagnstico diferencial es con la realizacin de radiografa de trax.la clnica suele ser similar a la traquetis bacteriana. dolor farngeo, malestar general y fiebre elevada, suelen ser los sntomas ms frecuentes. una membrana diftrica suele estar presente. es una patologa muy rara en pases con altas tasas de vacunacin contra la difteria, ttanos y tos ferina.quiste broncognico, pudiendo causar compresin de las vas respiratorias, sndrome de guillain-barr inicial por afectacin del nervio larngeo, al provocar parlisis de cuerdas vocales.la mayora de los casos son leves y autolimitados, por lo que pueden tratarse con xito de forma ambulatoria. sin embargo, el mdico debe ser capaz de identificar los signos y sntomas que caracterizan la enfermedad moderada o grave, o los sntomas que progresan rpidamente, que probablemente requieran un tratamiento y observacin hospitalaria.no hay un tratamiento especfico para las de etiologa vrica. la terapia est dirigida a disminuir el edema en las vas respiratorias, soporte respiratorio y mantenimiento de la hidratacin.le epinefrina y los corticoides nebulizados son la piedra angular.cuando el cuadro es leve y por lo tanto el tratamiento puede ser domiciliario, el tratamiento es humidificador del ambiente, antipirticos e incentivar la ingesta hidrca 12 . adems, se debe instruir a los cuidadores sobre los sntomas por los cuales debern acudir al servicio de urgencias.cuando el nio con clnica leve es visto por primera vez en el hospital, se recomienda una dosis nica de dexametasona oral (0,15 a 0,6 mg/kg, dosis mxima de 16 mg) 12 .en los casos leves no suele ser necesario el uso de epinefrina.los casos moderados y graves deben ser valorados en urgencias, ya que pueden requerir terapia agresiva, monitorizacin y cuidados de apoyo (tabla 5).el tratamiento inicial en estos casos incluye la administracin de epinefrina y dexametasona; adems de oxgeno humidificador y asegurar la hidratacin.dexametasona en una dosis oral nica de 0,15 mg/kg (mximo 10 mg) (pueden administrarse hasta 3 dosis cada 12 otra opcin es una nica dosis de budesonida nebulizada 2 mg (independiente de peso y edad), para los pacientes que no toleran la va oral y no se ha logrado un acceso intravenoso.adems de budesonida nebulizada, tambin se recomienda epinefrina racmica nebulizada, en una dosis de 0,05 ml/kg por dosis (mximo de 0,5 ml) de una solucin al 2,25% diluida en 3 ml de volumen total con solucin salina. se administra va nebulizada durante 15 minutos.la l-epinefrina (producto parenteral) se administra en forma de 0,5 ml/kg por dosis (mximo de 5 ml) usando la concentracin de 1 mg/ml (tambin puede denominarse dilucin 1: 1000). se administra va nebulizada durante 15 minutos.los pacientes deben estar en observacin 3-4 horas tras el tratamiento inicial, y una nueva intervencin o el ingreso hospitalario se determinar por la respuesta al tratamiento inicial.si tras 3-4 horas los pacientes evolucionan favorablemente, se les podr dar el alta si cumplen los siguientes criterios: ausencia de estridor en reposo; saturacin de oxgeno por oximetra normal; ventilacin conservada; buen nivel de consciencia; coloracin e hidratacin adecuada; tolerancia de la va oral y cuidadores instruidos correctamente en los sntomas por los que tendrn que acudir a urgencias.en el caso de la traquetis bacteriana y cuando la traquetis y la traqueobronquitis se complican con sobreinfeccin bacteriana, se recomienda administrar antibiticos, con cobertura amplia, que incluya los patgenos ms frecuentes incluido staphylococcus resistente a meticilina (tabla 1).se recomienda un tiempo de antibioterapia entre 10 y 14 das, aunque no hay estudios formales que hayan analizado el tiempo adecuado.la terapia antivrica estar justificada cuando es influenza y los sntomas tienen menos de 3 das de evolucin.las complicaciones son muy raras, ya que generalmente se recuperan sin secuelas. van desde obstruccin grave de la va area que precise intubacin orotraqueal hasta incluso paro cardaco.las sobreinfecciones bacterianas son una complicacin ms frecuente, incluida la neumona. la traquetis bacteriana puede complicarse con shock txico, incluso se han descrito casos de neumotrax, neumomediastino y edema pulmonar. el curso clnico en ocasiones puede complicarse por el sndrome de distrs respiratorio agudo. se ha descrito estenosis subgltica residual 8 .la bronquitis aguda es la inflamacin aguda de la mucosa bronquial autolimitada, caracterizada por tos, con o sin expectoracin, y que con frecuencia se debe a una infeccin vrica, en ausencia de enfermedad pulmonar obstructiva crnica (epoc) o una causa identificada como neumona o sinusitis.la bronquitis aguda es una de las patologas ms comunes en la prctica clnica. en estados unidos, la bronquitis aguda es la novena enfermedad ms comn entre los pacientes ambulatorios. la incidencia es mayor en otoo e invierno cuando la transmisin de los virus respiratorios es mayor.es frecuente que sea la continuacin de una infeccin de vas respiratorias superiores.la principal causa de la bronquitis aguda es vrica. de los virus, el de la influenza merece una especial consideracin debido a su morbilidad 14 (tabla 6).la causa bacteriana es poco comn, y las bacterias que se asocian con ms frecuencia son bordetella pertussis, mycoplasma pneumoniae y chlamydia pneumoniae. de estas, b. pertussis es la responsable de causar tos prolongada. la incidencia de tos ferina y los brotes asociados estn aumentando en todo el mundo 15 , y es una de las pocas causas bacterianas de bronquitis aguda que puede responder a la terapia con antibiticos (tabla 6).no hay evidencia clara que respalde la relacin con patgenos como streptococcus pneumoniae, staphylococcus aureus, el sntoma principal y el ms importante es la tos, que puede o no asociarse a expectoracin que puede o no ser purulenta y las caractersticas de la misma no parecen ser predictivas de infeccin bacteriana 17,18 . suele tener una duracin de unos 5 das; sin embargo, no es infrecuente que pueda persistir hasta 3 semanas. dado que es frecuente que le preceda una infeccin de las vas respiratorias altas, los sntomas de infecciones de va area superior como rinorrea, congestin nasal, cefalea, fiebre y malestar no son infrecuentes; sin embargo, es la tos el sntoma cardinal 14 .los pacientes pueden presentar disnea leve y autoescucha de ruidos respiratorios. en la auscultacin pulmonar podremos encontrar sibilancias y roncus.en estos pacientes se cree que la hiperreactividad bronquial transitoria es el mecanismo que justifica la tos persistente, que puede durar hasta unas 6 semanas 19 .los pacientes pueden presentar dolor torcico y retroesternal en relacin con la tos prolongada.durante los primeros das, son frecuentes los sntomas leves de infeccin de va area superior. posteriormente, la tos suele hacerse persistente durante ms de 5 das, pudiendo, en algunos pacientes, durar hasta 6 semanas.durante este tiempo podra haber alteracin de las pruebas de funcin pulmonar con un volumen espiratorio forzado en el primer segundo (fev 1 ) disminuido o hiperreactividad bronquial en las pruebas especficas de provocacin bronquial, que tras unas 6 semanas mejoran 16, 20 .en pacientes sanos, la produccin de esputos purulentos indica la presencia de epitelio traqueobronquial desprendido y clulas inflamatorias.los factores de riesgo son antecedentes de tabaquismo, o exposicin al humo de tabaco, vivir en zonas contaminadas, antecedentes de asma bronquial. en algunos pacientes suele asociarse a reacciones desencadenas por alrgenos como plenes, perfumes y vapores.el diagnstico en la mayora de los pacientes es clnico, basado en la historia clnica, antecedentes mdicos y exploracin fsica. son pacientes que presentan la clnica descrita previamente, sin hallazgos sugestivos de neumona ni antecedentes de epoc. una excepcin son los pacientes de edad avanzada, ya que en la neumona en los pacientes ancianos es frecuente la ausencia de sntomas.las pruebas complementarias generalmente se reservan para los casos en los que se sospecha neumona, cuando el diagnstico clnico no es claro, o cuando los resultados cambiaran el tratamiento; por ejemplo, un paciente con criterios de recibir terapia antivrica en caso de test de influenza positivo 14 .se realiza cuando es necesario el diagnstico diferencial con una neumona, ya que en la bronquitis aguda es normal o con hallazgos inespecficos como signos sugestivos de engrosamiento de las paredes bronquiales.es muy inespecfica. es posible solicitar procalcitonina que es un biomarcador emergente para el diagnstico de infeccin bacteriana; sin embargo, no se utiliza rutinariamente en el diagnstico de la bronquitis aguda, salvo cuando el uso de antibiticos no est claro.como ya se ha comentado, en la mayora de los casos no se realizan pruebas para identificar patgenos especficos, ya que la deteccin de los mismos no cambiara el tratamiento.los cultivos de esputo no se recomiendan, ya que los patgenos bacterianos aislados son causas raras de bronquitis aguda.los casos en los que las pruebas microbiolgicas pueden cambiar el tratamiento se enumeran a continuacin.en el paciente con alto riesgo de complicaciones (tabla 7) 21 , pacientes hospitalizados, trabajadores de la salud y/o cuando los datos sean tiles para proporcionar datos de vigilancia local o implementar medidas de control de las infecciones. siempre que haga menos de 3 das desde el inicio de la clnica.sospecha de tos ferina. usualmente la confirmacin depender del estado de riesgo o de aspectos de salud pblica. las pruebas dependern del tiempo de evolucin de la tos. en los pacientes con menos de 2 semanas de evolucin se realizar cultivo y pcr (la sensibilidad del cultivo disminuye despus de las 2 primeras semanas). en pacientes con 2-4 semanas de tos tambin se realizar tanto cultivo como pcr, ya que aunque la sensibilidad del cultivo disminuye, la pcr sigue siendo til; no se debe realizar solo la pcr, ya que como prueba independiente requiere un estudio adicional. tras las 4 semanas de tos, solo la serologa es til. en los pacientes con resultados discordantes, por ejemplo, cultivo positivo y pcr negativa, se debe asumir tos ferina.presencia en la exploracin fsica de signos de consolidacin o auscultacin de crepitantes inspiratorios. en los pacientes mayores de 75 aos, la clnica es ms inespecfica y puede presentarse con alteraciones del nivel de consciencia. el diagnstico diferencial se establecer con una radiografa de trax.sensacin de drenaje posnasal, necesidad de aclarar constantemente la garganta, rinorrea con sntomas compatibles.presencia de pirosis, regurgitacin y disfagia; aunque la tos puede ser el nico sntoma, y adems puede ser la causa de tos crnica.antecedente de autoescucha de sibilancias, disnea y tos. particularmente cuando la clnica aparece tras la exposicin a algn desencadenante. cuando es un primer episodio de asma es difcil de diferenciar.relacionado con el uso de frmacos uso de inhibidores de la enzima convertidora de angiotensina. suele comenzar tras una semana de tratamiento. habitualmente se resuelve a los 4 das de suspender el tratamiento; sin embargo, puede durar hasta 4 semanas.la disnea de esfuerzo, la ortopnea y la disnea paroxstica nocturna son sntomas que deben hacer sospechar insuficiencia cardaca. en la exploracin cardaca podremos encontrar ritmo de galope en la auscultacin cardaca, aumento de la presin venosa yugular y edema en las extremidades.la disnea de inicio repentino, el dolor torcico pleurtico y la hemoptisis son los sntomas clsicos del tromboembolismo pulmonar (tep). sin embrago, debemos recordar que el tep en la gran simuladora, por lo que es importante la sospecha.inflamacin de vas respiratorias pequeas que generalmente se presentan con la tos caracterstica y que progresivamente se acompaa de taquipnea, dificultad respiratoria e hipoxemia.se deber considerar en paciente con antecedente de tabaquismo importante o tabaquismo actual. otros sntomas que nos deben hacer sospechar son la hemoptisis y los sntomas de obstruccin de la va area.la sobreinfeccin de bronquiectasias se deber sospechar en el paciente con antecedente o signos radiolgicos de sospecha.en pacientes no diagnosticados pero que se sospeche en funcin de los antecedentes de tabaquismo y caractersticas clnicas previas. habr que confirmar el diagnstico de sospecha con espirometra en fase de estabilidad.en la mayora de los casos los sntomas son autolimitados, en un tiempo de una a tres semanas. no suele estar recomendado el uso de antibiticos 22,23 , por lo que la informacin al paciente y el control de los sntomas es la piedra angular del tratamiento. recomendaciones a los pacientes: es importante informar a estos sobre el tiempo de evolucin, haciendo hincapi en que el tiempo de recuperacin es de aproximadamente una semana y que habitualmente no est indicado el uso de antibiticos, ya que, salvo en casos seleccionados, no aceleran el tiempo de recuperacin (por lo menos de forma considerable) ni previenen complicaciones. para evitar el uso inadecuado de los mismos debemos controlar los sntomas. nios y adolescentes menores de 19 aos que reciben tratamiento con cido acetilsaliclico obesidad extrema (grado iii de la oms, imc  40) residentes en hogares de ancianos u otras instalaciones de largo plazo imc: ndice de masa corporal; oms: organizacin mundial de la salud.tos. algunos autores recomiendan indicar medicamentos para el alivio de la tos de venta libre como dextrometorfano. aunque los beneficios de estos medicamentos son inciertos, las guas sugieren que ofrecer medicamentos para el control de la tos reduce la solicitud de antibiticos 22 . se debe evitar el uso de supresores de la tos de origen opioide como la codena por su potencial efecto adictivo y los efectos secundarios. tambin se recomienda limitar el uso de beta agonistas inhalados, dejndolos reservados para pacientes con hiperreactividad bronquial. no se recomienda el uso de corticoides orales ni aine por falta de eficacia o por problemas de seguridad.terapia antimicrobiana. como ya se coment, no estn indicados en la mayora de los pacientes, salvo en casos seleccionados.por ejemplo, en la infeccin por b. pertusis, en pacientes con tos de 3 semanas o menos de evolucin, en mujeres embarazadas y en personas que trabajan con bebs y trabajadores de la salud con tos de menos de 6 semanas de evolucin. el antibitico de primera lnea son los macrlidos. dada la naturaleza altamente contagiosa, en caso de sospecha el tratamiento se debe iniciar al mismo tiempo que se realizan las pruebas diagnsticas.el tratamiento para la bronquitis aguda por m. pneumoniae o c. pneumoniae y ausencia de neumona, generalmente no se recomienda.se sospecha cuando hay un empeoramiento de los sntomas, casos en los que se recomienda realizar una radiografa de trax.neumotrax o neumomediastino espontneo como complicacin con la maniobra de valsalva con la tos muy fuerte. en cuyo caso se debe realizar una radiografa de trax.proteccin de personas y animales. los autores declaran que para esta investigacin no se han realizado experimentos en seres humanos ni en animales.confidencialidad de los datos. los autores declaran que en este artculo no aparecen datos de pacientes.derecho a la privacidad y consentimiento informado. los autores declaran que en este artculo no aparecen datos de pacientes.los autores declaran no tener ningn conflicto de intereses.muy importante  metaanlisis  artculo de revisin  ensayo clnico controlado  gua de prctica clnica  epidemiologa se han seleccionado y analizado las principales recomendaciones y medidas preventivas en los entornos de atencin primaria de salud y el domicilio desde un enfoque integrador dnde se incluyen los aspectos biopsicosociales del nio durante el confinamiento.la importancia de los cuidados de la infancia frente a la enfermedad, radican sobre todo en asegurar las correctas medidas de prevencin del contagio por la condicin de actuar como posibles portadores durante un perodo de incubacin de hasta 21 das. la recomendacin es que los nios participen activamente en las acciones preventivas habituales para la contencin de la expansin de la enfermedad. a nivel domiciliario, el aislamiento supone un importante reto para las familias dnde se presentan manifestaciones de incertidumbre, miedo e indefensin ante los cambios y entre las recomendaciones se encuentran establecer rutinas orden mediante horarios de actividades y ocio unido a las medidas de higiene.dada la rapidez con la que se ha producido la pandemia por covid-19, existen pocas evidencias del impacto en nios en espaa por el momento. es necesario desarrollar estudios especficos sobre prevencin y tratamiento en la edad peditrica para mejorar las recomendaciones disponibles.palabras clave: "covid-19", "pediatra", "nio", "adolescente" y "cronicidad".based on the report on the situation of covid-19 in spain, dated april 3, 2020, the confirmed cases amount to 117,710, of which 343 are under 14 years of age (<1%). it is essential to know the specificity of this process in the child population, as well the specific recommendations for proper prevention and care of children during the covid-19 pandemic. our objective is to analyze the scientific evidence on the specific recommendations for pediatric care in cases of covid-19 from the family and community settings.the main recommendations and preventive measures in primary health care settings and at home have been selected and analyzed from an integrative approach that includes the biopsychosocial aspects of the child during confinement.the importance of caring for children in the face of the disease lies above all in ensuring the correct measures for the prevention of contagion due to the condition of acting as possible carriers during an incubation period of up to 21 days. the recommendation is that children actively participate in routine preventive actions to contain the spread of the disease. at the household level, isolation is an important challenge for families where there are manifestations of uncertainty, fear and helplessness in the face of changes and among the recommendations are establishing routines and order through schedules of activities and leisure together with hygiene measures.given the rapidity with which the covid-19 pandemic has occurred, there is little evidence at the moment. research on prevention and treatment in the pediatric age needs to be developed to improve the available recommendations.keywords: "covid-19"; "pediatric"; "child; "adolescent" y "chronic disease".partiendo del informe sobre la situacin de covid-19 en espaa, del 3 de abril de 2020 1 , los casos confirmados ascienden a 117.710, de los que 343 tienen una edad inferior a 14 aos (menos del 1%), presentando por tanto una incidencia baja. sin embargo, en edades superiores a 14 aos esta cifra aumenta situndose en un 5,8% hasta la edad de adulta (29 aos). afecta prcticamente en igual proporcin a nios y nias a diferencia de los adultos con predominio mayor en varones.en los casos declarados por el centro chino para el control y la prevencin de enfermedades, slo el 2% de los casos tenan entre 0-19 aos 2 . los pacientes peditricos presentan un mejor pronstico mostrando un periodo de recuperacin de 1-2 semanas, pero con sntomas leves 3 . los autores indican que esto no significa que los nios sean invulnerables, sino que no suelen presentar sntomas severos 4, 5 . por otra parte, existen datos de los registros de la infeccin por sars-cov-2 que indican que la incidencia en la edad peditrica va en aumento 4 .se han identificado ciertos factores de riesgo en los nios relacionados con una mayor vulnerabilidad, como los casos de cardiopatas, diabetes, cncer, tratamiento con inmunosupresores y asma severa entre otras 6 . por esto, se hace necesario actuar con mayor nfasis en la prevencin de complicaciones en aquellos nios que presentan estas patologas.una peculiaridad para tener en cuenta en la poblacin peditrica en poca de inverno-primavera es la presencia de problemas respiratorios causados por otros agentes con sntomas muy similares, ocasionando as dificultades en el diagnstico por covid-19, sobre todo cuando se trata de casos leves.los nios con covid-19 confirmada, por lo general, muestran manifestaciones leves o incluso pueden llegar asintomticos. las manifestaciones predominantes del covid-19 en nios es semejante a la originada por infecciones respiratorias virales comunes de la infancia como la gripe, incluyendo fiebre, tos y dificultad respiratoria. asimismo, en nios con covid-19 se ha detectado simultaneamente la presencia de otros patgenos respiratorios (gripe, virus sincitial respiratorio, mycoplasma pneumoniae), que deben ser descartados para la confirmacin del diagnstico 2 . adems, se han descrito otros sntomas gastrointestinales, no tan frecuentes en los adultos como son dolor abdominal, diarrea, nuseas y vmitos 8 .cai et al 3 , analizaron a diez casos de nios infectados, que presentaron un cuadro general leve. ocho pacientes tuvieron fiebre que se resolvi en 24 horas, seis tuvieron tos, cuatro presentaron dolor de garganta, cuatro evidenciaron neumona focal y ninguno precis administracin de oxgeno suplementario.en otro estudio realizado por liu et al 9 se estudiaron seis nios de 1 a 7 aos que fueron hospitalizados en wuhan con covid-19. todos tuvieron fiebre por encima de 39c y tos, cuatro evidenciaron neumona viral mediante prueba de imagen y uno fue ingresado en la unidad de cuidados intensivos.en una cohorte de estudio de poblacin pediatrica gravemente afectada por la covid-19, la duracin de la misma fue de mas de 10 das de evolucin, siendo entre los mas crticos de 20 das y permaneciendo ingresados en uci dos nios tras mas de 20 das de tratamiento 10 . las manifestaciones clnicas mas frecuentes fueron la polipnea (100%), fiebre (75%), tos (75%), expectoracin (50%) y nauseas y vmitos (50%). a nivel radiolgico, los pacientes que desarrollan sndrome de distres respiratorio agudo mostraron imgenes compatibles con neumona 11 .aunque realmente el riesgo de parecer la infeccin por coronavirus en la edad peditrica es bajo, debemos tener en consideracin que los nios pueden actuar como portadores de la enfermedad y continuar la transmisin a otras personas de su entorno. por tanto, los nios asintomticos pueden ser portadores y transmitir la infeccin por sars-cov-2 por un perodo de incubacin de hasta 21 das. en el informe realizado por li et al 12 , oscilaron entre 3 a 7 das, con un intervalo de 1 a 14 das. es por ello, que la recomendacin es que los nios participen activamente en las acciones preventivas habituales para la contencin de la expansin de la enfermedad.el modo de contagio de los nios es mayoritariamente por transmisin de algn miembro de la familia, aunque no presenten sntomas 4 .en caso de contagio, es importante hacer una valoracin detallada de los sntomas y una vez confirmado, emprender medidas para frenar los efectos de la infeccin. hasta ahora, el tratamiento de los casos de nios con enfermedad por coronavirus 2019 (covid-19) se orienta segn el nivel de gravedad de los sntomas, que pueden ser leves, moderados o graves. en los casos de nios con sntomas leves, no se recomienda el uso de regmenes teraputicos antivirales por su falta de demostrada eficacia y por sus muchos efectos secundarios 13 . slo ante casos graves se estan utilizando tratamientos antivirales como los administrados en china, dnde se ha recurrido a lopinavir/ritonavir e interfern alfa, pero no se ha determinado la seguridad y eficacia que ofrecen estos medicamentos al respecto 14, 15 .siguiendo las recomendaciones generales en la poblacin pediatrica ante sospecha de infeccin por sars-cov-2 en atencin primaria se recomienda 16 : colocar informacin visual en las salas de espera de los centros de salud para advertir y ofrecer las instrucciones necesarias sobre el lavado de manos e higiene respiratoria. todos los nios deben ir acompaados de un adulto hasta la zona de triaje en la que a todos los que presentan sntomas de infeccin respiratoria se le ofrecer una mascarilla quirrgica. es necesario adaptar las medidas de higiene personal (lavado de manos, limpieza de secreciones) y control respiratorio (uso de mascarillas y distancia de seguridad), a las diferentes edades de los nios. en caso de nios menores de un ao, en los que esta contraindicado el uso de mascarillas, se mantendr la distancia de seguridad en sus sistemas de retencin propios o en brazos de su familiares y cuidadores acompaantes. en aquellos nios que puedan portar mascarillas, se le colocar una y se mantendr la restriccin de contacto con otras personas a menos de dos metros.  se establecer una estancia peditrica aislada de otros pacientes dnde se eliminarn materiales (como juguetes o libros) en los que no se pueda garantizar el cumplimiento de las normas de limpieza e higiene recomendadas.  el personal sanitario portar las medidas de proteccin necesarios (bata, mascarillas ffp2, guantes y proteccin ocular) para la valoracin, exploracin y tratamiento de los nios con clnica sugestiva de infeccin por sars-cov-2 o sospecha de la misma.  en los casos de sntomas claros se realizar una muestra respiratoria de frotis orofarngeo y/o nasofarngeo.  en la administracin de medicamentos inhalados para el alivio de los sntomas, se evitar la administracin en forma de aerosoles. en este caso, se realizarn mediante cmaras y dispositivos de inhalacin de dosis media con o sin mascarilla segn la edad del nio. si el nio tiene cmara en casa lo indicado es que la lleve al centro.en los casos de nios con patologas de riesgo o con mayor riesgo de complicaciones, se han puesto en marcha sistemas de comunicacin con los familiares y cuidadores para garantizar el cumplimiento de los regmenes terapeuticos y ofrecer instrucciones telefnicas con el fin de minimizar las consultas presenciales.entre las recomendaciones para los cuidados, se encuentran las especficas para nios afectados de asma y/o enfermedades alergicas. stas son extradas de las sugerencias de las medidas preventivas generales que la organizacin mundial de la salud (oms) y los centros para control y prevencin de enfermedades (cdc). estos organismos han establecido las siguientes pautas para reducir la exposicin y la transmisin del nuevo coronavirus.las principales recomendaciones 17 se centran en: evitar el contacto cercano con personas que padecen infecciones respiratorias agudas, fiebre o tos. lavado frecuente de manos usando un desinfectante para manos a base de alcohol (durante 10 segundos) o agua y jabn (20 segundos), especialmente despus de contacto con personas enfermas. lavar las manos sistematicamente despues de toser o estornudar. secarse las manos con un pauelo de papel de un solo uso. limpiar frecuentemente los utensilios que comunmente se comparten en escuelas y centros, como juguetes, lapices, instrumentos musicales, ordenadores, pomos de puertas, etc. evitar compartir vasos, platos y otros utensilios que puedan estar contaminados con saliva. las personas con sntomas de infeccin respiratoria aguda deben mantener distancia mnima de un metro (preferible 2 metros) con otras personas, o cubrir la boca al toser o estornudar con pauelos desechables y acto seguido lavarse las manos o bien cubrir la j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f boca con la ropa (idealmente con el brazo), o usar una mascarilla respiratoria para evitar la trasmisin.por otra parte, se recomienda las medidas generales para evitar la propagacin de la infeccin. con los nios asmticos habr que tener especial precaucin de que realicen correctamente su tratamiento de base para conseguir un buen control de su enfermedad.en caso de tener que acudir al servicio de urgencias o a algn centro sanitario se recomienda el uso de mascarilla protectora y seguir en lo posible las medidas de seguridad para prevenir el contagio. se incide en la importancia de sntomas respiratorios (tos, pitos, sensacin de dificultad respiratoria, etc.) llevar consigo su propia cmara espaciadora y mascarilla para el uso de inhaladores de manera individualizada en caso de precisarlo.la aplicacin de medidas de aislamiento supone un importante reto para las familias que deben afrontar la crisis sanitaria en el hogar. durante el confinamiento en el domicilio, es habitual que los nios, al igual que los adultos que lo rodean manifiesten incertidumbre, miedo e indefensin ante una situacin en continuo cambio. esto conlleva cambios en los procesos cognitivos, preocupacin, ansiedad, estrs, y puede alterar de manera significativa los sentimientos y emociones llegando incluso a producirse un afrontamiento familiar ineficaz. dez 18 explica que los sentimientos y emociones mas habituales que se producen en estas situaciones son la incertidumbre, el miedo, la tensin, la ansiedad, el panico, aislamiento de los seres queridos, reacciones de ansiedad y mayor desobediencia o rebelda ante las normas.desde distintos colectivos y organismos se proponen algunas recomendaciones que ayuden a minimizar los efectos del confinamiento y hacer frente con un adecuado afrontamiento social y familiar. la asociacin espaola de pediatra y sociedad de psiquiatra infantil, han elaborado varios materiales que incluyen de manera prctica las recomendaciones generales para actuar frente al coronavirus 19 .entre las ms comunes para los nios se encuentran: rutinas y orden. aconsejan mantener una actitud positiva y ofrecer a los nios mensajes de confianza y esperanza y recordarles que es una situacin temporal.  seguir estableciendo lmites con cario y coherencia, evitar el catastrofismo, usar la creatividad y el sentido del humor.  para fomentar la seguridad en los nios en una situacin llena de incertidumbre se recomienda buscar formas alternativas de comunicacin y unin con los seres queridos mediante videoconferencias, e-mails o dibujos y manualidades dedicados a ellos.para llegar a todas las familias, garca-onieva 20 difunde un vdeo de estas recomendaciones a travs de las redes sociales para alcanzar al mayor nmero de familias interesadas. entre los materiales elaborados se encuentran infografas con los aspectos ms prcticos del da a da: establecer con los nios, de lunes a viernes, unas rutinas y un horario similar al del colegio, donde se especifiquen los espacios y tiempos dedicados a cada actividad.  incluir con cada cambio de actividad, el lavado de manos.  recomiendan tratar de ser creativos y mantener el buen humor.  permitir a los nios que propongan actividades, pero tambin sugerirlas por los mayores.  mantener la actividad fsica para reducir la ansiedad, mejorar el humor, el sueo y disminuir el riesgo de sobrepeso.  anunciar cada da lo que se puede hacer al da siguiente, ya que ayuda a mantener la ilusin.  realizar con nuestros hijos actividades de las que en otros momentos habran disfrutado y no era posible, cada uno con sus gustos y preferencias. tambien los hermanos mayores pueden tener una gran oportunidad para mostrar su capacidad para ser responsables, cuidar, ensear y pasar mas tiempo con sus hermanos menores.aunque la incidencia de nios afectados por covid-19 sea baja o los sntomas no sean tan graves en la mayora de los casos, la importancia de los cuidados de la infancia frente a la enfermedad, radican sobre todo en asegurar las correctas medidas de prevencin del contagio.la explicacin de por qu los nios se encuentran ms protegidos de la infeccin por covid-19 an no est clara. chan et al 21 proporcionaron una demostracin formal de la capacidad del covid-19 para infectar al nio en su estudio, donde se realiz el cribado de los miembros asintomticos de la familia de un paciente con neumona y estos mostraron que la infeccin tambin haba afectado al nio, aunque este permaneca asintomtico. una explicacin podra ser que la neumona es el resultado de la respuesta inmune inducida por el virus que causa la destruccin del tejido pulmonar y tales mecanismos podran ser menos efectivo en los nios, aunque son aspectos que an se estn investigando.los nios con factores de riesgo como leucemia, tumor u otras deficiencias inmunes, que estn infectados con covid-19, la gravedad de las afecciones y los efectos de los tratamientos pueden tener resultados impredecibles 22 . por todo lo anterior y dado que an no se conoce un tratamiento especifico eficaz, es necesario poner ms nfasis en la prevencin.otro aspecto importante de la edad infantil es la repuesta individual psicoemocional segn el nivel de madurez y desarrollo en relacin con la orden de confinamiento durante la cuarentena por el covid-19. segn cada caso, nos encontramos con diferentes respuestas a los cambios de rutina, los espacios de juego y el estrecho cerco social al que se ven sometidos, haciendo ms difcil el manejo de la situacin 23 . en este sentido, el sistema familiar, se vuelve imprescindible para afrontar esta situacin, cuando el contacto con otras personas importantes para el nio, como son los compaeros de colegio, vecinos, amigos y otros familiares se interrumpen.dada la rapidez con la que se han desarrollado los acontecimientos sobre la pandemia del covid-19, existen por el momento pocas evidencias. es necesario desarrollar ms investigacin sobre prevencin y tratamiento en la edad peditrica para mejorar las recomendaciones disponibles.background chemerin is a chemokine known to be increased in morbidly obese (mo) patients and correlated with markers of inflammation and nitrooxidative stress. we aimed to evaluate the changes of serum chemerin six months after laparoscopic sleeve gastrectomy (sg) and to asses if these changes are accompanied by variations of inflammatory and nitrooxidative stress markers. material and methods we investigated the levels of chemerin, high-sensitive c-reactive protein (hscrp), tumor necrosis factor alpha (tnf-), nitrite and nitrate (nox), total oxidant status (tos), total antioxidant response (tar), and oxidative stress index (osi) in a group of 24 mo patients submitted to sg before and six months after surgery. the mo group was compared with 20 controls. results hscrp (p < 0.001), nox (p < 0.001), tos (p < 0.001), tar (p = 0.007), and osi (p = 0.001) were significantly different between the two groups. six months after surgery, we noticed significant changes (42.28% decrease) of hscrp (p = 0.044) and osi (p = 0.041) (31.81% decrease), while no significant changes were observed for chemerin (p = 0.605), tnf- (p = 0.287), nox (p = 0.137), tos (p = 0.158), and tar (p = 0.563). conclusions our study showed no significant changes of chemerin, and except for hscrp and osi, no other inflammatory and nitrooxidative stress markers changed six months after surgery.chemerin, inflammatory, and nitrooxidative stress marker changes six months after sleeve gastrectomy.conclusiones. los datos obtenidos en este trabajo indican que entre las manifestaciones clnicas de las infecciones respiratorias agudas de etiologa viral en la poblacin peditrica, a diferencia de lo que ocurre en la poblacin adulta, la fiebre se encuentra asociada a todos los virus estudiados mientras que los sntomas gastrointestinales se asocian, en mayor grado, a las infecciones producidas por virus de la gripe a y b y que el grupo de edad de < 5 aos es el que muestra una mayor frecuencia de dichos sntomas.las infecciones respiratorias virales de vas altas suponen un importante problema de salud pblica. afectan principalmente al tracto respiratorio superior con una variedad de sntomas locales y sistmicos que suelen autolimitarse al trmino de 2 a 5 das. los sntomas que se asocian a estas infecciones son muy variables, si bien la fiebre, la tos, la odinofagia, la cefalea y el malestar general suelen estar presentes en la mayora de los casos. aunque se considera que ocasionalmente pueden aparecer trastornos gastrointestinales en lactantes 1 no hay unanimidad en cuanto a considerar la presencia de dicho trastorno en las infecciones respiratorias agudas (ira) de etiologa viral. no existe una relacin especfica entre los sntomas clnicos de presentacin de las infecciones respiratorias y el virus causal, por lo que para la vigilancia de la gripe, la bsqueda del virus causal se hace a partir de muestras de frotis nasales y farngeos de personas que presentan o bien sndrome gripal o bien infeccin respiratoria aguda. algunos autores sugieren, por ejemplo, que existen diferencias en la forma de presentacin de los virus de la gripe a y b (vga y vgb), mientras que otros no observan dichas diferencias. asimismo, otros autores apuntan acerca de la posible confusin entre la sintomatologa producida por virus respiratorio sincitial (vrs) y la propia de los virus de la gripe 2 . desde la perspectiva de salud pblica es importante identificar la presencia de virus de la gripe entre los cuadros respiratorios que se presentan como sndrome gripal. cuando hay circulacin de virus de la gripe en la comunidad, la presencia concomitante de sntomas como fiebre alta ( 37,8 c) y tos en un paciente hace compatible su asociacin a vga y vgb 3, 4 .la poblacin peditrica de menor edad presenta tasas elevadas de infeccin y hospitalizacin por infecciones respiratorias de etiologa viral, especialmente por virus de la gripe y por vrs en el caso de lactantes 5 . la afeccin de los nios por el virus de la gripe es importante incluso en temporadas de actividad gripal baja o moderada 6 . en los nios el cuadro gripal puede ser indistinguible del producido por otros virus respiratorios 1 .en las infecciones por vga y vgb se observa que en nios de menor edad (0-3 aos) la infeccin se presenta con fiebre alta y sntomas respiratorios generalmente asociados a otitis media, en cambio en nios mayores y adultos jvenes (de 20 a 40 aos) los sntomas sistmicos y gastrointestinales son ms prominentes [7] [8] [9] . la confirmacin del diagnstico clnico por laboratorio tiene gran importancia en el caso de la poblacin peditrica, ya que la presentacin clnica es an menos caracterstica que en adultos 10 .es evidente que en el momento del diagnstico sintomtico de un paciente con sndrome gripal hay que considerar la edad del paciente y el tipo de virus. el objetivo de este trabajo es el de estudiar las diferencias en la sintomatologa presentada en las infecciones respiratorias virales confirmadas por el laboratorio, especialmente en cuanto a manifestaciones clnicas de gastroenteritis, en funcin de la edad y el virus aislado.en catalua, durante la temporada 1988-1989 se puso en funcionamiento un sistema de vigilancia gripal, el programa sisigab (sistema de informacin integrado sobre la gripe en el rea de barcelona). este sistema tena la finalidad de estudiar el comportamiento gripal, detectar el inicio de la epidemia y caracterizar los virus circulantes. a partir de aquella temporada, el desarrollo del programa se ha llevado a cabo cada ao durante el perodo habitual de actividad gripal.vacunas. 2005;6:22-7 posteriormente, en la temporada 1999-2000, el sistema de vigilancia gripal en catalua incorpor una serie de modificaciones para conseguir una representatividad geogrfica ms amplia, mayor frecuencia y agilidad en la obtencin de la informacin, y una mayor cobertura en la recogida de muestras para el estudio virolgico. tambin cambi su denominacin, y pas a llamarse pidirac (plan de informacin diaria de las infecciones respiratorias agudas en catalua). a partir de entonces, este sistema ha estado funcionando durante cada temporada gripal 11 .la vigilancia virolgica y epidemiolgica se activ al inicio del perodo de vigilancia de cada temporada de la semana 45 hasta la semana 16 durante las temporadas gripales 1999-2000 a 2003-2004 dentro del pidirac. los mdicos de los equipos centinela tomaron un frotis nasal y otro farngeo de todos los pacientes diagnosticados clnicamente de sndrome gripal o de infeccin respiratoria aguda. los escobillones con los que se recogieron las muestras se enviaron, previamente introducidas en medio de transporte (medio de hanks, modificado), lo ms rpidamente posible al laboratorio de microbiologa del hospital clnic, barcelona, donde fueron procesados por distintas tcnicas diagnsticas para aumentar el grado de deteccin al mximo. los virus estudiados fueron el vga, el vgb, los parainfluenza 1, 2 y 3, el adenovirus (adv) y el vrs. las tcnicas empleadas fueron las siguientes: deteccin de antgeno mediante inmunofluorescencia indirecta (ifi) con anticuerpos monoclonales, cultivo celular y posterior identificacin por inmunofluorescencia en caso de observarse efecto citoptico y reaccin en cadena de la polimerasa por transcripcin inversa [rt-pcr]) 12 . se revisaron los informes de recogida de datos correspondientes a las muestras obtenidas por los centros centinela con resultados positivos para alguno de los virus estudiados. en cuanto a la presentacin clnica de los pacientes, se estudiaron las siguientes variables: inicio brusco, fiebre, sintomatologa respiratoria, odinofagia, artromialgias, sintomatologa gastrointestinal para cada tipo de virus y antecedentes de vacunacin gripal. se consider como sintomatologa gastrointestinal la existencia de nuseas, vmitos, diarrea o dolor abdominal. se consideraron 2 grupos de edad: menores o iguales y mayores de 14 aos. se hizo un anlisis descriptivo de los datos y se utilizaron medidas de asociacin (odds ratio [or]), con sus correspondientes intervalos de confianza [ic] del 95%. . 1 ). de las muestras positivas pertenecientes al grupo de  14 aos se obtuvieron 4 coinfecciones por adv y vrs, 3 por adv y vga y 1 por vga y vrs. de las muestras positivas pertenecientes al grupo de > 14 aos se obtuvo una coinfeccin por adv y vga y una por vga y vrs. para este estudio se desestimaron los aislamientos correspondientes a los virus parainfluenza 1, 2 y 3, ya que el porcentaje fue inferior al 1% de las muestras.de las muestras que presentaron sntomas gastrointestinales (100), en los menores de 14 aos un 61% (47/77) resultaron positivas a alguno de los virus estudiados, mientras que en las muestras de pacientes mayores de 14 aos slo un 17% (4/23) resultaron positivas.en cuanto a la sintomatologa, se vio que los 3 sntomas ms frecuentes en la poblacin peditrica eran fiebre, tos e inicio brusco para cualquiera de las etiologas estudiadas. en cambio, en adultos existan diferencias entre los distintos virus causales: para el vga los sntomas de presentacin ms frecuentes eran tos (85,8%), fiebre (76,7%) y artromialgias (74,2%); para el vgb, inicio brusco (82,8%), fiebre (82,8%) y tos (75,9%); para el adv, fiebre (50,0%), tos (50,0%) y odinofagia (50,0%), y para el vrs, los sntomas de presentacin ms frecuentes eran odinofagia (100%), artromialgias (91,6%) y fiebre (83,3%) (tabla 1).globalmente, las infecciones respiratorias agudas de etiologa viral (para los virus estudiados), cuya sintomatologa de presentacin fueron sntomas gastrointestinales acompaados de fiebre, inicio brusco, cefaleas u odinofagia, mostraron diferencias significativas entre ambos grupos de edad, y fueron ms frecuentes en los pacientes peditricos (or = 4,944; ic del 95%, 3,000-8,203; p = 0,001). para el vga, la fiebre (or = 16,536; ic del 95%, 4,893-55,887; p = 0,001) y la sintomatologa gastrointestinal (or = 4,664; ic del 95%, torner 1,569-13,868; p < 0,036) resultaron ser significativamente ms frecuentes en los  14 aos que en los mayores de esa edad, mientras que las artromialgias (or = 0,048; ic del 95%, 0,026-0,089; p = 0,001) lo fueron para los mayores de 14 aos. dichas diferencias tambin se observaron para cada virus analizado por separado, pero dado el menor porcentaje de aislamientos positivos y la ausencia total de sntomas gastrointestinales en adultos para vgb, adv y vrs no se pudieron valorar estadsticamente las diferencias (tabla 2). al comparar la distribucin de los aislamientos virales con los sntomas gastrointestinales por grupos de edad se observ que el grupo de nios menores de 5 aos era el que presentaba mayor numero de casos y que, adems, dicho nmero iba disminuyendo al incrementar la edad, de modo que no se observ ningn caso con sintomatologa gastrointestinal mayor de 25 aos ( fig. 2 ).desde la perspectiva de la salud pblica, el objetivo principal de la vigilancia de las infecciones respiratorias agudas es detectar una posible epidemia de virus de la gripe. las manifestaciones clnicas varan en funcin de la edad y del virus causal, pero cualquiera de los muchos virus respiratorios puede producir cualquiera de los sntomas con los que se definen las infecciones respiratorias agudas y el sndrome gripal incluyendo el vga y el vgb, parainfluenza 1, 2, 3 y 4, adv, vrs, rinovirus, coronavirus 13,14 y enterovirus.los virus parainfluenza que afectan a los humanos son los tipos 1, 2, 3, 4a y 4b, los 2 ltimos se aslan poco y no se ha podido establecer ninguna caracterstica estacional. a diferencia del virus parainfluenza tipo 3 que se considera endmico y se asla durante todo el ao, con un pico entre abril y sntomas gastrointestinales 23 (13, 9) 4 (3,3) 11 (14,1) 0 (0) 5 (13, 9) 0 (0) 4 (10,2) 0 (0) los 10 casos con coinfeccin de 2 virus se han eliminado para el clculo estadstico. mayo, los parainfluenza tipos 1 y 2 pueden causar epidemias en otoo y, a menudo, a aos alternos, por lo que es comn observar un tipo particular cada 2 aos.las infecciones debidas a adv humanos son omnipresentes, aunque existen leves variaciones en la asociacion de serotipos especficos con varios sndromes. los tipos 1, 2, 5 y 6 con frecuencia se aslan en nios mientras que los tipos 3, 4 y 7 lo son en adultos jvenes con enfermedad respiratoria aguda. en circunstancias no epidmicas en la poblacin general, al menos la mitad de las infecciones producidas por adv no ocasiona enfermedad clnicamente evidente.el vrs es la principal causa de infeccin de las vas respiratorias inferiores en nios pequeos con elevadas tasas de hospitalizacin. se disemina tan eficazmente que casi la totalidad de la poblacin se ha infectado con este agente en los primeros aos de vida. sin embargo, la inmunidad no es completa y a menudo se observan reinfecciones. si bien los procesos potencialmente graves aparecen los primeros 2 aos de vida, las infecciones por vrs contribuyen de forma apreciable a la morbilidad debida a infecciones respiratorias agudas en nios mayores y adultos 15 . los brotes de infeccin por vrs son anuales. de hecho, es el nico agente viral que con certeza produce una cantidad considerable de infecciones cada ao en invierno y primavera: empieza en noviembre y se extiende hasta abril o mayo, presentando picos de actividad en enero y febrero 16 .los enterovirus patgenos respiratorios mejor caracterizados son coxsackievirus a21 y a24 que producen una enfermedad con odinofagia, tos, coriza y fiebre, y son los responsables de los virus que se aslan de nios con infecciones del tracto respiratorio superior durante el verano (gripe del verano) 17 , por lo que no se consideran en el diagnstico diferencial durante la temporada gripal.los rinovirus producen un resfriado comn tpico, tanto en adultos como en nios, con manifestaciones nasales (rinorrea y obstruccin nasal), farngeas, tracto respiratorio inferior y de tipo general de escasa gravedad, y la fiebre es infre-cuente. tienen un patrn estacional bien establecido en los climas templados, con picos de infeccin que ocurren en otoo y primavera, aunque tambin son responsables de una proporcin relativamente elevada de resfriados de verano. en los meses de invierno la actividad de los rinovirus es baja, se piensa que los coronavirus y otros agentes menos conocidos o aun por descubrir, sean los responsables de los resfriados comunes de invierno 18 . la contribucin de infecciones por coronavirus a la cantidad total de infecciones de las vas respiratorias superiores puede alcanzar el 35% durante los pe-rodos pico de actividad viral (invierno y primavera). en estados unidos se demostr la periodicidad de las 2 cepas mejor estudiadas, oc43 y 229e, con grandes epidemias cada 2-3 aos la primera suele aparecer en brotes localizados y la segunda tiende a ser epidmica. la infeccin aparece a cualquier edad, pero es ms comn en los nios 19 . el virus influenza ha causado epidemias recurrentes de enfermedad respiratoria febril cada 1 a 3 aos durante, por lo menos, los ltimos 400 aos. las epidemias de gripe habitualmente estn asociadas con un aumento de la morbimortalidad con elevadas tasas de neumonas y hospitalizacin. la enfermedad asociada al vgb suele ser algo ms leve que la asociada al vga. en contraste, la infeccin por vgc, cuando ocurre, causa resfriados comunes afebriles y no ocasiona epidemias.la falta de sintomatologa especfica y la imposibilidad de llegar a un diagnstico etiolgico en todos los casos sospechosos son limitaciones con las que se enfrentan clnicos y epidemilogos. clsicamente, el sndrome gripal se define como un proceso de inicio brusco con fiebre o febrcula, tos, odinofagia, artralgia, mialgia o postracin, o bien fiebre superior a 37,8 c con 2 de los 4 sntomas siguientes: cefalea, tos, odinofagia y mialgia. la infeccin respiratoria aguda (ira) es un proceso de inicio brusco con tos, odinofagia con o sin sntomas constitucionales (fiebre, cefalea, mialgia, mal estar general y fatiga) 20 . cuando existe circulacin de virus de la gripe en la comunidad, la presencia de tos y fiebre se asocia con gripe, lo que puede dar lugar a un tratamiento especfico con in-figura 2. nmero de aislamientos de los virus de la gripe a y b, adenovirus y virus respiratorio sincitial en pacientes con sintomatologa gastrointestinal durante las 5 temporadas gripales estudiadas. catalua, 1999-2004. hibidores de la neuraminidasa. sin embargo, dado que la definicin clnica de caso es subptima (valor predictivo negativo alrededor del 40%) los casos con presentacin atpica y aquellos que se presentan al inicio de la temporada pueden pasar sin diagnosticar, a no ser que se lleve a cabo alguna prueba diagnstica como la deteccin de antgeno 3 . el predominio de los sntomas sistmicos es fundamental para diferenciar la infeccin por virus de la gripe de otras infecciones virales del tracto respiratorio superior.las tasas de ataque de los virus de la gripe son ms altas en los nios que en los adultos. la mayora de infecciones por virus de la gripe se dan entre los 5 y los 15 aos, probablemente por el aumento de inmunidad al incrementar la edad, aunque los cambios antignicos pueden contrarrestar este efecto, y porque las infecciones se transmiten con gran facilidad en el mbito escolar. los nios son los que introducen la infeccin a sus familiares. las tasas de hospitalizacin ms elevadas se dan en los nios menores de 1 ao y en los ancianos, siendo en estos ltimos la neumona la principal causa de hospitalizacin 21 . la gripe es causa de una importante carga de enfermedad en nios y sus familias en cuanto a morbididad, complicaciones, tratamiento y absentismo. la carga de enfermedad es mayor en nios menores de 3 aos, lo que justifica que la vacunacin de nios entre 6 meses y 3 aos pueda ser beneficiosa para reducir la carga total de gripe peditrica sobre la comunidad 22 . en nios con ira se han observado sntomas gastrointestinales en infeccin por vga 23,24 y vgb 25 , de modo que, a diferencia de los adultos, los nios, especialmente los menores de 5 aos, pueden presentar gripe gastrointestinal 26 .los datos obtenidos en este trabajo indican que entre las manifestaciones clnicas de las ira de etiologa viral en la poblacin peditrica, a diferencia de lo que ocurre en la poblacin adulta, la fiebre se encuentra asociada a todos los virus estudiados, mientras que los sntomas gastrointestinales se asocian en mayor grado a las infecciones producidas por vga y vgb, y que el grupo de edad de < 5 aos es el que muestra una mayor frecuencia de dichos sntomas.las viriasis respiratorias constituyen un amplio abanico de procesos infecciosos que abarca todo el rbol respiratorio, desde nasofaringe (rinitis, sinusitis, etc.) hasta los alveolos (neumona). en su mayora, las infecciones respiratorias agudas son procesos benignos que no condicionan una alta tasa de complicaciones, excepto en pacientes inmunodeprimidos o en las edades extremas de la vida. sin embargo, debido a su frecuencia, s tienen una repercusin socioeconmica muy importante (en ee. uu. se estima un total de 21 millones de das de escuela y 20 millones de das de trabajo perdidos anualmente) 1 .una de las caractersticas de los virus respiratorios es su variabilidad serotpica (tabla 1). este es uno de los motivos por los que la frecuencia de las infecciones respiratorias vricas es tan elevada. por otro lado, alguno de estos agentes, con menor nmero de serotipos (virus respiratorio sincitial -vrs-, virus parainfluenza, metapneumovirus), interaccionan con el sistema inmunolgico de tal modo que no se pro-duce una inmunidad adaptativa duradera y completa, y en consecuencia no se previene la reinfeccin. sin embargo, la inmunidad adquirida durante la infeccin por ellos s disminuye la gravedad de las reinfecciones 2 .epidemiolgicamente, se caracterizan por tener una estacionalidad muy marcada, limitada a los meses fros del ao, y una distribucin prcticamente mundial. la diseminacin es horizontal por 3 mecanismos fundamentalmente: a) pequeas partculas en aerosol (gotas de pflgge), con capacidad de transmitirse a grandes distancias por el aire; b) partculas mayores en aerosol (gotas de wells) que recorren distancias mayores y c) contacto directo, a travs de fmites contaminados o contacto persona-persona 3 .la gripe es una infeccin respiratoria vrica causada por el virus influenza altamente contagiosa. en condiciones normales, su presentacin clnica es indistinguible de otras infecciones respiratorias vricas y suele ser autolimitada. tanto la gravedad de la infeccin como la mortalidad se relacionan con la afectacin de pacientes inmunodeprimidos, con enfermedades crnicas subyacentes y ancianos 4,5 .el virus de la influenza pertenece a la familia orthomyxoviridae, que es una familia de virus arn segmentado de sentido negativo con estructura helicoidal rodeada de una membrana de fosfolpidos. la segmentacin del arn permite el desarrollo de nuevas cepas por mutacin y reorganizacin de los segmentos genticos.los viriones de la gripe son pleomorfos, esfricos o tubulares con un dimetro que oscila entre 80 y 120 nm. posee en la membrana fosfolipdica externa dos glicoprotenas espiculadas: ha (hemaglutinina) y na (neuraminidasa) que son los determinantes antignicos mayores. otras dos protenas que forman parte del virus son la m2 (un canal inico transmembrana) y la protena de la matriz m1, necesaria para el ensamblaje del virus 6,7 .el virus influenza se clasifica en 3 tipos distintos: influenza a, influenza b e influenza c. adems, las caractersticas epidemiolgicas, huspedes y clnica difieren entre los 3 grupos (tabla 2) 8 .desde el punto de vista patognico, la ha es la protena que se une al cido silico de las superficies epiteliales, fundamentalmente del tracto respiratorio superior; es la responsable de que se produzca la respuesta inmunitaria mediante anticuerpos neutralizantes. la na tiene capacidad enzimtica, escindiendo el cido silico de las protenas del virin (evitando as el agrupamiento de estos) y facilitando la liberacin del virus de las clulas infectadas y la infeccin de clulas adyacentes.el gnero influenza a est formado por distintos subtipos, dependiendo de las variaciones de los antgenos principales (h1 a h16 y n1 a n9). tiene capacidad para producir infeccin en seres humanos y animales (principalmente cerdos y aves).tanto influenza a como influenza b presentan capacidad de deriva (en ingls shift) antignica (cambios menores en sus antgenos h o n, por acumulacin de mutaciones puntuales), hecho que facilita la aparicin de brotes epidmicos cada 1-3 aos en una poblacin, a pesar de que existan individuos con anticuerpos contra las cepas previas del virus. adems de esta deriva antignica, el virus influenza a puede producir variaciones antignicas, entendidas como cambios antignicos mayores (h y/o n), determinando la aparicin de un nuevo subtipo vrico, para el que no existe inmunidad en la poblacin. esta capacidad es la que condiciona la aparicin de pandemias mundiales 9 . las nuevas cepas de virus pand- micos ocurren por reordenacin gentica entre virus influenza a animales y humanos o por transmisin directa de cepas animales a seres humanos. por su parte, la variabilidad gentica del virus influenza c es escasa, por lo que no produce epidemias (tampoco pandemias) 10,11 . aunque existen descripciones de epidemias de gripe desde la antigedad, el primer registro de pandemia de gripe oficial es de los aos 1889-90, conocida como la gripe rusa (h3n2). posteriormente tuvo lugar la gripe espaola en 1918-20 (h1n1), con la mayor tasa de letalidad de todas las pandemias de gripe registradas hasta la actualidad. habra que esperar hasta los aos 50 (1957-58) para una nueva pandemia, esta vez la gripe asitica (h2n2). en los aos 1968-69 ocurre la pandemia por gripe de hong-kong (h3n2). la ltima pandemia, en el siglo xxi, fue la nueva gripe a h1n1 que si bien posea una hemaglutinina h1, sus caractersticas eran bastante distintas de la h1 circulante desde finales de los aos 70, debido a su origen porcino; aunque la mortalidad de esta ltima pandemia no fue elevada, los aos de vida perdidos fueron sumamente altos, debido a que la mayor letalidad se centr en poblacin joven (los ancianos posean cierta inmunidad residual de la pandemia de 1918) 12-15 .el sndrome gripal tpico es el producido por los virus de la gripe a y b. el virus de la gripe c ocasiona infecciones respiratorias altas leves indistinguibles de otros procesos catarrales 16 .aunque no existen unos criterios diagnsticos establecidos para la gripe, los sntomas asociados con ms frecuencia a este proceso y que nos deben hacer sospechar la enfermedad son: fiebre asociada a escalofros, cefalea, deterioro del estado general, artromialgias (con predominio de las mialgias), sntomas respiratorios e hiporexia 13,17 .las mialgias suelen afectar a grandes grupos musculares (extremidades, espalda) y las artralgias suelen ser menos llamativas. los sntomas respiratorios son variables, dependiendo de la virulencia del virus, la edad y las caractersticas propias del paciente (tabaquismo, inmunodepresin, etc.). fundamentalmente son tos seca, secrecin mucopurulenta nasal y odinofagia. el inicio de la enfermedad suele ser brusco, tras una incubacin corta de 48-72 horas, con la aparicin de fiebre elevada (38-41 c) y quebrantamiento del estado general muy marcado. habitualmente la fiebre es continua, de difcil control a pesar del tratamiento antitrmico; ocasionalmente se puede presentar de forma intermitente e incluso con una curva bifsica tras una remisin temporal. la tos seca y la cefalea aparecen con posterioridad al inicio de la fiebre. en la exploracin clnica pueden aparecer pequeas adenopatas en los territorios cervicales de caractersticas benignas (blandas, no adheridas, rodaderas) as como roncus y sibilancias en un pequeo porcentaje de pacientes (10 %). de forma menos frecuente pueden aparecer sntomas extrarrespiratorios; hasta en un 3 % de los casos pueden aparecer sntomas gastrointestinales (especialmente vmitos).los datos de laboratorio son muy inespecficos, sin diferencias con otros procesos respiratorios vricos, con la leuco-citosis como alteracin ms prevalente, as como una moderada elevacin de la protena c reactiva y del fibringeno, como reactantes de fase aguda.en poblacin general, la duracin total del cuadro suele ser en torno a 5 das (3-7 das) si no hay complicaciones, si bien sntomas como la tos o la astenia pueden permanecer hasta dos semanas.aunque poco frecuentes, en ocasiones pueden aparecer complicaciones, sobre todo en pacientes con comorbilidades respiratorias (enfermedad pulmonar obstructiva crnica -epoc-, asma grave) o cardiovasculares (insuficiencia cardiaca congestiva) e individuos inmunodeprimidos o de edad avanzada 4,18,19 .la neumona vrica primaria es una complicacin que se asocia a una elevada mortalidad. suele tener lugar al poco tiempo del sndrome gripal, con la aparicin de tos productiva con expectoracin sanguinolenta, taquipnea, crepitantes finos en la auscultacin pulmonar e insuficiencia respiratoria. en la radiografa se trax pueden aparecer infiltrados intersticiales, aunque no es rara la presencia de infiltrados alveolares como cualquier otro proceso neumnico tpico. la respuesta a la antibioterapia emprica suele ser escasa. ms frecuente que la neumona primaria es la sobreinfeccin bacteriana, tpicamente por streptococcus pneumoniae, staphylococcus aureus, haemophilus influenzae y estreptococos del grupo b. en pacientes con patologa pulmonar crnica, como los pacientes con epoc, fibrosis qustica o asma bronquial puede producirse una exacerbacin de la misma 20 .el sndrome de reye consiste en una encefalopata aguda con edema cerebral, elevacin de la presin del lquido cefalorraqudeo pero con recuento celular y anlisis bioqumico del mismo normales, asociada a degeneracin grasa heptica. se ha descrito en pacientes que han consumido cido acetilsaliclico (aas) en el contexto de una infeccin gripal, afectando especialmente a los nios. tambin se han descrito casos de encefalitis postinfluenza (con deteccin por reaccin en cadena de la polimerasa -pcr-de arn de influenza en el lquido cefalorraqudeo), mielitis transversa y sndorme de guillain-barr 21, 22 .se han descrito casos de miositis con elevacin de la creatinfosfoquinasa (cpk) y de la transaminasa aspartato aminotransferasa (ast), siendo una complicacin ms frecuente en nios que en poblacin adulta y ms frecuente en el caso de infeccin por el virus influenza b.tambin existen casos descritos de miocarditis por influenza, ms frecuentes en casos de brotes pandmicos. el espectro abarca desde la alteracin exclusivamente analtica, con elevacin de marcadores de sufrimiento miocrdico (troponina i y e, cpk) hasta el shock cardiognico fulminante.ms frecuente que la miocarditis es la descompensacin de la patologa cardiaca de base, como consecuencia de un aumento de la demanda cardiaca en el contexto de la infeccin gripal 23 .no suele requerirse el diagnstico etiolgico del sndrome gripal causado en condiciones de epidemia estacional en pacientes adultos o nios sin gravedad que no requieren ingreso ni son inmunodeprimidos, asumiendo el diagnstico de gripe si el paciente presenta los sntomas tpicos en dicho contexto epidemiolgico 24, 25 . en pacientes de alto riesgo para complicaciones derivadas de la gripe s estara indicado, as como en condiciones de pandemia (tabla 3) 26 .el diagnstico se realiza a partir del cultivo vrico y/o tcnicas moleculares e inmunolgicas. estas ltimas permiten un resultado en un tiempo relativamente rpido (entre 15 minutos y 48 horas). la rentabilidad diagnstica depende, adems de la tcnica microbiolgica empleada, del tiempo desde el inicio de la enfermedad y la toma de muestra, disminuyendo rpidamente a partir de las 48 horas del inicio de los sntomas, al ser tcnicas dependientes de la carga vrica existente en la faringe (oro y nasofaringe) 27 .son inmunoensayos que identifican en muestra respiratoria antgenos de la nucleoprotena vrica de influenza a y b. son test rpidos (15-30 minutos) y tienen una sensibilidad del 60-90 % en comparacin con el cultivo vrico. la muestra se debe tomar mediante torunda nasofarngea y orofarngea.la rt-pcr es la tcnica ms sensible y especfica, incluso ms rentable que el cultivo vrico. se obtiene el resultado en 5-6 horas y permite diferenciar entre influenza a y b y los distintos subtipos.se emplea para estudios de vigilancia epidemiolgica, pero no en el manejo clnico de los pacientes con sospecha de gripe. el resultado tarda entre 48 y 72 horas. se puede realizar a partir de muestra nasal, farngea, esputo o lavado broncoalveolar.el diagnstico serolgico requiere de dos muestras: una inicial durante el cuadro agudo y una posterior en el periodo de convalecencia (10-14 das tras enfermedad) para ver la evolucin de los ttulos de anticuerpos. una diferencia en los ttulos 4 veces superior en el periodo de convalecencia respecto a la fase aguda se considera diagnstica. no es til en el diagnstico clnico, siendo empleado especialmente con fines de investigacin.el tratamiento especfico para pacientes sin riesgo de complicaciones y con presentacin clnica no grave no est indicado. en estos individuos se prescribe un tratamiento sintomtico (antitrmicos, analgsicos, reposo).en situaciones graves o con complicaciones viscerales, est indicado el tratamiento. el tratamiento precoz antivrico (menos de 48 horas) de la gripe ha demostrado disminuir los sntomas de la infeccin y parece estar relacionado con una disminucin discreta del riesgo de complicaciones 28,29 . existen cuatro antivricos disponibles que describimos a continuacin.amantadina y rimantadina son frmacos que inhiben el canal inico de la protena m2. son frmacos tiles frente a influenza a pero no frente a influenza b o c, cuya protena m2 es distinta. ambos frmacos se administran en una pauta de 100 mg al da durante 3-5 das (en el caso de amantadina requiere ajuste por funcin renal).pueden dar lugar a efectos secundarios neurolgicos (insomnio, mareo, dificultad para la concentracin) y gastrointestinales, estos ltimos algo menos frecuentes. son ms habituales con amantadina que con rimantadina. otro factor limitante es la aparicin de resistencias, especialmente en nios 30 .los frmacos de esta familia son zanamivir y oseltamivir. inhiben la actividad de la neuraminidasa vrica, con lo que se evita la liberacin y difusin de nuevos virus infectantes.zanamivir est indicado en pacientes mayores de 7 aos y se administra por va inhalatoria (2 inhalaciones cada 12 horas durante 5 das) y no requiere ajuste en funcin del aclaramiento de creatinina. su principal efecto secundario es el desarrollo de broncoespasmo.oseltamivir se administra por va oral (75 mg cada 12 horas), requiriendo ajuste por funcin renal. sus principales efectos secundarios son gastrointestinales. debera evaluarse de forma individualizada la relacin riesgo-beneficio de la administracin de inhibidores de la neuraminidasa en mujeres gestantes (categora c de la fda). aunque menos fre- cuente que con los inhibidores de la protena m2, tambin se han descrito resistencias.un nuevo agente dentro de este grupo es peramivir, actualmente en fases preclnicas de investigacin, de administracin intravenosa y que estara indicado en pacientes ingresados con infeccin confirmada por el virus influenza a h1n1 pandmico con alta sospecha de resistencia a oseltamivir 31 .existen dos estrategias profilcticas para la prevencin de la gripe: vacunacin y quimioprofilaxis.es la medida ms efectiva para la prevencin y control de las epidemias gripales. las vacunas ms empleadas son las desarrolladas a partir de virus inactivados. la vacuna que se emplea actualmente se formula a partir de muestras de los siguientes virus: influenza a (h1n1) no pandmico, influenza a (h3n2) e influenza b. de este ltimo se emplea el subtipo que se considera que ms probablemente sea el que cause enfermedad en la siguiente estacin fra. para ello existe una red de centros centinela, en los que se toman muestras de pacientes, con el objetivo de intentar anticipar cul ser la variacin antignica predominante en la prxima temporada gripal. para aumentar la inmunogenicidad de la vacuna, se emplean adyuvantes (mf59 y as03) 32 . las vacunas inactivadas son generalmente bien toleradas en la poblacin general. ocasionalmente en torno al 2-10 % de los casos se describe un proceso autolimitado pseudogripal leve de 1-2 das de duracin. la vacunacin con virus inactivados obtiene una elevacin de los anticuerpos en un 90 % de los adultos sanos, con solo una dosis administrada. en pacientes ancianos o inmunodeprimidos, dicho resultado es menor 33 .las vacunas vivas atenuadas, administradas por va intranasal, aportan ventajas con respecto a la vacuna inactivada clsica: en primer lugar, mejoran las tasas de inmunidad adquirida con la vacuna clsica (consiguen unos ttulos de anticuerpos superiores hasta en un 50 %); en segundo lugar, aportaran tanto inmunidad sistmica como local, al administrarse por va intranasal 34 . la vacuna se ha probado en pacientes con infeccin por virus de la inmunodeficiencia humana (vih) muy inmunodeprimidos, sin que se hayan descrito eventos adversos relacionados con la propia infeccin por el vih o con la gripe.las indicaciones la para vacunacin anual se dividen en dos grupos: a) personas con riesgo para padecer complicaciones (tabla 3) y b) personas con riesgo de transmitir la infeccin a miembros del grupo 1 (personal sanitario, personal de residencias geritricas, personas del entorno familiar de miembros del grupo 1). en nios (6 meses a 8 aos) se administran dos dosis separadas 4 semanas. en adultos, se administra una sola dosis. la nica complicacin grave asociada a la administracin de la vacuna es el desarrollo del sndrome de guillain-barr, ocurrida durante la temporada de gripe de 1976 en ee. uu.; posteriormente no se ha confirmado en las sucesivas campaas de vacunacin en todo el mundo.los cuatro agentes antivricos anteriormente descritos se han empleado como prevencin en distintos esquemas: profilaxis estacional (administracin de forma continua durante la temporada gripal), profilaxis familiar, profilaxis institucional y profilaxis en pacientes de alto riesgo que se vacunan durante la temporada de gripe. los beneficios de estas estrategias son discutibles.adems del virus de la gripe, existen otros virus que producen enfermedad respiratoria aguda. los ms frecuentes (tabla 1) se exponen a continuacin.es un virus adn sin envoltura con un tamao de los viriones activos entre 70 y 90 nm de dimetro. se han aislado ms de 100 adenovirus en animales, siendo 51 los serotipos con actividad en los seres humanos, divididos en 6 subgrupos (de la a a la f) en funcin de sus caractersticas de hemaglutinacin.aunque pueden causar un amplio espectro de infecciones, habitualmente leves, a nivel respiratorio se caracterizan por ser los responsables de hasta el 5 % de las infecciones respiratorias altas y el 10 % de las neumonas en nios. en el caso de la infeccin respiratoria alta, se presenta como faringitis o traquetis y suelen ser de intensidad leve. el periodo de incubacin oscila entre los 2 y los 14 das. puede acompaarse de sntomas sistmicos (cefalea, malestar general, mialgias). los serotipos ms implicados son el 1, 2, 3, 5, 6 y 7. tambin puede presentarse como una faringoamigdalitis indistinguible de la producida por los estreptococos del grupo b. los serotipos que producen con mayor frecuencia neumona son del 1 al 5, 7, 14 y 21. ocasionalmente, pueden dejar como secuelas bronquiectasias. aunque la diana fundamental son los nios, se han documentado brotes de infeccin respiratoria aguda en entornos militares con escasa afectacin del tracto respiratorio inferior 35 .pertenecen a la familia de los picornaviridae. es un virus arn envuelto en una cpside con un dimetro de 30 nm. se han descrito hasta 101 serotipos distintos. el virus tiene capacidad para sobrevivir durante horas y das en superficies no biolgicas, si la temperatura se encuentra entre 24 y 37 c. por ello, la va de transmisin, adems de la area, es por contacto con dichas superficies u otros fmites contaminados.es el agente etiolgico ms frecuente del resfriado comn (30-40 % de los casos). predomina en las pocas de transicin del verano al otoo y de la primavera al verano. la incubacin es corta (1 a 4 das). la clnica de rinorrea, picor nasal, obstruccin nasal, tos (30 %), estornudos, cefalea, fiebre y odinofagia puede durar entre uno y 33 das (habitual-mente 5-7 das). no se asocia con complicaciones directas salvo reagudizaciones de enfermedades respiratorias crnicas (asma, epoc), aunque s puede acontecer la sobreinfeccin bacteriana del tracto respiratorio superior, siendo rara la afectacin directa o sobreinfeccin bacteriana del tracto inferior 36 .de la familia de los coronaviridae, son virus arn con envoltura circular de 30 kilobases de longitud, con una morfologa de corona estrellada debida a unas proyecciones en forma de palillo de tambor. constituyen la segunda causa ms frecuente de resfriado comn (15 %). tienen diseminacin mundial y estacionalidad, siendo ms frecuentes en invierno y primavera. en ee. uu. se han descrito brotes epidmicos de resfriado comn cada 2-3 aos causados por este agente.adems del resfriado comn, se han descrito casos de neumona y bronquiolitis en nios, otitis y exacerbaciones de asma en jvenes y adultos, as como neumona y bronquitis grave en ancianos e inmunodeprimidos.en 2002 se describi un cuadro conocido como sndrome respiratorio agudo grave (sars) en la provincia china de guangdong, que se disemin a varios pases (fundamentalmente canad). este cuadro se iniciaba con cefalea, malestar general y mialgias, seguido por tos seca y disnea. en la radiologa simple de trax se observaban opacidades alveolares perifricas. hasta el 25 % desarrollaron un cuadro de distrs respiratorio del adulto, ms frecuente en individuos mayores de 50 aos. la mortalidad global fue del 9-12 % 37 .es un virus de la familia de los paramyxoviridae, de tipo arn con envuelta y un tamao de 120 a 300 nm. su nombre se debe a que produce sincitios por fusin de las clulas que infecta. tiene capacidad para sobrevivir en superficies inertes hasta 30 horas a temperatura ambiente. tiene una distribucin mundial y produce epidemias estacionales en los meses fros.es el agente causal ms frecuente de la bronquiolitis aguda del lactante, aunque tambin produce con frecuencia traquetis y neumona en lactantes y nios pequeos. en estudios de seroprevalencia, hasta un 98 % de los nios menores de un ao han sido infectados por el vrs. las infecciones recurrentes suelen ser menos agresivas que la primoinfeccin. la clnica consiste habitualmente en bronquiolitis (en torno al 2-10 % de los casos pueden desarrollar crup larngeo), aunque inicialmente puede cursar con sintomatologa de la va area superior (rinorrea, tos, laringitis) que progresa a la va inferior con la instauracin de la bronquiolitis con disnea progresiva. en ese momento la tos se hace ms prominente y productiva. la fiebre puede aparecer pero es de baja intensidad y no se correlaciona con la gravedad de la infeccin. tan solo en el 1 % de los casos se evidencia una consolidacin parenquimatosa pulmonar. en nios pequeos es frecuente el desarrollo de otitis media aguda como com-plicacin del cuadro anterior (serosa en el 74 % de los casos). un alto porcentaje de nios (30-50 %) que requieren ingreso como consecuencia de la infeccin por este virus tienen a largo plazo episodios de sibilancias recurrentes que pueden perdurar hasta la adolescencia 38 .en adultos se desconoce la importancia que tiene la infeccin por vrs, si bien en los casos documentados la tasa de complicaciones es relativamente elevada: un 82 % de los pacientes desarrollan infeccin respiratoria baja, un 18 % ingresan en la unidad de cuidados intensivos (uci) y un 10 % fallecen. en la poblacin adulta el diagnstico de esta infeccin debe buscarse activamente mediante cultivo vrico de secreciones respiratorias.es un virus de la familia paramyxoviridae. son virus arn con envuelta y un dimetro de 150 a 200 nm. son miembros de dos gneros distintos dependiendo del tipo: respirovirus (tipos 1 y 3) y rubulavirus (tipos 2, 4a y 4b). tiene una protena espiculada que le permite unirse al cido silico de las clulas del tracto respiratorio superior (hemaglutinina-neuraminidasa). en nios, la infeccin por virus parainfluenza la produce ms frecuentemente el tipo 3. la variabilidad estacional depende del serotipo: el tipo 3 es endmico durante todo el ao con algn pico los meses de abril y mayo; los tipos 1 y 2 producen epidemias en otoo de crup larngeo (el tipo 1 es el agente causal ms frecuente de esta entidad, en el caso del tipo 2 la presentacin es ms leve); finalmente los tipos 4a y 4b no tienen una clara estacionalidad (producen una enfermedad leve).el espectro clnico de la infeccin por este virus es amplio, desde infeccin respiratoria alta hasta un cuadro clnico indistinguible de la bronquiolitis ocasionada por el vrs, siendo el segundo agente causal en frecuencia. adems, es el agente causal ms frecuente del crup (laringotraquetis) en nios. la clnica consiste en tos metlica, voz ronca y estridor larngeo. en la radiografa es tpico el signo del campanario a nivel larngeo (imagen en punta de lpiz). el cuadro puede progresar a neumona.los autores declaran no tener ningn conflicto de intereses. importante  muy importante  metaanlisis  artculo de revisin  ensayo clnico controlado  gua de prctica clnica  epidemiologa  1. adams pf, hendershot ge, marano ma. current estimates from the national health interview survey, 1996. national center for health statistics. vital health stat. 1999; 10:59-66. la bronquitis aguda es una enfermedad inflamatoria de la va area de mayor calibre de carcter autolimitado, que se caracteriza por la presencia de tos sin datos sugestivos de neumona. afecta al 5 % de la poblacin adulta y aparece con mayor frecuencia en el invierno.ms del 90 % de los casos de bronquitis aguda tiene una causa no bacteriana. solo se identifica el patgeno causante en un 164 0% de los casos.los virus suelen ser la causa habitual, destacando entre ellos el virus infuenza a y b, pero tambin podemos identificar: parainfluenza, coronavirus, rinovirus, virus respiratorio sincitial (vrs) y metapneumovirus, estando influenciado por el carcter epidmico y la estacin del ao.en una minora de los sujetos se identifican bacterias como responsables de la infeccin. las bacterias atpicas ocupan un papel importante en el origen de las bronquitis agudas, destacando entre ellas bordatella pertussis, mycopplasma pneumoniae y clamydia pneumoniae (tabla 1 ).la tos es el sntoma principal y suele durar ms de 5 das y menos de 3 semanas. se puede asociar o no a esputo purulento, que es la expresin clnica del infiltrado inflamatorio de la mucosa traqueobronquial.un alto porcentaje de los sujetos presenta hiperreactividad bronquial, llegando a observarse en la espirometra un descenso del volumen espiratorio forzado en el primer segundo (fev1) y una prueba broncodilatadora positiva que suele recuperarse sin problemas. en la exploracin fsica podemos encontrar sibilantes al realizar la auscultacin pulmonar. la tos no asociada a fiebre, la taquicardia y la taquipnea sugieren bronquitis ms que neumona. en ausencia de alteraciones en las constantes vitales tpicas (temperatura, tensin arterial, frecuencia cardiaca, saturacin de oxgeno) y de crepitantes o hipofonesis en exploracin fsica se minimiza la probabilidad de neumona, no siendo necesaria de forma rutinaria la realizacin de una radiografa de trax.no hay que olvidarse de los pacientes de edad avanzada, en los que es posible la existencia de neumona en ausencia de sntomas y signos caractersticos; por ello, en estos casos s es necesaria la realizacin de una radiografa de trax para descartar neumona.tambin se recomienda hacer una radiografa de trax si observamos: a) frecuencia cardiaca mayor de 100 latidos por minuto; b) frecuencia respiratoria mayor de 24 respiraciones por minuto y c) temperatura mayor de 38 c y datos compatibles en la exploracin fsica con una posible condensacin en la radiografa de trax (crepitantes, hipofonesis) (tabla 2 ).la existencia de expectoracin purulenta no hace distincin entre bronquitis aguda y neumona, siendo nicamente la expresin de una inflamacin de la mucosa traqueobronquial, como ya hemos comentado previamente.en los casos de bronquitis aguda no se recomienda realizar un cultivo de esputo, ya que en la mayora de los casos el agente etiolgico es un virus.si sospechamos la existencia de una infeccin por virus influenza a o b se pueden realizar tcnicas de deteccin rpida, las cuales tienen una baja sensibilidad y, en muchos casos, precisan tcnicas de confirmacin como la reaccin en cadena de la polimerasa (pcr). en estos casos, el diagnstico se basa en la clnica fundamentalmente. el inicio de tratamiento antivrico no debe retrasarse por esperar el resultado confirmatorio, ya que es importante iniciar el tratamiento en las primeras 48 horas para que tenga alguna validez.en los casos en los que se sospeche infeccin por bordetella pertussi (pacientes con paroxismos de tos de al menos dos semanas) se aconseja realizar un anlisis de pcr que tiene una alta sensibilidad y los resultados se obtienen rpidamente.se ha propuesto la procalcitonina como marcador de infeccin bacteriana en casos de bronquitis aguda, ya que tiene una alta especificidad para las infecciones bacterianas. esta determinacin sera til para determinar qu pacientes se beneficiaran del tratamiento antibitico y cules no. no debe utilizarse de forma independiente, si no que debe integrarse con el resto de las pruebas complementarias.en los casos en los que sospechemos que la bronquitis aguda tenga su origen en alguna bacteria atpica como son mycoplasma pneumoniae o chlamydia pneumoniae se podran realizar estudios serolgicos, dado que el cultivo de esputo no es rentable para el diagnstico de estos microorganismos por su difcil crecimiento.las patologas ms frecuentes con las que debemos realizar un diagnstico diferencial son la neumona y el asma.en la neumona suelen existir datos de gravedad como son fiebre elevada, taquipnea, taquicardia, etc., que puede asociarse a dolor de caractersticas pleurticas. en la exploracin fsica solemos encontrar crepitantes o incluso hipoventilacin. al realizar una radiografa de trax se observa una condensacin parenquimatosa que es la clave para el diagnstico de neumona.otra patologa con la que debemos realizar un diagnstico diferencial es el asma. en el momento agudo es difcil hacer un diagnstico diferencial, pero los pacientes con asma suelen tener antecedentes respiratorios previos, pueden tener clnica de atopia, los sntomas suelen ser ms frecuentes por la noche y desencadenarse tras la realizacin de ejercicio. en el momento agudo no sirve de nada realizar una espirometra para diferenciar una patologa de otra, ya que en muchas ocasiones en personas con bronquitis aguda encontramos un patrn obstructivo con una cada del fev1. en estos casos, al cabo de 34 semanas las pruebas de funcin respiratoria se normalizan. adems, muchas veces los pacientes con asma no presentan un patrn obstructivo en el momento en el que se realizan las pruebas, teniendo que recurrir a pruebas de provocacin para el diagnstico.otras patologas que pueden cursar con tos son: reflujo gastroesofgico, insuficiencia cardiaca, goteo nasal posterior, bronquiectasias, frmacos y enfermedad pulmonar intersticial difusa (epid) (tabla 3 ).no se recomienda el uso de antibiticos de forma sistemtica en los casos de bronquitis aguda. solo se aconseja su uso cuando se sospecha o se identifica bordetella pertussis o parapertussis, estando indicado el tratamiento con macrlidos o, en su defecto, trimetropim/sulfametoxazol.en los casos de bronquitis aguda en los que se identifique virus influenzae a o b como responsable de la clnica se puede iniciar un tratamiento con oseltamivir o zanamivir, los cuales reducen la duracin de la clnica.el uso de adrenrgicos beta 2 inhalados puede ser beneficioso en un subgrupo de paciente en los que se observa una limitacin crnica al flujo areo y sibilancias. no se recomienda su uso de forma sistemtica en las bronquitis agudas.el uso de frmacos antitusgenos como son la codena o dextrometorfano, entre otros, es til como tratamiento sintomtico a corto plazo para aliviar la tos en el paciente con bronquitis crnica.no se recomienda su uso de forma sistmica en la bronquitis aguda.los autores declaran no tener ningn conflicto de intereses.the effect of weather changes is important to understand, especially changes in temperature, on covid-19 infections, hospitalizations, and deaths. knowledge of the effect of weather conditions on sars-cov-2 (the virus causing can inform health care systems' preparations at local, state, and national levels. in addition, by studying the relationship between environmental factors and covid-19 mortality, we may learn more about how environmental factors influence the spread and transmission of the disease to generate novel hypotheses on transmission patterns and preventive strategies.associations between weather and viral prevalence, population incidence rates, or virus survival time were explored prior to the appearance of covid-19 in human populations. temperature and humidity modulate the transmission and survival of influenza viruses. [1] [2] [3] the transmission of the h1n1 flu virus in 2009 increased in areas with lower absolute humidity and open schools. 4 viruses related to sars-cov-2 (e.g., sars-cov-1 between 2002 and 2003) increased in prevalence for areas with lower temperatures, a wider range between maximum and minimum temperatures, and higher wind velocity. 5 the highest prevalence occurred when temperatures averaged 62.4fahrenheit (95% confidence interval, ci: 51.3f88.0f), and relative humidity averaged 52.2% (95% ci, 33.0%71.4%). 5 also, higher temperatures and higher levels of ultraviolet (uv) light were associated with higher mers-cov transmission rates, a virus similar to sars-cov-2. 6, 7 transmission of a virus from one person to another requires social proximity, favorable environmental conditions, and host susceptibility. increased physical interactions and social behavior influence the transmission of various viral infections. 8 influenza transmission is higher on workdays compared to weekends and holidays, apparently due to increased physical and social contacts and the duration of contact. 3, 9 an early study of sars-cov-2 transmission in wuhan highlighted the possibility of higher transmissibility due to an increased population density. 10 in addition, environmental factors impact viral transmission. ambient pollutants negatively impacting the immune system and may make individuals who are exposed to pollutants more susceptible to infectious diseases. 11 areas with higher concentrations of particulate matter appear to sustain sars-cov-2 for longer, 12 and long-term exposure could increase mortality rates. 13 also, weather conditions affect how long a virus survives on surfaces and in the air. the survival time of a virus on a surface depends on its exposure to temperature, humidity, and concentration. 14 as the temperature approaches 86f and relative humidity decreases, the shorter the survival time of sars-cov-2 and similar viruses. 14- 17 the survival time of sars-cov-2 in a person's nasal sputum and mucosa decreases as the relative humidity and temperature increase. the virus can remain viable for at least 7 days, even in warm, humid conditions. 17 the stability of sars-cov-2 in aerosols and conditions similar to the upper respiratory tract led to a warning that its transmission may exponentially increase. 18 host susceptibility depends, on the other hand, on individual health status, genetic, and other contextual factors. geographical regions that expose populations to various antigens and higher levels of vitamin d through sunlight may increase a population's inherent immunity to the novel coronavirus. 19 analyses of how weather influences sars-cov-2 transmission have yielded mixed results. some findings suggest that the virus may be similar to a seasonal respiratory virus where the higher the temperature, the lower the transmission rate. 10, [20] [21] [22] [23] [24] [25] [26] transmissions rates also appear lower when humidity is higher [20] [21] [22] [23] [24] [25] [26] [27] [28] [29] [30] [31] and when an area has a higher uv light index. 23, 26 reductions in transmission also appear as wind speed and precipitation decrease. 20, 25, 32 other studies, however, reported weak or inconclusive relationships with weather, 23,33-35 which warranted a cautious interpretation. 36, 37 inconclusive research on the effect of weather and environmental factors on sars-cov-2 transmission may emerge from methodological challenges such as utilizing only a limited number of environmental factors 21,22,30,31,34,38,39 without controlling for important influences such as government mitigation efforts, public responses, population density, and local practices. 20, 22, 23, 26, 27, 30, 40, 41 also, covid-19 research that examined covid-19 cases suffers from potentially substantial measurement error from lack of systematic representative testing, leading to uncertainty about the true prevalence and incidence covid-19 in study communities. while the total case estimates are underestimates of the truth, measurement error can be lowered by using hard outcomes such as the number of covid-19 deaths, especially if deaths occurred in a hospital, frequently the case in the united states. research on environmental and meteorological effects on covid-19 fatality is scarce. two studies mapped global covid-19 deaths against the global pattern of climate changes and predicted that covid-19 deaths increase as the weather becomes warmer in spring. 42, 43 two timeseries studies explored the relationship between weather changes and covid-19 deaths for specific cities in china and found positive predictive associations. 44, 45 on the other hand, among the two studies that examined cross-national variation in covid-19 deaths by temperature and precipitation, one found no association 46 and another found a negative association with covid-19 death. 47 lastly, one study that used the average long-term levels of weather and air pollutants across u.s. counties found no association between covid-19 deaths and a county's average summer and winter temperatures, but found a positive association between that and the historical pm 2.5 levels. 48 it is important for literature on environmental factors and covid-19 mortality to carefully consider the influence of confounding factors. first, using country fixedeffects as well as time fixed-effects are necessary to capture many potential correlates. some studies controlled for country fixed-effects but only included a weak form of time fixed-effects or sometimes, only time trends. 26,46,47 thus, non-linear trends and measurable and unmeasurable changes in government policies were not captured. additionally, much of the literature did not control for serial correlation in cases, deaths, and weather variables. 26, 46, 47 serial correlation can result in underestimates of coefficient standard errors hence produces spuriously statistically significant results. furthermore, data quality across countries and over time varies due to variation in testing capacity, lack of resources or knowledge to identify covid deaths correctly. assessing nonlinear trends over time due to testing capacity and health care resources and knowledge that differ across geography, and hence environmental factors, is important to consider when studying environmental factors and covid-19 outcomes. this study used county-level covid-19 death numbers across the united states and examined their association with minimum and maximum daily temperatures at the approximate time of exposure to sars-cov-2. to address the aforementioned issues of confounding, serial correlation, and time trends, this analysis accounted for timeconstant factors, linear and non-linear time-varying factors, serial correlation, social distancing measures, and daily levels of precipitation, ozone, pm2.5, and uv light.data from seven different sources were integrated to assemble the work file used in this analysis. daily county-level covid-19 cases and deaths data, collected from state and local public health departments and compiled by the new york times from the beginning of the pandemic in the u.s. until may 16, 2020, were extracted. 49 new york times complies the data from state and local public health departments on a daily basis. county-level covid-19 data were geocoded using the u.s. county centroid latitude and longitude provided by the national weather service of the national oceanic and atmospheric administration (noaa). 50 next, the geocoded covid-19 dataset was supplemented with county population characteristics (i.e., the population by age group, gender, race, and ethnicity) from the u.s. census bureau. 51 the bureau's latest (2018) estimations of the u.s. counties' population characteristics were used. four state-level social distancing measures were added to the dataset that contained facilities closures (i.e., when a shelter-in-place order was issued, gatherings of 500 or more were banned, public schools were closed, restaurants, gyms, entertainment facilities) (figure 1) . 52 noaa's global historical climatology network (ghcn)-daily data were added to supplement covid-19 and population data, 53 and included temperature (daily maximum and minimum), precipitation, snowfall, and snow depth-labeled as core meteorological elements. additional meteorological information (e.g., average daily temperature, evaporation, wind speed, wind direction, and cloudiness) was not used because it included many missing values that required estimation by interpolation. daily data on the core meteorological elements from 24,679 us weather stations from january 1 to may 16, 2020, were combined. each county-day with the core weather information recorded by the first to the tenth nearest station to the county's centroid. more than one station was used for a county to facilitate estimation of county's nearest station to estimate missing values with a linear estimate of surrounding stations.air pollution information was obtained from the u.s. environmental protection agency (epa)'s outdoor air quality data portal, 54 which is pollutant-specific. ozone (o3) and pm2.5 (fine particulate matter) from 2020 that had substantially less missing values than other pollutants gathered by the epa for 2020 were selected. the influence of the two air pollutants on sars-cov-2 has been studied. 12, 48, 55, 56 daily maximum 8hour ozone concentrations (in parts per million, ppm) were reported by 1,194 stations across the u.s. from january 1 to may 16, 2020. daily average pm2.5 concentrations (in micrograms per cubic meter, g/m 3 ) were reported by 1,078 stations across the u.s. during the period. each county-day with the ozone and pm2.5 information recorded by the first to the tenth nearest air quality monitors to the county's centroid. more than one monitor's recording was assigned to a county in order to estimate the nearest station's missing values with the values recorded by the nearby stations.the uv light index for the u.s. county centroids was obtained from the www.openweather.com, using the python "pyowm" program, 57 and joined to the data file. the assembled data file included covid-19 cases and deaths, demographics, social distancing, weather, ozone, pm2.5, and uv information for each county-day from january 1 to may 16, 2020 (figure 1 ).the assembled data file included 2,984 counties. because of missing values, only 41% of county-days were assigned with the temperature information from their nearest weather stations; 21%, 12%, 8%, and 6% of them were assigned with the temperature information from their second, third, fourth, and fifth nearest weather stations, respectively. the median distances of the first to fifth nearest stations from the county centroid were 4.5 (standard deviation, sd=5.5), 7.0 (sd=5.7), 9.9 (sd=6.7), 11.6 (sd=6.3), and 12.1 (sd=6.6) miles, respectively. there were fewer station changes in the assignment of precipitation, ozone, and pm2.5 information to counties than for pollution measures. at least 75% and 86% of county-days were assigned with the precipitation, ozone, and pm2.5 information from their first and first two nearest weather or air quality stations, respectively. the median distance of the nearest and the second nearest precipitation-recording station from the county centroid was 4.0 (sd=4.6) and 7.9 (sd=7.0) miles, respectively.county-days that were assigned with the information from a weather station located 50 miles or more away from the county centroid were checked, and no such cases were identified. among the county-days with missing weather information in the nearest station, checks were done to determine if weather station data were estimated with weather information from a station that was located 25 miles or more away from the nearest weather station, and these counties were excluded, resulting in 2,931 counties included in the analysis.in general, the distances of ozone-and pm2.5-recording air quality stations from county centroids were longer than those of weather stations. in the unrefined data file, the median distances for the first and second nearest ozone-recording stations were 28.6 (sd=52.6) miles and 36.4 (sd=61.9) miles, respectively, and 30.6 (sd=35.6) and 40.9 (sd=34.2) for pm2.5. such long distances can result in a potentially substantial error in the measurement of air pollutants at the county level. thus, any county-day that was assigned with ozone or pm2.5 value recorded by a station that was located 60 miles or more away from the county centroid was dropped, and 594 counties were subsequently excluded from the analysis. among the remaining 2,337 counties in the analysis, counties that had reported at least one covid-19 death by may 16, 2020, were included to avoid measuring spurious effects. the latter constraint resulted in dropping 1,024 counties, leaving 1,313 counties in the sample. in the final work file for statistical analyses, another 30 counties were dropped due to the existence of missing values still remained in the data. hence, the final work file included 1,273 counties from february 28 to may 16, 2020 (figure 2 ). 8 the total number of county-days in the final work file was 42,674. in this final work file, the median distances of stations that recorded temperature, precipitation, ozone, and pm2.5 from the county centroid were 6.9 (sd=6.0), 4.2 (sd=4.8), 17.3 (sd=14.0), and 21.8 (sd=14.5) miles, respectively. the results of this study persisted lowering the maximum distance of stations that recoded to ozone and pm2.5 from 60 miles to 40 and 20 miles (table a1) . with the maximum 20 mile criterion, the median distances of stations that recorded ozone and pm2.5 were 9.5 (sd=5.4), and 10.5 (sd=5.7) miles from county centroids, respectively.the logarithm of the daily covid-19 deaths per capita in each county by day was the dependent variable in this analysis. per capita was defined as the daily death rate by the size of the population over 18 years old in the county. the population below age 18 was excluded because covid-19 rarely causes death in younger age cohorts. daily death rate +1.0 was computed before dividing by population and taking the logarithm of the quotient to avoid an undefined term (i.e., the logarithm of zero). four statistical models are described below. the first model was: in which is the log of daily death rate per capita in county on day . the published literature shows that, on average, infection occurs about 20 days before death. 58-63 a five-day window around 20 days before death, which is 18 through 22 days before death, were taken and assumed that infection happened in that time window. in sensitivity analyses, this five-day window was changed to a three-day and a seven-day window and similar results were obtained (table a2-a5). is the set of county fixed-effects, where the subscript represents a county. these are dummy variables for each county in the data. these fixed-effects control for factors that are constant over the period of this study but can be different across counties, and include factors such as demographic characteristics of a county, ethnic distribution in a . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. (which was not certified by peer review)the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted june 22, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.20.20136259 doi: medrxiv preprint county, health care features and resources of a county, cultural factors in a county, social norms, attitudes, and aspirations in a county, geography and climate of a county, political characteristics, and infrastructure of a county.is a set of time fixed-effects for each day hence the subscript . there were 78 days in the analysis sample. hence, 78 dummy variables were included in the regression, each representing a day. these fixed-effects pick up any variable that is constant across counties in the u.s. but can vary daily. federal government policies or anything that affects the whole nation (e.g., the center for disease control's measures, travel restrictions, and immigration policies) are examples of time fixed-effects.some policies and procedures in response to covid-19 occurred at the state level in the u.s., vary by state, and are not the same across all counties in the u.s. within a given day. hence, the day fixed-effects, , cannot capture these potentially confounding factors. these policies were controlled using , , which is a set of four policy-response dummies that control for four state-level policy changes over time: (1) shelter-in-place order, (2) order of no gathering of more than 500 people, (3) order of public school closures, and (4) order of closure of restaurants, entertainment venues, and gyms. in other words, for each policy, a dummy variable was defined that is equal to one for a county on a specific day if the state to which the county belongs had that policy in place on that day. the dummies are zero otherwise. like temperature variables, the average of these dummy variables 18 through 22 days before death as independent variables. to strengthen this model, model (2) was defined below in which county-level timetrends, , were added: the time-trends control for the time trend in (i.e., trends in the log of per capita daily death rate specific to each county). in other words, they allow each county to have its own time trend. together, they constitute 1,453 additional independent variables in the regression.in models (1) and (2) include day fixed-effects, , which control for any country-level factor such as federal-level policies that change daily but is constant across all counties on any day. regional-level day fixed-effects were added to control for even more timevarying factors. these are day fixed-effects that are unique to a certain region of the . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. (which was not certified by peer review)the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted june 22, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.20.20136259 doi: medrxiv preprint u.s. that is, they control for factors that (1) can vary day by day, (2) are constant for counties within a certain region over any day, but (3) can be different for counties in other regions. for example, some neighboring states in certain regions coordinated their responses. such coordination can mean that every day these states may implement similar policies that are unique to that region and period but different from other regions. the region-specific day fixed-effects, represented by in models (3) and (4) the number of dummy variables representing fixed-effects in these models can be calculated as 8 regions  78 days = 624. in model (4), county-level time-trends were added to model (3): model (4) provides the strongest specification and controls for numerous time-constant and time-varying factors. it includes 3,534 variables other than temperatures, some of which, like the county fixed-effects, or day fixed-effects control for multiple factors by themselves. this is the most robust model that has been used among studies related to weather and covid-19 thus far. to strengthen the results, precipitation, pollution, and uv light were added as independent variables to model (4) because these variables could be potential confounders. as with temperature variables, the averages of precipitation, pollution, and uv light, between 18 through 22 days before death (the most likely period of exposure to sars-cov-2) were added to the regressions.americans who live in the north of the u.s. may respond differently to changes in the temperature than those who live in the south due to the warmer climate. it is speculated that changes in temperature may change mobility and contact in the north differently from the south. thus, death rates may vary differently with temperature in the north vs. the south u.s. to understand these differences, the sample was split into counties in the north and south, and the models were run separately for the north and south . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. (which was not certified by peer review)the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted june 22, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.20.20136259 doi: medrxiv preprint samples. the latitude of the geographical center of the continental united states, which is 3950' north, 65 was used to split the sample. counties with centroid latitudes greater than 3950' were included in the north sample, and those with centroid latitudes less than 3950' were included in the south sample.one issue to be careful about is the serial or auto correlation. there is a robust solution to the problem of serial correlation in the panel data estimation: correcting the standard errors, hence p-values, of the coefficients by clustering them at the cross-sectional level. as a result, no lagged dependent variable will be needed as a regressor. in the present study, the cross-sectional units are counties. thus, clustering standard errors at the county level accounts for the serially correlated structure of standard errors within each county. [66] [67] [68] [69] thus, in all of the regressions for all models, p-values were clustered at the county level to address serial correlation.there were 87,771 covid-19 deaths in the u.s. by may 16, 2020. 70 the study sample included 52,823 or 60% of these deaths. the majority, 70%, of the 52,823 deaths, occurred in the northern sample, the rest in the southern sample. on average, there were 1.2 (sd=5.8) deaths in the county-days of the analysis sample. the distribution of deaths was left-skewed because there were no covid-19 deaths in 73% of the countydays and less than two deaths in 86% of county-days. the distribution of covid-19 deaths over county-day was less left-skewed in the northern than the southern sample: in 67% and 77% of county-days, no covid-19 deaths were reported in the north and south, respectively. also, at least two covid-19 deaths were reported in 18% and 9% of county-days in the north and south, respectively (table 1, figure a1 ). because of the skewed distribution of the daily deaths, the logarithm of per capita deaths counts was used in the statistical analyses.the average minimum temperature during the presumed days of exposure to the coronavirus (18 through 22 days before death) was 42.1f (sd=11.3f). it was lower in the northern sample, 32.5f (sd=5.9f), but higher in the southern sample, 47.8f (sd=9.7f). the average maximum temperature during the exposure period was 63.4f (sd=12.3f), with a northern-southern gradient of 52.3f (sd=7.1f) and 70.0f (sd=9.7f), respectively. on average, there were 36.6 mm (sd=45.8 mm) of rainfall during the exposure period, 28.3 mm (sd=29.2 mm) in the northern and 41.6 mm (sd=52.7 mm) in the southern samples, respectively. the three meteorological elements were approximately normally distributed, except precipitation. there was also . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted june 22, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.20.20136259 doi: medrxiv preprint greater variation in precipitation than temperatures across counties over time. the logarithm of precipitation (plus one) was obtained to turn it into a distribution that resembles a normal distribution (table 1, figure a2 ).the average of 8-hour maximum concentration of the ground-level ozone during the exposure period was 40.4 ppb (sd=5.7 ppb). while the average ozone levels were generally in the "good" aqi (air quality index) range, 71 the median ozone concentration level in the northern u.s. was sless than that in the southern u.s., 40.2 ppb (sd=4.9 ppb) versus 41.8 ppb (sd=6.2 ppb). the highest ozone level in the south was 78.2 ppb, categorized as "unhealthy for sensitive groups" by the epa, 71 but 61.4 ppb, categorized as "moderate," in the north. in addition, there was more variation in ozone in the south (table 1, figure a2 ). the averages of the mean daily pm2.5 concentration and the uv light index in the analysis sample were 7.3 g/m 3 (sd=3.1 g/m 3 ) and 6.6 (sd=1.8), respectively. again, the average, variation, and maximum level of both pm2.5 and uv light index were greater in the south (table 1, figure a2 ).the association of covid-19 deaths at the county-level in the u.s. was estimated with minimum and maximum daily temperatures during the exposure period, while systematically adding control variables to assess the effect of each potential contributing factor on the association ( table 2) . as basic control variables, the following were included in all model specifications: four social distancing measures (shelter-in-place, no large gathering, closure of public schools, and closure of restaurants and entertainment venues), county fixed-effects, and day fixed-effects. the latter set of controls varied in some specifications. the estimates from the first model, which include u.s.-level day fixed-effects, show that a 1f increase in the five-day average of the daily minimum temperature was associated with a 3.8% increase in adult covid-19 deaths in a typical u.s. county during the study period. county-level daily death rates in the left-hand-side (dependent variable) of all statistical models were weighted by county population 18 years and older. thus, the estimated association can also be interpreted as the increase in the number of covid-19 deaths per 18 years and older county population. note that a 1f increase in the five-day average of daily minimum temperature requires the daily minimum temperature to increase by 5f cumulatively in those five days. this is not necessarily a small change. also, a 1f increase in the fiveday average of the daily maximum temperature was associated with a 2.1% decrease in adult covid-19 deaths per 18 years and older county population during the study period.the negative association of covid-19 deaths with the five-day average maximum temperature became non-significant when the model was improved by including . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted june 22, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.20.20136259 doi: medrxiv preprint county-specific time trends. also, the size of the positive association of covid-19 deaths with the five-day average minimum temperature decreased. the estimates from the second model show that a 1f increase in the five-day average minimum temperature was associated with a 2.6% increase in county-level covid-19 deaths during the study period ( table 2 ). the results from model (2) largely sustained the replacement of the u.s.-level fixed-effects with the region-level fixed-effects and the dropping of county-specific time trends, models (3) and (4) . according to the estimates from the specification with the preferred set of time-constant and time-varying controls but without other weather elements and air pollutants, model (4), a 1f increase in the five-day minimum temperature was associated with a 2.4% increase in county-level covid-19 deaths during the study period ( table 2) .model (4) was improved by adding daily precipitation, ozone, pm2.5, and uv index. the factor with the greatest influence on the association of county-level covid-19 deaths with daily minimum temperature was ozone concentration, which resulted in a 20% decrease in the magnitude of the association ( table 2 ). ozone itself also had a statistically significant negative association with covid-19 deaths.according to the estimates from the optimal statistical model, model (4), a 1f increase in the five-day average minimum temperature was associated with a 1.8% increase in county-level covid-19 deaths during the study period. the association between covid-19 deaths in a county and the daily maximum temperature, daily precipitation, pm2.5 concentration, and uv light index was not statistically significant. however, a 1 ppb increase in the 8-hour maximum ozone concentration level during the day was associated with a 1.3% decrease in county-level covid-19 deaths during the study period ( table 2) .the associations of covid-19 deaths with minimum daily temperature and ozone differed between the u.s. north and south regions. specifically, the positive association between covid-19 deaths and the minimum daily temperature was statistically significant only in the northern sample during the study period, but no such association was detected in the southern sample. in the north, a 1f increase in the five-day average of the minimum daily temperature was associated with a 5.1% increase in county-level covid-19 deaths during the study period. no other statistically significant associations were detected in the analysis of the northern sample ( table 3) . to put this result in context, suppose that a northern county experienced 100 covid-19 deaths on a day (for example, april 23) and suppose that on every day between 18 through 22 days before that day (i.e., april 1-5) the minimum temperature was x degrees. thus, the fiveday average minimum temperature was also equal to x degrees. on the following day . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted june 22, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.20.20136259 doi: medrxiv preprint (april 24), approximately 105 people will die of covid-19 if the five-day average minimum temperature for that day increased by 1f (i.e., the average minimum temperature for april 2-6). the minimum temperature should have increased by 5f on april 6 so that the five-day average minimum temperature for april 24 increased by 1f.in contrast, the negative association between covid-19 deaths and the maximum 8hour ozone concentration was statistically significant only in the southern sample, while no such association was detected in the northern sample. in the south, a 1 ppb increase in the five-day average ozone concentration was associated with a 2.0% decrease in county-level covid-19 deaths during the study period. no other statistically significant associations were detected in the analysis of the southern sample ( table 3) .to put this result in context, suppose that a southern county experienced 100 covid-19 deaths on a day (for example, april 23) and suppose that on every day between 18 through 22 days before that day (i.e., april 1-5) the ozone concentration was z ppb. thus, the five-day average ozone concentration was also equal to z ppb. on the next day (april 24), approximately 98 new covid-19 deaths will be recorded if the five-day average ozone concentration for that day increased by 1 ppb (i.e., average ozone concentration for april 2-6). the ozone concentration should have increased by 5 ppb on april 6, so that the five-day average minimum temperature increased by 1 ppb.the average minimum daily temperature in the northern sample was 32.2f. in 95% of county-days in the north, the minimum daily temperature was less than 42.2f ( table  1 ). this range of minimum daily temperatures is below the range of temperatures in which sars-cov-2's persistence on surfaces and in the aerosols decreases at elevated speeds. 14,72 it is possible that the measured positive association between covid-19 deaths and daily minimum temperature in the north is attributable to changes in contact rates (after accounting for the county, state, and time-specific contributing factors) because a likely increase in the minimum daily temperature was not likely to kill sars-cov-2 on surfaces or in the air. warmer temperature may significantly increase the contact rate, which affects opportunities for the transmission of the virus. in the south, where no significant association between the five-day average minimum daily temperature and covid-19 death was found, the increase in the minimum temperature during the period apparently did not significantly change contact rate.. cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted june 22, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06. 20.20136259 doi: medrxiv preprint an association between covid-19 deaths and the maximum daily temperature is potentially the result of two opposing factors. the five-day average maximum daily temperatures were large enough that a substantial increase was likely to decrease the sars-cov-2 transmission rate. at the same time, temperature may increase the personto-person contact rate. if no association is detected, it is possible that these two opposing forces balance out such that the impact of the increase in the five-day maximum daily temperature during the study period is not identified. alternatively, it may indicate that the increases in the maximum daily temperature during the study period, which covers late winter and spring, were not sufficiently strong to have a disinfection effect against sars-cov-2 and did not change contact rates either.the negative association between the airborne ozone level and covid-19 deaths is a potentially important finding. municipal sanitizing systems often use ozone to disinfect water sources or in some health care settings to disinfect surfaces. laboratory testing shows that ozone may inactivate sars-cov-2. 55, 56 currently, researchers are exploring an ozone-based intervention to curb the progression of cvod-19. 73 also, there was a negative, although uncontrolled, correlation between average ozone level in major chinese cities in january and march 2020 and confirmed covid-19 cases. 74 a global study also showed the negative association between covid-19 transmission rate and ozone concentration. 26 this study provides the first empirically robust evidence of a relationship between ozone and covid-19 deaths.the outcome analyzed is the covid-19 death rate by day by county. the number of infected cases is limited by testing capacity and is not a random sample. in the u.s., like most countries, testing capacity in the period of this study was confounded by a proportionately small number of tests done for prevalence estimates, and far below the level to cover everyone. although this capacity has increased over time, available data on the number of cases suffers substantially from a time-varying measurement error that may not be captured by often-used time variables, such as time trends. some related studies that use the number of cases argued that as long as the measurement error in the number of cases is not correlated with daily changes in temperature, the results are reliable. 26 this assumption, however, is unverifiable. the number of covid-19 deaths, on the other hand, is more reliable than the number of cases because it has been collected with more precision. a potential measurement error in the number of covid-19 deaths is the underdiagnosis of the disease in some fatalities and symptomologic diagnosis in others.. cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. the focus of the present study is on the united states because the quality of data is more homogenous within a nation than between them, even for death. reporting systems are likely to be more consistent within a given nation than across a number of countries. therefore, u.s. data was the most consistent and reliable data on covid-19 deaths that were accessible at the county level, and there are hundreds of counties in the analysis sample of this study.since there are 1,273 counties in the analysis sample, in models (1)-(4) represents a collection of 1,273 dummy variables, known as fixed-effects. these county fixed-effects control for any confounder that is constant over the period of this study but can vary across counties. one benefit of county fixed-effects is that they control for any timeconstant factor in a county even if the data on the factor is not available or the factor is not measurable. for example, if warmer counties have different health care infrastructure than cooler counties in general, county fixed-effects control for them as long as the health care infrastructure remains the same over the period of this study in each of these counties.the day fixed-effects capture factors affecting the daily death rate that varies daily but is constant across counties in the united states. federal government responses to covid-19, cdc measures, or anything that affects the whole nation and the spread of covid-19 (e.g., travel restrictions and immigration restrictions). they affect all counties, but their intensity or nature can vary from one day to another. it is necessary to control for time in a granular way without restriction on the functional form because the policy response to covid-19 was ever-evolving during the period of this study. controlling for a polynomial functional form of time trends does not capture all the variation in policy over time and is restricted by the functional form. day fixed-effects, however, capture any non-linear changes in policies as they have no restriction on the functional form.separate day fixed-effects were defined for each region to strengthen day fixed-effects, in model (4). this captures not only federal-level responses that vary daily, but also responses specific to each of the eight u.s. regions that can vary daily. this strong specification, together with controlling for state-specific policy measures ( , ), captures numerous time-varying factors that can confound the results. in addition to these day fixed-effects, county time trends allow control for any trend in death rate within each county separately. this captures any trend in covid deaths within a county that could be for any reason, such as the gradual increase in the understanding of the county population about the disease and ways to prevent it.. cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted june 22, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.20.20136259 doi: medrxiv preprint because fixed-effects capture all independent variables that only vary by either county or time, independent variables added to these models must vary by both county and time. in addition, such independent variables should be potentially correlated with covid death and temperature, and would need to be included in the model. precipitation, pollution, and uv level are such potential variables. all these variables are included in this study's models, making them powerful in the identification of the causal impact of temperature variation on covid-19 deaths.an important advantage of this study is that it addresses serial correlation in the error terms of the statistical models. a robust solution to the problem of serial correlation in this panel data estimation is to correct the standard errors and p-values of the coefficients by clustering them at the geographic level, which is the county. thus, in all of the regressions for all models, reported p-values are corrected by clustering at the county level. this is an important issue that is often overlooked in other studies on the effect of environmental factors on covid.the r-squared of the models of this study is generally low. this is certainly not a disadvantage of these models. to identify the causal effects of an independent variable on a dependent variable, in regular statistical models, researchers include as many covariates as possible to capture the effect of confounders. increasing the number of covariates in such models increases r-squared. hence, one quick way for researchers to find whether confounders are sufficiently controlled for has been to examine the rsquare values of such models. fixed-effect models, by nature, produce small withingroup r-squared because they control for an immense number of confounders, many of which are impossible or hard to measure.the present study has several important limitations. measurement error in the assignment of air pollution information is much greater than the error in the assignment of temperature and precipitation information. specifically, the median distance of stations reporting temperatures, precipitation, ozone, and pm2.5 to the county centroid was 6.9, 4.2, 17.3, and 21.8 miles, respectively. the sensitivity of this study's results was tested against the exclusion of counties with air quality stations 40 miles or more and 20 miles or more away from the county centroid. the results sustained the test. the association of covid-19 deaths and the five-day average minimum temperature was 5.5% when the most restricted sample was used. the association of covid-19 deaths and the five-day average ozone level, however, increased from 2.0% to 3.8% (table   . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted june 22, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.20.20136259 doi: medrxiv preprint a1). moreover, the results were preserved after distances from weather and air quality stations were added as covariates to the statistical models (tables a6 and a7) .another issue of note is that state-level day fixed-effects were not included in the models. including state-level day fixed-effects removes much of the daily variation in temperature because many u.s. states, particularly in the northeast, are too small to have much within-state variation in temperature. in other words, the results would produce a statistically insignificant estimate due to the model, rather than the true coefficient (a recently published study used the same set of region-level time fixedeffects as model 3 to estimate the effect of social distancing policy measures on the spread of the virus. 52 ). nevertheless, a model with state-level day fixed-effects was estimated to compare the results: in this model, is a set of dummy variables representing state and day . they control for any factor that can vary daily within states. interestingly, the results for the minimum temperature, reported in table a8 , remained the same for the northern sample. the results for the ozone concentration in the southern sample, however, faded away. as mentioned, this model controls for too many confounders and diminishes the variation in independent variables.temperature and pollution are weather factors that could affect the spread of sars-cov-2. this study used the most reliable data, deaths, and a strong statistical model at the county level to estimate the impact of these factors. during march, april, and may of 2020, when the average minimum temperature within a five-day window increased by one degree fahrenheit, daily death in northern u.s. counties increased by about 5.1%. in addition, when ozone concentration rised by one ppb, daily death in southern u.s. counties increases by about 2.0%. no evidence of an effect of maximum temperature, precipitation, pm2.5, and uv light on covid-19 deaths was found. the absence of evidence, however, is not evidence of absence.these results were robust to the specification and to the inclusion and exclusion of variables. the impact of minimum temperature on covid-19 deaths is thought to be . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted june 22, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.20.20136259 doi: medrxiv preprint through the increase in physical mobility and personal contacts. importantly, these results apply only to the spring weather during march, april, and may of 2020. the rise in the minimum temperature in the springtime in the northern united states could be the reason people leave their homes more often than in colder temperatures early in the year. temperature (minimum) may not have the same effect on behavior in summer, but that was not yet analyzed. the impact of summer (or fall) weather on covid-19 deaths will be separately analyzed. the effect of ozone may be explained by its disinfectant properties, but this has not been analyzed in laboratory experiments to our knowledge.. cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted june 22, 2020. is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted june 22, 2020. . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted june 22, 2020. yao m, zhang l, ma j, zhou l. since january 2020 elsevier has created a covid-19 resource centre with free information in english and mandarin on the novel coronavirus covid-19 . the covid-19 resource centre is hosted on elsevier connect , the company ' s public news and information . 2020;(january).. cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted june 22, 2020. . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted june 22, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.20.20136259 doi: medrxiv preprintdata refinement procedure . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted june 22, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.20.20136259 doi: medrxiv preprint 0 notes: numbers in parentheses are standard deviations. counties whose centroid is above the 39 50'n are considered northern. temperatures are in fahrenheit. precipitation is in millimeters. ozone is the maximum 8-hour concentration level measured in parts per billion, ppb. pm2.5 is the average daily concentration level measured in micrograms per cubic meters, g/m 3 . table 2 multiple regression results of estimating the association of weather and air quality indicators with the logarithm of county-level daily death rate 18+ population in 1,273 counties and 42,674 county days interpretation of the reported coefficients: percentage (in decimals) change in daily death per 18+ county population for a one-unit change in the weather and air quality indicator. (1) (2) 109 notes: all standard errors are clustered at the county level. numbers in parentheses are robust p-values. signs ***, **, and * indicate 1%, 5%, and 10% statistical significance levels. the minimum and maximum temperatures are in fahrenheit. precipitation is in millimeters. ozone is the maximum 8-hour concentration level measured in parts per billion, ppb. pm2.5 is the average daily concentration level measured in micrograms per cubic meters, g/m 3 . table 3 multiple regression results of estimating the association of weather and air quality indicators with the logarithm of county-level daily deaths per 18+ population in northern and southern counties, using the preferred statistical model (model 4).interpretation of the reported coefficients: percentage (in decimals) change in daily death per 18+ county population for a one-unit change in the weather and air quality indicator counties whose centroid is above the 3950n are considered northern. all standard errors are clustered at the county level. numbers in parentheses are robust p-values. signs ***, **, and * indicate 1%, 5%, and 10% statistical significance levels. the minimum and maximum temperatures are in fahrenheit. precipitation is in millimeters. ozone is the maximum 8-hour concentration level measured in parts per billion, ppb. pm2.5 is the average daily concentration level measured in micrograms per cubic meters, g/m 3 .. cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. tables   table a1 multiple regression results of estimating the association of weather and air quality indicators with the logarithm of county-level daily death rates (per 18+ population) for the northern and southern samples -samples based on the distance of stations reporting ozone and pm data to the county centroid interpretation of the reported coefficients: percentage (in decimals) change in daily death per 18+ county population for a one-unit change in the weather and air quality indicator. all standard errors are clustered at the county level. numbers in parentheses are robust p-values. signs ***, **, and * indicate 1%, 5%, and 10% statistical significance levels. the minimum and maximum temperatures are in fahrenheit. precipitation is in millimeters. o3 is the maximum 8-hour concentration level measured in parts per billion, ppb. pm2.5 is the average daily concentration level measured in micrograms per cubic meters, g/m 3 .multiple regression results of estimating the association of weather and air quality indicators with the logarithm of county-level daily death rate per 18+ population in 1,261 counties and 41,958 county days -average weather variables are calculated over a 7-day period: 17 through 23 days before death.interpretation of the reported coefficients: percentage (in decimals) change in daily death per 18+ county population for a one-unit change in the weather and air quality indicator. (1) (2) multiple regression results of estimating the association of weather and air quality indicators with the logarithm of county-level daily deaths per 18+ population in northern and southern counties, using the preferred statistical model (model 4) -average weather variables are calculated over a 7-day period: 17 through 23 days before death.interpretation of the reported coefficients: percentage (in decimals) change in daily death per 18+ county population for a one-unit change in the weather and air quality indicator counties whose centroid is above the 3950n are considered northern. all standard errors are clustered at the county level. numbers in parentheses are robust p-values. signs ***, **, and * indicate 1%, 5%, and 10% statistical significance levels. the minimum and maximum temperatures are in fahrenheit. precipitation is in millimeters. o3 is the maximum 8-hour concentration level measured in parts per billion, ppb. pm2.5 is the average daily concentration level measured in micrograms per cubic meters, g/m 3 .. cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted june 22, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.20.20136259 doi: medrxiv preprint table a4 multiple regression results of estimating the association of weather and air quality indicators with the logarithm of county-level daily death rate per 18+ population in 1,281 counties and 43,480 county days -average weather variables are calculated over a 3-day period: 19 through 21 days before death.interpretation of the reported coefficients: percentage (in decimals) change in daily death per 18+ county population for a one-unit change in the weather and air quality indicator. (1) (2) multiple regression results of estimating the association of weather and air quality indicators with the logarithm of county-level daily deaths per 18+ population in northern and southern counties, using the preferred statistical model (model 4) -average weather variables are calculated over a 3-day period: 19 through 21 days before death.interpretation of the reported coefficients: percentage (in decimals) change in daily death per 18+ county population for a one-unit change in the weather and air quality indicator counties whose centroid is above the 3950n are considered northern. all standard errors are clustered at the county level. numbers in parentheses are robust p-values. signs ***, **, and * indicate 1%, 5%, and 10% statistical significance levels. the minimum and maximum temperatures are in fahrenheit. precipitation is in millimeters. o3 is the maximum 8-hour concentration level measured in parts per billion, ppb. pm2.5 is the average daily concentration level measured in micrograms per cubic meters, g/m 3 .. cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. (which was not certified by peer review)the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted june 22, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.20.20136259 doi: medrxiv preprint table a6 multiple regression results of estimating the association of weather and air quality indicators with the logarithm of county-level daily death rate per 18+ population in 1,273 counties and 42,674 county days -average weather variables are calculated over a 5-day period: 18 through 22 days before death, and distances from weather and air quality stations are added as covariates.interpretation of the reported coefficients: percentage (in decimals) change in daily death per 18+ county population for a one-unit change in the weather and air quality indicator. (1) (2) all standard errors are clustered at the county level. numbers in parentheses are robust p-values. signs ***, **, and * indicate 1%, 5%, and 10% statistical significance levels. the minimum and maximum temperatures are in fahrenheit. precipitation is in millimeters. o3 is the maximum 8-hour concentration level measured in parts per billion, ppb. pm2.5 is the average daily concentration level measured in micrograms per cubic meters, g/m 3 .multiple regression results of estimating the association of weather and air quality indicators with the logarithm of county-level daily deaths per 18+ population in northern and southern counties, using the preferred statistical model (model 4) -average weather variables are calculated over a 5-day period: 18 through 22 days before death, and distances from weather and air quality stations are added as covariates.interpretation of the reported coefficients: percentage (in decimals) change in daily death per 18+ county population for a one-unit change in the weather and air quality indicator 110 notes: counties whose centroid is above the 3950n are considered northern. all standard errors are clustered at the county level. numbers in parentheses are robust p-values. signs ***, **, and * indicate 1%, 5%, and 10% statistical significance levels. the minimum and maximum temperatures are in fahrenheit. precipitation is in millimeters. o3 is the maximum 8-hour concentration level measured in parts per billion, ppb. pm2.5 is the average daily concentration level measured in micrograms per cubic meters, g/m 3 .. cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. (which was not certified by peer review)the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted june 22, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.20.20136259 doi: medrxiv preprint table a8 multiple regression results of estimating the association of weather and air quality indicators with the logarithm of county-level daily deaths per 18+ population in northern and southern counties, using state-level day fixed-effects interpretation of the reported coefficients: percentage (in decimals) change in daily death per 18+ county population for a one-unit change in the weather and air quality indicator 177 notes: counties whose centroid is above the 3950n are considered northern. all standard errors are clustered at the county level. numbers in parentheses are robust p-values. signs ***, **, and * indicate 1%, 5%, and 10% statistical significance levels. the minimum and maximum temperatures are in fahrenheit. precipitation is in millimeters. ozone is the maximum 8-hour concentration level measured in parts per billion, ppb. pm2.5 is the average daily concentration level measured in micrograms per cubic meters, g/m 3 .. cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. (which was not certified by peer review)the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted june 22, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.20.20136259 doi: medrxiv preprintla dermatitis atpica es una enfermedad cutnea inflamatoria crnica caracterstica, que ocurre tpicamente en individuos con una historia personal o familiar de atopia.no existe en la actualidad un parmetro objetivo de laboratorio y su diagnstico se basa en su asociacin a una serie de rasgos clnicos.el pediatra debe establecer un diagnstico de sospecha, ante una dermatitis pruriginosa con carcter persistente o recurrente de ms de 6 semanas de duracin. el tratamiento de la dermatitis atpica se basa en educar al paciente y a su familia, evitar los factores exacerbantes, reducir la sequedad cutnea y tratar la inflamacin.el tratamiento debe entrar a formar parte de la rutina diaria de la familia e implicar al nio en sus cuidados.aunque el pronstico es habitualmente bueno, los nios con dermatitis atpica tienen un elevado riesgo de presentar una alergia respiratoria con la edad.an pediatr contin. 2013;11(4):197-203 197 actualizacin nismo de penetracin viral y la apoptosis consiguiente de clulas epiteliales estn regulados por el interfern, que minimiza la replicacin viral. el tratamiento de la infeccin por rinovirus con interfern intranasal ha producido resultados desalentadores porque no ha sido capaz de revertir la cascada inflamatoria que produce la infeccin y la administracin tpica de interfern ocasiona una sintomatologa similar a la del proceso catarral. por todo ello, no parece que est justificado su empleo 2 .la tos en un proceso catarral es, sin discusin alguna, un mecanismo de defensa para eliminar secreciones de la va respiratoria. no obstante, el uso de antitusgenos y otros medicamentos anticatarrales es muy frecuente en nuestro medio. segn un estudio 3 publicado recientemente sobre prescripcin de medicamentos anticatarrales en pediatra en el mbito de la comunidad autnoma de castilla y len, las tasas de prescripcin, referidas a 100 personas/ao, fueron de 20,7 para antitusgenos, 7,0 para simpaticomimticos y 23,4 para mucolticos, con tasas ms altas en nios menores de 4 aos. en el siglo xviii se utiliz la quinina como medicamento antitusgeno y, posteriormente, la herona y la morfina (comercializada hasta hace 100 aos como tratamiento de la tos en nios y adultos). en 1827 se obtuvo la codena, que ms tarde se convertira en el medicamento de referencia contra la tos, pero la importante dependencia farmacolgica que causa su empleo cre la necesidad de sintetizar un frmaco antitusgeno sin estas limitaciones. as, a mediados del siglo pasado, se obtuvo una molcula, el dextrometorfano, que pretenda tener las propiedades antitusgenas de la codena pero no suel catarro comn o resfriado es una infeccin aguda, autolimitada, de la va respiratoria superior que se acompaa de grados variables de fiebre, tos, estornudos, rinorrea, cefalea, malestar, dolor de garganta e inapetencia. est causado por ms de 200 virus, siendo el rinovirus, con ms de 100 serotipos, el agente infeccioso responsable de la mitad de estos procesos. es, sin duda alguna, una de las causas ms frecuentes de consulta en pediatra. la teraputica del catarro se ha orientado de manera preferente al tratamiento de sus sntomas y no de su causa. los resultados clnicos obtenidos con la mayora de los frmacos empleados han sido poco alentadores porque los tratamientos propuestos no han superado con claridad el balance riesgo/beneficio que cabra esperarse. como dijo osler hace ms de un siglo, hoy en da podramos decir tambin que la mejor manera de tratar el catarro es con desprecio.en el hemisferio norte, el catarro ocurre preferentemente en meses fros. el rinovirus es el agente causal predominante en septiembre; en octubre y noviembre son ms frecuentes las infecciones por virus parainfluenza; en los meses invernales los virus patgenos ms habituales son virus respiratorio sincitial, coronavirus e influenza. en primavera se cierra el ciclo con un nuevo brote de rinovirus 1 . el rinovirus afecta preferentemente a las clulas del epitelio de la rinofaringe y libera su arn de forma intracelular. este meca- no hay tratamiento antivrico ni actuacin teraputica sobre los mecanismos de invasin del virus (interfern) con evidencias suficientes para que se justifique cualquier tratamiento en este sentido.la tos es uno de los sntomas ms relevantes y constituye uno de los mayores motivos de demanda de medicacin por parte de las familias.los antitusgenos que actualmente estn en el mercado tienen ms de 50 aos de existencia y no est demostrado que su eficacia teraputica justifique sus riesgos, especialmente en nios pequeos.dependencia. sin duda, el dextrometorfano es el medicamento antitusgeno ms utilizado en la poblacin peditrica 4 en el mundo. otro medicamento antitusgeno de amplio uso en espaa, segn se desprende del trabajo de cano et al., es la cloperastina 3 .la codena es uno de los antitusgenos ms usados, sola o en combinacin con otros medicamentos anticatarrales. su vida media en plasma es de 2-4 h y un 10% se metaboliza en morfina. los lactantes presentan mayor susceptibilidad a la intoxicacin por codena por inmadurez del sistema de glucuronidacin heptico. adems, se ha observado que existen diferentes genotipos de metabolizacin de la codena en morfina pudiendo dar lugar a resultados fatales en los metabolizadores rpidos del citocromo p4502d6 (cyp2d6) 5, 6 . las reacciones adversas de la codena consisten en nuseas, vmitos, estreimiento, palpitaciones y mareos. en casos de intoxicacin, la codena puede ocasionar parada respiratoria. la eficacia de la codena como antitusgeno viene siendo cuestionada desde hace aos 7, 8 . ya en 1997 la academia academia americana de pediatra se pronunci en el sentido de que la codena se podra considerar como un medicamento contraindicado y peligroso en muchos procesos respiratorios, incluido el catarro de vas altas 9 . en 2010 la agencia britnica del medicamento, mhra, sobre la base de la ausencia de pruebas concluyentes que apoyaran la eficacia de la codena como antitusgeno en nios, su toxicidad y el riesgo de abuso y dependencia en adolescentes, indic la supresin de la comercializacin de todos los jarabes que contienen codena para menores de 18 aos 10 .el dextrometorfano est relacionado estructuralmente con la codena pero carece de efecto analgsico. su efecto antitusgeno es ms prolongado que el de la codena y dura unas 6 h. a dosis habituales, su toxicidad es baja pero a dosis altas puede tener un efecto disociativo similar a la ketamina y por este motivo se ha convertido en un frmaco de uso recreacional frecuente en nios y adolescentes en estados unidos 11 y en otros pases. su eficacia antitusgena y el beneficio subjetivo de mejora del sueo de los nios y de las familias de nios tosedores no parecen que sean superiores a la miel o al placebo 12, 13 .la cloperastina es un antitusgeno de prescripcin frecuente entre los pediatras espaoles 3 pese a que apenas se han publicado estudios de su eficacia en sus ms de 50 aos de vida. la cloperastina tiene un efecto dual, depresor del centro de la tos y antihistamnico 14 . debido a la precariedad de estudios sobre este frmaco, no pueden extraerse conclusiones sobre su eficacia.la levodropropizina es un antitusgeno no opiceo que parece actuar sobre receptores del tracto respiratorio pero que posee pocos estudios clnicos en nios, la mayora de ellos realizados en el mismo entorno geogrfico 15 con manifiesto conflicto de intereses. la noscapina es un antitusgeno opiceo tambin conocido desde hace muchos aos. carece de estudios que evalen su eficacia y seguridad en nios.pese a que se lleva ms de medio siglo utilizando estos medicamentos como tratamiento de la tos, no se ha conseguido demostrar su eficacia. son numerosas las publicaciones que demuestran que la mejora es explicada por el curso natural de las infecciones respiratorias y por la sensacin subjetiva de mejora que refieren los padres, explicada muchas veces por el efecto placebo 16, 17 . este efecto placebo, desencadenado tambin por sustancias azucaradas 18 , puede estar relacionado con la generacin de neurotransmisores centrales, como los opioides endgenos. y otro de antitusgenos asociados a broncodilatadores no encontraron mejores resultados comparados con el placebo. un ensayo clnico que valoraba 2 jarabes antitusgenos mostraba una respuesta satisfactoria en el 46 y el 56% de los nios comparando con el 21% en los nios que recibieron placebo. los autores de la revisin concluyen que no existe evidencia ni a favor ni en contra de los medicamentos otc en la tos aguda y que estos resultados deben ser valorados con cautela debido a las caractersticas de los estudios y a la calidad de ellos, sin olvidar conflictos de intereses. esta revisin concluy que eran necesarios nuevos estudios y de mayor calidad metodolgica para establecer criterios fiables sobre la indicacin de estos antitusgenos otc. tampoco se ha visto que el uso de antitusgenos otc cause mejora en nios y adultos con neumona 21 , aunque s se recomienda expresamente no emplear codena ni antihistamnicos debido a sus efectos deletreos. adems de la ineficacia de los antitusgenos y anticatarrales, se sabe que estos productos no estn exentos de riesgo y en ocasiones con consecuencia fatales 22, 23 . por tanto, la necesidad de regulacin de estos productos pareca necesaria 24 por la falta de eficacia, por los riesgos potenciales para la salud y por la ausencia de estudios farmacolgicos en nios. las dosis peditricas de estos frmacos se haban estimado en funcin de las dosis de adultos. en 2007, la food and drug administration (fda) haba comunicado 123 fallecimientos en menores de 6 aos en las ltimas dcadas como consecuencia del empleo de medicamentos antitusgenos y anticatarrales 25 . la fda, en 2008, prohibi el uso de estos productos para menores de 2 aos 26 . posterior-mente, esta limitacin se ha hecho extensiva a los menores de 4 aos. esta prohibicin de venta de medicamentos anticatarrales y antitusgenos de libre disposicin se ha extendido para los nios menores de 6 aos en muchos pases como reino unido, canad, australia y holanda, entre otros (tabla 1). la regulacin sobre el uso de anticatarrales y antitusgenos en estados unidos ha tenido repercusiones en forma de una reduccin sustancial del nmero de intoxicaciones y efectos adversos en nios 27 . estos productos antitusgenos y anticatarrales otc son frecuentemente objeto de errores en su administracin a nios por parte de familiares y cuidadores que, asociados a la impresin de su inocuidad por su fcil accesibilidad y al uso consagrado por varias generaciones, adems de la proclividad a la reiteracin de su uso por la ineficacia en la erradicacin de los sntomas, hacen que sean frecuentes las consultas a urgencias como consecuencia de efectos adversos e intoxicaciones, en ocasiones con consecuencias fatales.los preparados terpnicos (alcanfor, cineol, citral, eucalipto, mentol, niaouli, pino, terpineol, terpina, tomillo, trementina) se usan desde hace ms de un siglo como productos antitusgenos y anticatarrales. recientemente, se ha publicado que preparados terpnicos tpicos disminuyen la tos y facilitan el sueo 28 . estas conclusiones se han cuestionado por ser un estudio no cegado, con errores metodolgicos y con manifiesto conflicto de intereses. estos productos se emplean en ocasiones en localizaciones caprichosas, como las plantas de los pies y en otros en la cara y pecho de los nios, ocasionando problemas de irritacin local en muchos nios. adems, hay que considerar el riesgo potencial de estos productos, entre ellos la provocacin de convulsiones y otros problemas neurolgicos, no solo por va tpica sino tambin por otras vas de administracin 29 . en espaa, durante muchos aos se han utilizado preparados terpnicos por va rectal para el tratamiento de la tos. segn la agencia europea del medicamento, los supositorios que contienen derivados terpnicos no deberan usarse en nios menores de 30 meses o en nios con antecedentes de epilepsia o convulsin febril 30 , tal y como lo ha recogido la agencia espaola del medicamento.los mucolticos son medicamentos que supuestamente rompen el moco, haciendo que las secreciones sean ms fluidas y, por tanto, ms fcilmente eliminables por la tos. en europa es la n-acetilcistena el mucoltico ms empleado por su eficacia in vitro para romper puentes disulfuro y fluidificar el moco. esta eficacia no est suficientemente probada 31 . por el contrario, se ha observado en lactantes un efecto paradjico con riesgo de broncorrea, broncoespasmo, prolongacin de la tos y disfuncin respiratoria 32 , que ha ocasionado que francia e italia no autoricen su uso en nios menores de 2 aos. los expectorantes se prescriben con el propsito de transformar una tos seca en una tos productiva. su mecanismo de accin es mediante estimulacin indirecta del nervio vagal y de las glndulas bronquiales productoras de moco. estos productos, como la guaifenesina, la ipecacuana y el cloruro amnico, pueden causar nuseas y vmitos. la guaifenesina es el expectorante ms empleado en estados unidos, pero carece de estudios clnicos controlados que avalen su eficacia en nios.se suelen aadir a preparados anticatarrales como antitusgenos y como anticongestivos nasales, en ocasiones tambin asociado a analgsicos. segn una revisin cochrane, la eficacia de estos preparados no est establecida para nios pequeos y pueden ser de alguna utilidad en nios mayores y adultos 33 . cuando los antihistamnicos se usaron como monoterapia no se encontr mejora ni en nios ni en adultos, observndose menor rinorrea por sus propiedades anticolinrgicas, pero mayor somnolencia 34 . entre los efectos adversos de los anticolinrgicos se encuentran: sedacin, excitabilidad paradjica, depresin respiratoria y alucinaciones. no estn recomendados en menores de 6 aos y es de dudosa indicacin en menores de 12 aos.son innumerables los remedios para los catarros obtenidos de plantas y otros productos naturales mediatizados por la situacin geogrfica y la cultura, pero muchos de ellos sin eficacia demostrada y no exentos de riesgos.la miel ha sido uno de los productos ms usados desde antiguo para el tratamiento de la tos. se sabe que los productos dulces disminuyen la sensacin de molestia de la tos y contribuyen al efecto placebo. adems, se le atribuye efectos antioxidantes y posible accin antimicrobiana mediante liberacin de citocinas. la eficacia de la miel como antitusgeno en nios ha sido avalada frente al no tratamiento o al placebo 12, 35, 36 . la miel es muy bien tolerada y tiene un excelente perfil de seguridad siempre que est pasteurizada y se administre a nios mayores de un ao para evitar el riesgo de botulismo 37 .el ajo, supuestamente con efectos antimicrobianos y antivirales, no ha demostrado ser eficaz en los procesos catarrales 38 .a la echinacea purpurea se le atribuyen propiedades de estimulacin del sistema inmunitario y por este mecanismo se supone que disminuye la intensidad y la duracin de los procesos catarrales. aunque se ha comunicado una posible eficacia en adultos 39, 40 , no se han comunicado estos resultados en nios. por el contrario, en un estudio peditrico no se encontr ninguna diferencia en cuanto a la duracin e intensidad del catarro en comparacin con el placebo 41 . una revisin sistemtica estableci que no haba evidencias de que actualizacin tratamiento del catarro. evidencia cientfica r. ugarte libanono estn justificados los antibiticos como medida de prevencin de complicaciones bacterianas.los analgsicosantitrmicos deben utilizarse nicamente para tratamiento del dolor y malestar y no de la fiebre. tampoco est justificado el uso de corticoides tpicos. el tratamiento con echinacea purpurea fuera til en los procesos catarrales y, adems, recomend que se evitara en los alrgicos a gramneas y en aquellas personas que estuvieran en tratamiento con corticoides 42 . otros productos fitoterpicos como el ginseng no han demostrado eficacia alguna en la evolucin de los sntomas catarrales.no hay estudios sobre la eficacia de los probiticos en el tratamiento del catarro. se ha comunicado la eficacia de estos productos en la reduccin de los sntomas catarrales cuando se establece un consumo previo durante 6 meses 43 . no existen razones para indicar estos preparados con este propsito.desde hace 30 aos se viene utilizando el cinc en el tratamiento del catarro, sin saber exactamente cul es su mecanismo de accin. se piensa que el cinc pudiera inhibir la adhesin de los rinovirus al epitelio y de esta manera limitar su replicacin. un metanlisis reciente 44 establece acortamiento de los sntomas del catarro en poblacin adulta, especialmente con formulaciones orales de acetato de cinc, pero sin que este beneficio se pueda establecer para poblacin infantil. en trminos similares lo hace una revisin cochrane, siempre que el tratamiento se inicie en las primeras 24 h de inicio del catarro y en poblacin sana, aunque reconoce la dificultad de establecer recomendaciones sobre las formulaciones de cinc y la duracin del tratamiento 45 .el consumo de lquidos se considera un pilar en el tratamiento del catarro en nios. se entiende que una buena hidratacin facilitar el ablandamiento de las secreciones respiratorias y la eliminacin de las mismas mediante la tos y el estornudo. con frecuencia se recurre a los vahos, tanto con agua fra o caliente, para que el contacto de las secreciones con el vapor de agua facilite su fluidificacin. una revisin cochrane no encontr argumentos para hacer esta recomendacin 46 . sin duda, uno de los mayores inconvenientes que tiene este procedimiento es el riesgo de quemaduras por contacto del nio con agua caliente. est totalmente desaconsejado exponer al nio a la proximidad con agua caliente. los lavados nasales y la aspiracin de mocos de las fosas nasales con sistemas apropiados de succin facilitan la permeabilidad de la va area nasal y la ventilacin de la misma. el uso frecuente de dispositivos de instilacin y aspiracin pueden producir inflamacin local y ocasionar un efecto inconveniente.no hay estudios que demuestren que preparados con agua marina posean beneficios sobre preparaciones de suero fisiolgico o agua con sal al 0,9% para instilacin nasal.la homeopata se basa en 2 principios acientficos como son el principio de similitud, lo igual cura lo igual, y el de dilucin infinitesimal, cuanto ms se diluye un soluto (hasta que virtualmente desaparece de la solucin) ms potencia curativa tiene. en una revisin de la sociedad canadiense de pediatra 47 sobre homeopata de 2005 se hace referencia a una publicacin de 1994 donde no se encontr beneficio alguno de la homeopata en el catarro de vas altas. siguiendo el principio de similitud homeoptico y considerando que el contacto del jugo de la cebolla con la va respiratoria alta remeda los sntomas catarrales, todava es frecuente la colocacin de una cebolla en la proximidad del nio con catarro como remedio casero para el tratamiento de la tos nocturna. esta prctica tan extendida no ha demostrado ninguna eficacia pero tampoco se conocen riesgos.el dolor y la fiebre pueden acompaar al cuadro catarral. la fiebre es un mecanismo del sistema inmunitario para combatir ms adecuadamente las infecciones, incluidas las vricas. existen motivos para pensar que la fiebre en s misma puede reducir el tiempo de evolucin de procesos virales. por este motivo, y siguiendo la gua de prctica clnica nice 48 nante de estos preparados est desaconsejado porque no mejora sustancialmente la analgesia y existe un riesgo mayor de intoxicacin por estos frmacos. el uso de medios fsicos para bajar la temperatura como friegas con alcohol o baos en agua tibia o fra tambin se desaconseja porque no ocasionan ms que un descenso breve de la temperatura y una prdida de calor que exigir ms gasto energtico para que el nio alcance el punto de equilibrio trmico que le exige su centro termorregulador hipotalmico. en algunos casos se ha empleado tratamiento antiinflamatorio local mediante el empleo de corticoides tpicos pero son escasos los trabajos publicados como para establecer que esta modalidad de tratamiento tenga suficiente evidencia que la justifique 49 .la falta de evidencia para el tratamiento etiolgico de los catarros con frmacos antivirales o con productos moduladores de la respuesta inmunitaria (interfern tpico), asociada a la limitada o escasa eficacia de los frmacos antitusgenos para inhibir un mecanismo natural de defensa del aparato respiratorio y a los riesgos potenciales asociados que conllevan su uso, y la no probada eficacia de antihistamnicos, expectorantes y mucolticos en nios y sus riesgos potenciales, sobre todo en lactantes, hacen que el tratamiento de los catarros en nios se vea, hoy por hoy, privado de tratamiento farmacolgico eficaz. tampoco est justificado el empleo de antibiticos como medida preventiva de sobreinfecciones bacterianas. las bases del tratamiento del catarro en pediatra se basan en mantener una buen estado de hidratacin mediante la ingesta de lquidos (preferentemente, zumos de frutas y otros productos con hidratos de carbono para aportar vitamina c y caloras), lavados nasales con suero fisiolgico y aspiracin de secreciones nasales. aunque los vahos no han demostrado ser de utilidad comprobada y atendiendo a las recomendaciones de la mayora de los artculos y guas de tratamiento del catarro, parece conveniente emplearlos siempre que se tenga la seguridad de evitar totalmente riesgos de escaldadura. la miel ha demostrado ser un producto que no quita la tos pero produce una sensacin subjetiva de mejora que facilita el sueo de los nios acatarrados y sus familias. otros productos promocionados como naturales (ajo, equincea, ginseng, remedios herbales, cinc u homeopata) no estn justificados en el tratamiento del catarro. probablemente, el tratamiento ms eficaz del catarro infantil es la educacin sanitaria para familias y cuidadores, empoderndolos con informacin que ayude al manejo de estos tan frecuentes procesos respiratorios, sabiendo reconocer cuales son los signos y sntomas que indican gravedad del proceso respiratorio y, por consiguiente, la necesidad de acudir a un pediatra 50 . en el siglo xxi podemos decir que sigue en pie el aforismo de osler sobre el tratamiento con desprecio de los catarros pero con un adecuado soporte de educacin sanitaria y evitando la iatrogenia.los autores declaran no tener ningn conflicto de intereses. interesante revisin clnica de la tos con algoritmo diagnstico y teraputico, datos clnicos de inters, signos de alarma e indicacin de pruebas complementarias.actitud diagnstica y teraputica ante la sospecha de infeccin broncopulmonar aguda en pacientes inmunocompetentes d. benhamou l as infecciones respiratorias agrupan tres entidades con indicaciones teraputicas diferentes: la bronquitis aguda, la neumona aguda y las exacerbaciones de la bronquitis crnica. por consiguiente, es importante diferenciarlas. la bronquitis aguda es muy frecuente, de fcil diagnstico y de evolucin benigna. por regla general, es de origen viral, y la antibioticoterapia no est justificada. por el contrario, las neumonas agudas son poco frecuentes pero tienen un riesgo evolutivo de potencial gravedad y representan la sexta causa de mortalidad. su etiologa suele ser bacteriana en el adulto y siempre requieren antibioticoterapia. su diagnstico clnico es de presuncin, basado en los siguientes signos: fiebre, taquicardia, taquipnea, dolor torcico, estertores crepitantes en el foco de infeccin e impresin de gravedad. estos signos justifican la realizacin de una radiografa de trax. las exacerbaciones de la bronquitis crnica pueden ser de origen bacteriano, viral o no infeccioso. las indicaciones de la antibioticoterapia dependern de la probabilidad de su etiologa bacteriana (aumento de volumen y aspecto purulento de la expectoracin, aparicin o empeoramiento de la disnea) y del estadio evolutivo de la bronquitis crnica (simple, obstructiva sin insuficiencia respiratoria crnica, insuficiencia respiratoria crnica).palabras clave: neumona; bronquitis aguda; exacerbacin aguda de la bronquitis crnica; infecciones respiratorias; antibioticoterapia  introduccin las infecciones respiratorias son uno de los motivos ms frecuentes de consulta en la medicina urbana. originan gran nmero de prescripciones de antibiticos, injustificadas en muchos casos (cuando la infeccin es benigna o de origen viral). este hecho ha provocado en los ltimos aos el desarrollo de resistencias a los antibiticos por parte de las bacterias (incluso en algunas que hasta ahora eran muy sensibles). en los prximos aos se debern reservar estos antibiticos para las indicaciones tiles, de modo que se preserve su eficacia antibacteriana. el mayor nmero de estas infecciones corresponde a las bronquitis agudas, de evolucin benigna. por el contrario, las neumonas agudas son mucho menos frecuentes, pero poseen un riesgo evolutivo de potencial gravedad y representan la sexta causa de muerte. la existencia de una enfermedad respiratoria crnica subyacente, a menudo una enfermedad pulmonar obstructiva crnica (epoc), puede complicar el cuadro clnico y el pronstico. por tanto, para realizar un tratamiento adecuado es fundamental un buen diagnstico de la enfermedad en cuestin.las infecciones respiratorias agudas agrupan varias entidades que tienen en comn caractersticas de una infeccin aguda de las vas respiratorias bajas, pero que presentan cada una de ellas diferentes caractersticas clnicas, etiolgicas, pronsticas y teraputicas. por tanto, aunque la distincin entre neumona y bronquitis suele ser difcil en la prctica clnica urbana, conviene no adoptar una actitud pragmtica para tratar las infecciones respiratorias bajas.en la bronquitis, la infeccin se extiende desde la trquea y los bronquios hasta los bronquiolos.aparecen sobre bronquios indemnes. son extremadamente frecuentes, muy a menudo de origen viral y siempre de evolucin benigna, salvo en los casos que presentan enfermedad crnica asociada, que stas pueden descompensar a veces.se trata sobre todo de la bronquitis crnica y del enfisema. estas infecciones no representan ms que una parte (del 42 al 61% de los casos) de las exacerbaciones de la enfermedad pulmonar obstructiva crnica (epoc), enfermedad que agrupa tambin otras causas no infecciosas de empeoramiento de las epoc. sin embargo, este trmino suele emplearse de forma errnea para designar slo a la sobreinfeccin de la epoc.las exacerbaciones de las epoc son frecuentes. las de origen infeccioso pueden ser bacterianas o virales. poseen una gravedad potencial y el riesgo evolutivo depende de la gravedad del sndrome obstructivo que se debe a la epoc.se caracterizan por la afectacin aguda de origen infeccioso de los alvolos pulmonares. a menudo suele localizarse, aunque a veces puede extenderse, e incluso, alguna vez, ser difusa. su diagnstico se basa en la identificacin de un foco de condensacin alveolar que es clnica en contadas ocasiones y radiolgica en la mayora de los casos.la mayora de las veces son bacterianas y de potencial gravedad. se denominan comunitarias cuando se adquieren fuera de los centros de salud. en algunas ocasiones tambin se pueden manifestar, incluido el tiempo de incubacin, al principio de una hospitalizacin por otro motivo. este artculo tratar principalmente de ellas.se denominan nosocomiales cuando se adquieren en un centro de salud, siempre 48 horas despus del ingreso para no confundirlas con las neumonas agudas comunitarias que aparecen al principio de una hospitalizacin.1 tratado de medicina akos -e -6-0700 (2004) e -6-0700  absceso pulmonar el absceso de pulmn se define por la presencia de una coleccin infecciosa supurativa (no tuberculosa) contenida en una cavidad neoformada por el proceso infeccioso agudo. la supuracin tambin puede aparecer en una cavidad que exista con anterioridad (postuberculosa, bulla, cncer, etc.).estas supuraciones pulmonares no son muy frecuentes.consiste en una infeccin aguda o supuracin de bronquios deformados, dilatados, inflamados y a menudo colonizados por microorganismos de forma crnica. se podra incluir dentro de las exacerbaciones de las epoc, pero se considera por separado, ya que posee una epidemiologa microbiana diferente que implica un tratamiento particular y propio (sobre todo en cuanto al antibitico se refiere). es una enfermedad frecuente.se caracteriza por la presencia de grmenes en un derrame pleural. son poco frecuentes, pero de evolucin grave. en este artculo slo se tratarn como una complicacin de las neumonas agudas.deben asociarse: -al menos un signo de afectacin respiratoria baja (tos, expectoracin, disnea, roncus y estertores crepitantes, etc.); -uno o dos signos de infeccin general: fiebre, escalofros, malestar general, mialgias, etc.puede ser parenquimatosa (neumona) o bronqutica (bronquitis aguda o exacerbacin de bronquitis crnica).la diferenciacin entre neumona (poco comn) y bronquitis (frecuente) puede ser complicada en la clnica, pero es de vital importancia, ya que las dos entidades poseen un pronstico y un tratamiento muy distinto (fig. 1 ).-el diagnstico de bronquitis aguda suele ser fcil y no requiere ninguna prueba complementaria si se asocian tos precedida de una infeccin de vas respiratorias altas, fiebre inconstante y no muy elevada, as como molestia o quemazn retroesternal en un paciente cuyo estado general est conservado.-el diagnstico de exacerbacin de una epoc tambin es sencillo y no necesita ms exploracin que un interrogatorio detallado en el que se precisar la existencia de signos previos de broncopata crnica y obstruccin bronquial. los signos propios de la exacerbacin son un aumento de la tos, de la expectoracin, y aparicin o empeoramiento de la disnea.-la neumona aguda se caracteriza por la presencia de fiebre superior a 38c, taquicardia de ms de 100 latidos/minuto, polipnea superior a 25 respiraciones/minuto, dolor torcico, ausencia de infeccin en las vas respiratorias altas, impresin global de gravedad o signos auscultatorios en foco (estertores crepitantes) [2] . se necesita una radiografa de trax anteroposterior y lateral para confirmar el diagnstico.-sin embargo, la clnica del paciente puede ser engaosa o incompleta, sobre todo en pacientes de edad avanzada, en aqullos que vivan en una institucin o en los que presentan otra enfermedad asociada. en estos casos, la radiografa de trax ser muy til.la gravedad del cuadro depender de la aparicin de los siguientes signos de fallo:-respiratorio: polipnea, cianosis, etc.; -hemodinmico: taquicardia, cada de la presin arterial (shock sptico); -de otro rgano (prdida de conciencia, etc. e -6-0700 -actitud diagnstica y teraputica ante la sospecha de infeccin broncopulmonar aguda en pacientes inmunocompetentes adems de la inmunodepresin, que no se estudia en este artculo, los factores de riesgo para una mala evolucin son la edad avanzada (mayores de 75 aos), residir en una institucin, y la presencia de una o varias enfermedades asociadas (epoc, neoplasia, enfermedades neurolgicas, cardiovasculares, renales, etc.).en el caso de las neumonas agudas, se han propuesto diferentes escalas para cuantificar los factores de gravedad, pero su uso en la prctica es muy limitado porque suelen ser complejos e incluyen criterios paraclnicos que no suelen ser valorables de forma inmediata en un ambulatorio. slo la versin reciente de la escala de fine (1997) [6] permite desde un primer momento incluir o no a determinados pacientes en el tipo i (mortalidad de 0,1%), y tratarlos o no a domicilio. la agencia francesa del medicamento (1999) [2] propuso un algoritmo derivado de este ndice de fine para decidir si hospitalizar al paciente o no: la hospitalizacin se realizar cuando exista un signo de gravedad clnica, nivel socioeconmico bajo, edad superior a 75 aos asociada a un factor de riesgo o presencia de dos factores de riesgo.estos criterios descritos y validados para las neumonas tambin son aplicables a otras infecciones respiratorias, aunque teniendo en cuenta que los signos de sepsis aguda no aparecen en las infecciones bronquiales, que el riesgo principal en el contexto de una epoc (relacionado con el volumen espiratorio mximo por segundo [vems] previo) es una insuficiencia respiratoria aguda y que una bronquitis aguda nunca justifica la hospitalizacin, a no ser que provoque la descompensacin de alguna enfermedad asociada.la decisin de administrar o no antibioticoterapia depende, en primer lugar, del tipo de infeccin. por tanto, es necesario precisarla en el momento del diagnstico.en las neumonas agudas el riesgo evolutivo es elevado y la etiologa es sobre todo bacteriana: la antibioticoterapia se impone siempre.en las bronquitis agudas, la evolucin siempre es benigna y la etiologa viral: la antibioticoterapia no est justificada. su uso se podra discutir slo si la infeccin provoca la descompensacin de otra enfermedad asociada o si persiste la expectoracin purulenta tras el sptimo da.en las exacerbaciones agudas de la epoc, el riesgo evolutivo es variable y la etiologa puede ser bacteriana, vrica o no infecciosa. las indicaciones de la antibioticoterapia son menos estrictas y dependern de la gravedad del sndrome obstructivo preexistente y de la probabilidad de su origen bacteriano [1] :-en las exacerbaciones de las bronquitis crnicas simples: la antibioticoterapia no se recomienda como tratamiento de primera intencin (aunque haya fiebre). slo se recomienda en caso de que persista la fiebre ms de tres das;-en las exacerbaciones de las bronquitis crnicas obstructivas (disnea de esfuerzo y/o vems entre 35 y 80% sin exacerbacin): no se recomienda la antibioticoterapia como primera eleccin salvo si aumenta la purulencia y el volumen de la expectoracin, y/o aparece o aumenta la disnea. se recomienda, de forma secundaria, cuando la fiebre persiste ms de tres das o cuando aparecen dos o tres de los criterios antes citados (purulencia y volumen de la expectoracin, disnea); -en las exacerbaciones de la bronquitis crnica obstructiva con insuficiencia respiratoria crnica (disnea de reposo y/o vems <35% e hipoxemia de reposo sin exacerbacin): se recomienda la antibioticoterapia.en caso de administrar antibioticoterapia, la eleccin del antibitico depende del tipo de infeccin y de los grmenes implicados: los detalles se explicarn ms adelante. en cualquier caso, casi siempre se realiza de forma emprica en los ambulatorios, ya que las muestras microbiolgicas tomadas suelen ser poco fiables. la eleccin tambin variar en funcin de las caractersticas de los antibiticos disponibles (cuadro 1). hoy en da, ningn antibitico es eficaz frente a todos los posibles microorganismos, de forma que, como no hay una clara recomendacin, se optar por aquellos causantes ms probables segn la situacin basal y con una reevaluacin a los tres das.el diagnstico de bronquitis aguda es uno de los ms frecuentes en medicina urbana. actitud diagnstica y teraputica ante la sospecha de infeccin broncopulmonar aguda en pacientes inmunocompetentes -e -6-0700el signo principal es la tos, a veces precedida de signos en las vas respiratorias altas (rinitis, faringitis, laringitis). al principio suele ser seca, nocturna y dolorosa. algunos das despus se convierte en productiva, y la expectoracin es de aspecto mucoso o mucopurulento (que no se correlaciona con un posible origen bacteriano). se puede acompaar de una sensacin de malestar general con mialgias, artralgias, trastornos digestivos, cefaleas, etc. la fiebre es inconstante y casi nunca elevada. la exploracin es normal salvo algunos estertores. no es necesaria ninguna prueba complementaria.evoluciona de forma espontnea hacia la curacin. los signos generales desaparecen en pocos das, excepto la tos, que dura de 8 a 10 das e incluso puede persistir varias semanas o meses en algunos casos (reparacin de las lesiones epiteliales de los bronquios e inflamacin prolongada mantenida, provocada por irritantes bronquiales como el tabaco). la evolucin con antibioticoterapia es idntica a la evolucin espontnea, y varios estudios (antibioticoterapia versus placebo o versus tratamiento sintomtico) han demostrado la ausencia de efecto beneficioso en la duracin de los sntomas (sobre todo en la persistencia de tos prolongada) o en el nmero de das de baja laboral necesarios [2] .el cuadro clnico puede recidivar al cabo de semanas o meses; en este caso se debe investigar la existencia de un factor de riesgo respiratorio (tabaco, irritante respiratorio profesional u otro) o realizar ms pruebas (radiografa pulmonar como mnimo) en busca de una causa local (tumor, cuerpo extrao, bronquiectasias, etc.).los virus provocan la mayora de las bronquitis agudas (entre el 50 y el 90% de los casos) [2] . los ms frecuentes son el virus influenza (gripe) y parainfluenza, el adenovirus, el virus respiratorio sincitial (vrs) y, con menos frecuencia, los myxovirus, coronavirus y otros. las bacterias no suelen intervenir en la bronquitis aguda. las que suelen aparecer en estos casos poco comunes son mycoplasma pneumoniae, chlamydia pneumoniae y bordetella pertussis (la tos ferina podra ser la responsable de ciertas prolongaciones posbronquticas de la tos). el neumococo y haemophilus influenzae casi no intervienen, aunque podran provocar sobreinfecciones bacterianas secundarias favorecidas por las lesiones locales posvirales. formas clnicas -formas sintomticas. pueden aparecer formas broncoespsticas con disnea y sibilancias, aunque tambin de forma aislada. en cualquier caso, si recidiva, debe investigarse la existencia de hiperreactividad bronquial o asma crnico.-formas complicadas. slo aparecen en pacientes de riesgo y corresponden a la descompensacin de una enfermedad previa. algunos edemas de pulmn cardiognicos agudos y subagudos se asocian a signos de bronquitis sin que sea posible distinguir entre un origen bronqutico, cardaco o mixto. tratamiento -en la mayora de los casos no es necesario ningn tratamiento. se puede sugerir un tratamiento sintomtico: antitusgenos y mucorreguladores para el tratamiento de la tos asociados de forma eventual a un antipirtico. los betaadrenrgicos o los corticoides inhalados se administran en caso de tos rebelde o broncoespasmo. la eficacia de los antiinflamatorios no esteroideos y de los esteroides va sistmica no est documentada en la literatura aunque se usen con frecuencia.-la antibioticoterapia no est justificada en la mayora de los casos [2, 7] . no se demostr su eficacia en ninguno de los 11 estudios contra placebo que figuran en la literatura. un metaanlisis que incluye 8 de estos estudios describe adems un mayor nmero de efectos no deseados con los antibiticos. no debe discutirse su uso ms que por segunda intencin ante la persistencia de expectoracin purulenta y roncus en auscultacin. en estos casos, se elige con preferencia un macrlido o una ciclina que son activos frente a mycoplasma pneumoniae, chlamydia pneumoniae y bordetella pertussis.-el tratamiento de las bronquitis agudas en los pacientes con enfermedades asociadas no est definido en la literatura ni en las recomendaciones de los expertos. se puede asociar un tratamiento sintomtico (siempre que se eviten los antitusgenos) con el tratamiento de la descompensacin de la enfermedad asociada (una insuficiencia cardaca la mayora de las veces). las indicaciones de la antibioticoterapia incluyen, por analoga con la actitud en las exacerbaciones de una epoc, un probable origen bacteriano y la gravedad de la enfermedad concomitante.el diagnstico de la exacerbacin de la bronquitis crnica se hace por la clnica y asocia:-una bronquitis crnica preexistente (tos y expectoracin de ms de 3 meses de duracin al ao o que exista desde al menos 2 aos), ya conocida o buscada a la hora de interrogar al paciente;-un empeoramiento de los sntomas respiratorios: tos, expectoracin, disnea, cianosis, etc.el enfermo puede presentar sntomas generales, pero la fiebre es inconstante. en la exploracin se pueden encontrar a menudo roncus, y se debe analizar el volumen y el aspecto de la expectoracin. tambin se deben buscar signos de insuficiencia respiratoria aguda: cianosis, polipnea, tiraje intercostal, signos de insuficiencia cardaca derecha, etc.ninguno de estos signos por separado permite predecir la naturaleza infecciosa o bacteriana de la exacerbacin. la aparicin conjunta de varios de ellos sugiere una etiologa bacteriana: as se admiten los criterios clsicos establecidos de anthonisen [3] para pacientes bronquticos crnicos obstructivos:-aumento del volumen de expectoracin; -aumento de la expectoracin purulenta; -aumento de la disnea. la fiebre, cuando est presente, es un criterio a favor de la etiologa infecciosa de la exacerbacin, pero no permite distinguir entre un origen viral o bacteriano. sin embargo, la persistencia de la fiebre el cuarto da de evolucin debe hacer que se sospeche una infeccin bacteriana respiratoria (sobreinfeccin bronqutica o neumona). las fiebres debidas a los virus respiratorios, muy frecuentes, suelen durar menos de 3 o 4 das. la presencia de signos otorrinolaringolgicos asociados (rinorrea, disfagia, etc.) orienta hacia una etiologa viral. son muchas las causas no infecciosas de agudizacin de los sntomas respiratorios:-insuficiencia cardaca izquierda (entre el 8 y el 26% de los casos), arritmias (del 5 al 21% de los casos); -frmacos (25% en el estudio): sedantes; -embolia pulmonar, neumotrax, broncoespamo; -alergia, condiciones climticas, espesamiento de las secreciones, irritantes bronquiales;-cncer, ciruga. las pruebas complementarias son intiles en la fase aguda: -la radiografa pulmonar slo se pide ante sospecha de neumona; -el examen citobacteriolgico del esputo es intil. varios estudios han documentado la ausencia de utilidad, ya que no permite distinguir entre infeccin, colonizacin o contaminacin;-una vez pasado el episodio agudo, es necesario realizar ms pruebas si no se realizaron antes: radiografa pulmonar de manera eventual y, sobre todo, pruebas funcionales respiratorias y gasometra arterial que permitirn, entre otras cosas, definir mejor las indicaciones teraputicas en las prximas exacerbaciones.las exacerbaciones infecciosas de las epoc son infecciones de la mucosa, y en la mayora de los casos se resuelven de forma espontnea. la regresin hasta la situacin basal de la broncopata se produce entre 8 y 15 das. sin embargo, los riesgos evolutivos son considerables y se correlacionan con la gravedad de la epoc: ausencia de sndrome obstructivo, sndrome obstructivo sin insuficiencia respiratoria, insuficiencia respiratoria crnica (cuadro 2).-morbilidad y mortalidad propias asociadas a la exacerbacin: la insuficiencia respiratoria aguda constituye el mayor riesgo evolutivo en los pacientes bronquticos crnicos con patrn ms obstructivo. la mortalidad en estos pacientes alcanza entre el 10 y el 30% durante su estancia en cuidados intensivos, y su calidad de vida, al igual que su pronstico vital, estn comprometidos a medio plazo (mortalidad del 49% a los 2 aos).-empeoramiento de los trastornos respiratorios ligados a la epoc a causa de las exacerbaciones. e -6-0700 -actitud diagnstica y teraputica ante la sospecha de infeccin broncopulmonar aguda en pacientes inmunocompetentes -colonizacin crnica: contribuye al empeoramiento progresivo de los trastornos respiratorios y favorece las recidivas de las reagudizaciones.la etiologa de las exacerbaciones de la bronquitis crnica es variada y difcil. se distinguen causas infecciosas, virales y/o bacterianas, y causas no infecciosas que deben identificarse en cada caso, puesto que cada una posee un tratamiento especfico. adems, la reaccin inflamatoria bronquial constituye una entidad propia, sea cual sea su causa [8] .la incidencia de las infecciones bacterianas es inferior al 50% si se evala la totalidad de los estudios. las bacterias implicadas con ms frecuencia son haemophilus influenzae, streptococcus pneumoniae y branhamella catarrhalis; sin embargo, otras bacterias como staphylococcus aureus, las enterobacterias y pseudomona aeruginosa aparecen en ocasiones. la frecuencia de estas ltimas bacterias se correlaciona con la gravedad de la epoc (vems<35%), y la administracin previa de antibioticoterapia o de corticoterapia oral prolongada.chlamydia pneumoniae podra estar implicada en el 4 o 5% de las exacerbaciones de la bronquitis crnica. la frecuencia de mycoplasma pneumoniae vara del 1 al 8-9% segn los diferentes artculos.son muchos los virus implicados: rinovirus, vrs, influenza, parainfluenza, adenovirus, etc. la incidencia de la etiologa viral es variable. en algunos estudios es superior a la de las bacterias, y en otros inferior, entre el 20 y el 30%. algunos autores estiman que cierto nmero de infecciones virales no se acompaan de exacerbaciones. la incidencia de las exacerbaciones podra variar en funcin de la poca del ao; un estudio concluy que el 44% de las exacerbaciones invernales eran virales, frente al 12% en las otras estaciones. la infeccin viral tambin podra favorecer el desarrollo de una sobreinfeccin bacteriana.la dilatacin de los bronquios o bronquiectasias es una enfermedad bronqutica crnica especial. las infecciones tienen un papel importante en su evolucin y se relacionan con la aparicin de reagudizaciones. poseen una epidemiologa bacteriana diferente y, por tanto, tratamiento antibitico concreto.sus sntomas son muy similares a los de la bronquitis crnica y consisten, sobre todo, en episodios de tos con expectoracin bronquial. el diagnstico se basa en una serie de particularidades semiolgicas y anamnsicas: gravedad de la broncorrea (crnica o en episodios agudos), sinusitis asociada, hemoptisis, estertores hmedos localizados, comienzo de los sntomas en la infancia, ausencia de tabaquismo, etc. despus se puede completar con facilidad mediante pruebas de imagen, sobre todo mediante tomografa computarizada. la flora bacteriana es particular y est dominada por dos grmenes: haemophilus influenzae y pseudomonas aeruginosa.el tratamiento de las exacerbaciones agudas de la bronquitis crnica depende del grado de epoc, como hemos visto (cuadro 3) [1] . no todos necesitan antibioticoterapia. los tratamientos no antibiticos, prescritos de forma aislada o concomitante, incluyen broncodilatadores (betadrenrgicos de accin corta o larga, anticolinrgicos inhalados), corticoides inhalados, fisioterapia respiratoria y el tratamiento de las causas no infecciosas (insuficiencia cardaca, por ejemplo).en principio, en la bronquitis crnica simple no se recomienda la antibioticoterapia. en caso de epoc sin insuficiencia respiratoria, no se aconseja el uso de antibiticos salvo si aparecen 2 de los 3 signos siguientes: aumento del volumen o la purulencia de la expectoracin, de la disnea, o persistencia de la fiebre durante ms de tres das. cuando se trata de una epoc con insuficiencia respiratoria, y debido a su mayor riesgo evolutivo, se prescribir de entrada un antibitico.existe tambin una jerarqua para la eleccin del antibitico segn el grado de bronquitis crnica, del nmero de exacerbaciones agudas anteriores (ms o menos cuatro durante el ao anterior), y fracaso o no de antibioticoterapia previa en el episodio actual.-la primera eleccin se centra en los neumococos sensibles a la penicilina, haemophilus influenzae y branhamella catarrhalis no secretora de penicilinasa. molculas: amoxicilina, cefalosporinas de 1. generacin, macrlidos, ketolidos, pristinamicina y doxiciclina. indicaciones: primer tratamiento en caso de exacerbaciones poco frecuentes ( 3 exacerbaciones el ao pasado) en un paciente con vems basal superior o igual al 35%.-la segunda eleccin est dirigida a bacterias ms resistentes: haemophilus influenzae y branhamella catarrhalis, secretoras de penicilinasa o enterobacterias. molculas: el amoxicilina + cido clavulnico es el antibitico de referencia. las cefalosporinas orales de 2. generacin (cefuroxima-axetil) o de 3. generacin (cefpodoxima-proxetil, cefotiam-hexetil) y las fluoroquinolonas activas frente al neumococo son alternativas vlidas. indicaciones: fracaso del actitud diagnstica y teraputica ante la sospecha de infeccin broncopulmonar aguda en pacientes inmunocompetentes -e -6-0700primer tratamiento antibitico, en caso de exacerbaciones frecuentes (n  4 en el pasado ao), o primer tratamiento si la vems de base (sin exacerbacin) es inferior al 35%.-el ciprofloxacino posee indicaciones particulares y debe reservarse para el tratamiento de infecciones en las que bacilos gramnegativos y, sobre todo, pseudomonas aeruginosa, estn implicados o podran estarlo.todos los antibiticos se administran por va oral. el tratamiento suele durar de 7 a 10 das.se trata de enfermedades menos frecuentes, pero de gravedad potencial. son la sexta causa de muerte en estados unidos y la primera causa de muerte por enfermedad infecciosa.presentan los signos respiratorios (tos, expectoracin, disnea, etc.) e infecciosos (fiebre, escalofros, astenia, etc.) comunes a todas las infecciones respiratorias bajas, pero adems asocian signos de afectacin parenquimatosa y pleural (dolor torcico, crepitantes en foco, signos de condensacin pulmonar) y la mayora de las veces, impresin de gravedad.si aparecen todos estos signos a la vez, es lgico que se sospeche una neumona franca lobar aguda que se atribuye al neumococo. sin embargo, este cuadro no es especfico de dicho germen:-inicio brusco con dolor en punta de costado, escalofros intensos, fiebre elevada, malestar general. tambin aparece tos, primero seca, despus productiva;-la exploracin revela varios signos en foco: crepitantes, sndrome de condensacin pulmonar; -en la radiografa de pulmn se puede apreciar una opacidad densa, homognea, con broncograma areo, localizado en un lbulo (fig. 2) ; -en el plano biolgico se observa una leucocitosis a expensas de polimorfonucleares, y un sndrome inflamatorio.pero el cuadro puede presentarse de manera incompleta e incluso engaosa: -comienzo ms progresivo, a veces precedido de signos otorrinolaringolgicos o generales (cefaleas, mialgias, etc.); -posible presencia de signos extrarrespiratorios neurolgicos (cadas, malestar, prdida de conciencia, etc.), digestivos (dolor abdominal, diarrea, etc.), renales;-imgenes radiolgicas (siempre presentes excepto al principio) variadas: infiltrados alveolares mal o no localizados, intersticiales localizados (infiltrado hilifugo) o difusos (reticulares o micronodulares difusas), alveolointersticiales ms o menos extensos.suele variar en funcin de numerosos factores: naturaleza del germen, medio, adaptacin del tratamiento, etc. a pesar de la antibioticoterapia, el pronstico incluye un elevado ndice de mortalidad (entre el 10 y el 20% de los pacientes hospitalizados y menos del 5% de los que no requieren hospitalizacin).la evolucin no complicada se caracteriza por apirexia rpida (de 1 a 3 das) tras el inicio del tratamiento. la curacin clnica tiene lugar a los 8 o 10 das. los signos radiolgicos tardan ms en normalizarse (entre 2 y 4 semanas).la gravedad inicial puede deberse a una sepsis grave, una insuficiencia respiratoria aguda, e incluso la muerte precoz, en cierto grado sbita y sin signos premonitorios. la antibioticoterapia parece no tener mucha influencia en la mortalidad precoz.la fiebre suele ser el criterio ms sencillo y fiable para observar la evolucin. su persistencia traduce un fallo bacteriolgico (antibioticoterapia no adaptada, resistencia del germen, mal cumplimiento del tratamiento), la presencia de complicaciones (derrame pleural tabicado o no tabicado, abscedado, etc.), la posibilidad de otro episodio intercurrente (flebitis en la zona de perfusin, trombosis venosa profunda, etc.), un efecto indeseado ligado al tratamiento o a la descompensacin de otra enfermedad asociada. la mortalidad tarda se asocia a la neumona, pero tambin al contexto del paciente (edad avanzada, insuficiencia respiratoria crnica grave, cardiopata evolucionada, diabetes, etc.).la aparicin de pleuresa es frecuente (alrededor del 25% de las neumonas se acompaan de derrame pleural detectable en una radiografa) pero menos del 5% se complican con un empiema, con o sin tabicacin, que necesita tratamiento especfico (drenaje, lavados de pleura, antibioticoterapia, fisioterapia rehabilitadora).el diagnstico etiolgico no se suele alcanzar debido a la frecuente falta de recursos en el medio ambulatorio y a la bsqueda poco exhaustiva en los pacientes hospitalizados. cuando se realizan las investigaciones microbiolgicas, se averigua la etiologa en un margen del 50 al 70% de los casos [4] .existen varios tipos de tomas de muestras microbiolgicas: -un examen citobacteriolgico del esputo en busca de grmenes pigenos aerobios. esta toma, en apariencia simple y no invasiva, es un examen de mala calidad (baja sensibilidad y especificidad), intil e incluso engaoso fuera de los estudios epidemiolgicos; -la toma de muestras invasivas (endoscopias protegidas, lavado broncoalveolar, puncin traqueal transcutnea, puncin transparietal con aguja fina) buscan grmenes pigenos tanto aerobios como anaerobios, pero utilizan tcnicas microbiolgicas especficas (grmenes intracelulares, infecciones oportunistas, etc.); -la serologa (virus, legionella pneumophila, mycoplasma pneumoniae, chlamydia pneumoniae, etc.) constituye un diagnstico retrospectivo; -la bsqueda de antgenos solubles en orina posee valor orientativo para ciertos grmenes (legionella pneumophila, incluso streptococcus pneumoniae); -los hemocultivos, muy especficos, poseen una sensibilidad fiable: menos del 25% de las neumonas por neumococo son bacterimicas (menos del 5% para el resto de los grmenes). sin embargo, poseen un valor pronstico; -la presencia de grmenes en el derrame pleural no suele ser positiva, pero cuando lo es, indica una evolucin complicada (empiema).en el adulto, la etiologa suele ser bacteriana. el germen implicado ms a menudo es streptococcus pneumoniae. los otros agentes patgenos son: mycoplasma pneumoniae, muy frecuente en el adulto joven, legionella pneumophila, chlamydia pneumoniae, haemophilus influenzae, staphylococcus aureus, moraxella catarrhalis, las bacterias anaerobias y las enterobacterias. tambin se pueden observar otros bacilos gramnegativos, sobre todoe -6-0700 -actitud diagnstica y teraputica ante la sospecha de infeccin broncopulmonar aguda en pacientes inmunocompetentes pseudomonas aeruginosa, cuando existe un enfermedad respiratoria crnica subyacente evolucionada, y en especial en los casos nosocomiales. entre los virus slo el influenza a, y rara vez el b, provocan neumonas de potencial gravedad en el adulto, a excepcin de que aparezca una nueva cepa patgena como la del coronavirus asociado a sndrome respiratorio agudo grave (srag) que ha generado la epidemia mundial ms reciente.el principal germen es el neumococo por su frecuencia (indiferente del contexto) y su gravedad potencial (a pesar de su buena sensibilidad natural a los antibiticos). el cuadro clnico clsico es el de una neumona lobar aguda, descrita con anterioridad, aunque el cuadro no suele ser completo y en numerosas ocasiones puede presentarse de forma atpica. la evolucin puede ser complicada: formas extensivas precoces, pleuresas purulentas, etc. la mortalidad se sita prxima al 10%; la antibioticoterapia ejerce poca influencia en ella durante los primeros das. este germen era muy sensible de forma natural a la mayora de los antibiticos, pero en los ltimos aos ha desarrollado resistencias a las principales clases de los mismos. por tanto, es necesario que los antibiticos se usen de forma adecuada. la vacuna (de 23 valencias) contiene los antgenos polisacridos del 80% de las cepas de neumococo responsables en potencia de infecciones graves.incluyen las neumonas producidas por tres agentes bacterianos (mycoplasma pneumoniae, chlamydia pneumoniae, legionella pneumophila) que generan un cuadro clnico ms atpico. una de sus caractersticas comunes es que todas necesitan tcnicas microbiolgicas especficas para su diagnstico. es preferible considerarlas por separado.-mycoplasma pneumoniae es el primer germen responsable de neumonas en el adulto joven. en la clnica aparecen un cuadro seudogripal inicial, un empeoramiento progresivo con tos, expectoracin mucosa o mucopurulenta, y rara vez erupcin cutnea. la evolucin suele ser benigna, pero pueden desarrollarse formas graves. tambin pueden aparecer complicaciones extrarrespiratorias, aunque en pocas ocasiones: anemia hemoltica, tromboembolia, poliartritis, sntomas neurolgicos. el germen no es sensible a los antibiticos que actan sobre la pared bacteriana (porque no tiene), as que su tratamiento se basa en ciclinas, macrlidos o fluoroquinolonas.-chlamydia pneumoniae es tambin responsable de neumonas de aspecto progresivo precedidas de signos otorrinolaringolgicos. la evolucin no suele ser muy grave en el adulto joven, aunque a veces puede serlo en el adulto de edad avanzada.-legionella pneumophila es la segunda o tercera causa de neumona comunitaria, y en ciertos casos implica hospitalizacin del paciente. se transmite a partir de aguas contaminadas y puede dar lugar a neumonas nosocomiales. la legionelosis afecta ms a varones de edad media y est favorecida por la existencia de epoc, alcoholismo o inmunodepresin. los sntomas son variables y pueden asociar diarrea. la bsqueda del antgeno en orina (prueba rpida) es muy til, pero debe completarse con la presencia de la legionella en diversas muestras respiratorias.el cuadro clnico no es especfico, pero se asemeja ms a una forma atpica. es caracterstico el contexto en el que aparece y la epidemia ser ms extensa cuanto ms dbil sea la inmunidad de la poblacin (epidemia reciente de srag, posible pandemia gripal en los siguientes aos si se produce una mutacin del virus).la forma no encapsulada de haemophilus influenzae es la ms frecuente en el adulto y la menos virulenta. suele colonizar los bronquios en caso de broncopata crnica. su frecuencia vara segn se aprecie la presencia del germen: patgeno, patgeno asociado o simple colonizador. estas neumonas no poseen particularidades clnicas. entre el 20 y el 30% de las cepas producen betalactamasas.representan una causa poco frecuente de neumona comunitaria y una de las etiologas principales de las neumonas nosocomiales, sobre todo en los pacientes intubados o traqueotomizados. en las ciudades, afecta sobre todo al adulto joven o a las personas de edad avanzada. puede surgir como complicacin de una infeccin gripal o aparecer en el contexto de otras enfermedades de riesgo (mucoviscidosis, advp, puerta de entrada cutnea). la evolucin radiolgica no suele ser caracterstica: absceso nico o mltiple, neumoceles, empiema. el tratamiento depender de si el germen es resistente a la meticilina (frecuente en el hospital, aunque raro en la comunidad).son raras en el adulto joven, pero su frecuencia aumenta con la edad. incluyen las enterobacterias (escherichia coli, klebsiella pneumoniae, proteus mirabilis, etc.) y los bacilos ms difciles de tratar como pseudomonas aeruginosa. aparecen en enfermos con factores de riesgo (edad, alcohol, etc.) o en broncpatas crnicos (mucoviscidosis, dilatacin bronquial). representan la mayora de las neumonas nosocomiales.pueden aparecer tras sntomas de aspiracin (vmitos, aspiracin) y en este caso son evidentes. se deben sospechar ante ciertos factores de riesgo (trastornos en la deglucin de origen otorrinolaringolgico o neurolgico, como crisis comicial, etilismo agudo, etc.). se caracterizan por la aparicin de un cuadro de bronconeumona con obstruccin bronquial intensa. en estos casos se debe realizar una broncoscopia para tomar muestras bacteriolgicas, para broncoaspirar o para buscar cuerpos extraos. suelen ser polibacterianas con elevada frecuencia de grmenes anaerobios y bacilos gramnegativos.entre el 0,5 y el 1% de los pacientes hospitalizados desarrollan una neumona nosocomial, aunque la incidencia aumenta en determinados servicios (sobre todo en reanimacin). su gravedad se basa en el contexto clnico en el que surgen, en sus dificultades diagnsticas y en la naturaleza de los grmenes implicados, la mayor parte resistentes a los antibiticos. la mortalidad oscila entre el 20 y el 50%. la gran mayora se produce por aspiracin de grmenes de la orofaringe, favorecida por las enfermedades subyacentes, o los mtodos diagnsticos o teraputicos utilizados (intubacin). las neumonas nosocomiales de aparicin precoz (entre el 3. er y el 5. da de hospitalizacin) son producidas por bacterias ms similares a las de la comunidad (neumococo, haemophilus influenzae, estafilococo sensible a la meticilina, etc.) que las tardas (pseudomonas aeruginosa 45%, otros bacilos gramnegativos 40%, estafilococo 30%, etc.). los criterios diagnsticos son clnicos (fiebre, secreciones bronquiales purulentas, etc.), radiolgicos (aparicin de opacidades o empeoramiento de las preexistentes, etc.) y bacteriolgico, y a menudo requiere toma de muestras endoscpicas. el tratamiento es emprico al principio y asocia dos frmacos por va intravenosa. la principal prevencin consiste en cumplir las reglas de higiene sanitaria hospitalaria, un uso correcto de los antibiticos y limitar al mximo las intervenciones de riesgo.el tratamiento antibitico es sistemtico. se puede acompaar de un tratamiento no antibitico (antipirtico, analgsico, hidratacin y cuidados de enfermera, oxigenoterapia e incluso ventilacin mecnica) que puede requerir el ingreso hospitalario.la antibioticoterapia siempre debe ser emprica cuando el tratamiento es ambulatorio. en las formas graves hospitalizadas, es necesario realizar investigaciones microbiolgicas para permitir una antibioticoterapia adaptada despus del tratamiento emprico inicial.la eleccin del tratamiento inicial depender de los resultados epidemiolgicos (frecuencia de los grmenes segn el medio), de la sensibilidad de los grmenes a los antibiticos (sensibilidad natural y resistencias desarrolladas en potencia: epidemiologa, factores de riesgo propios del paciente), de las caractersticas farmacocinticas y farmacodinmicas. tambin depender del riesgo vital (gravedad inicial, factores de riesgo) que implicar utilizar un espectro antibitico ms o menos amplio. [2, 7]  adulto joven sin factores de riesgo y sin signos de gravedad en estos pacientes, el riesgo evolutivo es leve; el tratamiento tratar de abarcar el o los grmenes principales (neumococo o grmenes atpicos, o ambos). el riesgo de intolerancia al tratamiento debe de ser mnimo. las diferentes posibilidades son: -una amoxicilina (3 g/da); actitud diagnstica y teraputica ante la sospecha de infeccin broncopulmonar aguda en pacientes inmunocompetentes -e -6-0700 -un macrlido; -un ketlido; -la pristinamicina. la duracin del tratamiento es de 7 a 14 das. se debe evaluar la eficacia del tratamiento al cabo de 3 das. si no se observa mejora, debe considerarse la modificacin de los antibiticos elegidos; en ese caso, las opciones sern: -el mantenimiento de una monoterapia con un frmaco distinto al elegido en principio; -la ampliacin del espectro con la incorporacin de un segundo antibitico, o la eleccin de otro de ms amplio espectro que el inicial (neumococo activo sobre las fluoroquinolonas).si al tercer da de tratamiento el paciente empeora, deber considerarse la hospitalizacin.  adulto con factores de riesgo y sin signos de gravedad en este caso es difcil proponer una actitud unvoca; cada situacin puede discutirse segn el nmero y la naturaleza de los factores de riesgo que pueden influir en la naturaleza de los grmenes causantes y en el riesgo evolutivo de la neumona. se puede adoptar una actitud anloga a la propuesta en las personas sanas, pero que siempre incluya el neumococo, o ampliar el espectro a los gramnegativos o a los grmenes anaerobios (amoxicilina + inhibidor de las betalactamasas, o cefalosporinas de 2. o 3. generacin va oral). tambin debe considerarse el riesgo de infeccin por neumococo con sensibilidad disminuida a la penicilina (nsdp).si al tercer da el tratamiento ha fracasado, se puede optar por uno ms activo sobre el nsdp (cefalosporinas de 3. generacin va intravenosa: cefotaxima, ceftriaxona) o ampliar el espectro a los grmenes atpicos, pero asegurando siempre la actividad frente al neumococo (incluir un macrlido o sustituir el tratamiento por una fluoroquinolona activa frente al neumococo).en caso de empeoramiento, se aconseja hospitalizar al paciente.  neumonas comunitarias gravesel riesgo evolutivo es elevado y el tratamiento hospitalario. el objetivo es que el tratamiento sea activo lo ms deprisa posible (va intravenosa) y frente a la mayora de los grmenes potenciales (amplio espectro inicial). lo ms habitual es que se aconseje la asociacin de un antibitico activo frente al neumococo y ciertos bacilos gramnegativos (amoxicilina/inhibidor de las betalactamasas o cefalosporina antineumoccica inyectable) y un antibitico activo frente a grmenes intracelulares (macrlido). tambin se puede utilizar una fluoroquinolona activa frente a macrlido como alternativa a esta asociacin. a pesar del tratamiento, existen casos en los que la terapia antibitica fracasa (estafilococo resistente, pseudomonas aeruginosa, etc.).el control evolutivo debe ser diario y un tratamiento ms especfico sustituir al emprico inicial cuando los resultados microbiolgicos estn disponibles. el objetivo de este segundo tratamiento ser actuar contra el o los grmenes realmente responsables y, por tanto, se utilizar un antibitico de espectro ms estrecho (interesante por su menor toxicidad y para la prevencin de futuras resistencias).a menudo el tratamiento se puede tomar va oral a partir del 3. er da o entre 24 y 48 h despus de la desaparicin de la fiebre.los grmenes implicados son polirresistentes, con lo cual, los antibiticos elegidos son otros. debido al pronstico, se debe optar por un tratamiento maximalista, con la asociacin de tres o incluso cuatro antibiticos si se sospecha de grmenes iatrgenos. se propone el siguiente algoritmo:si se trata de un bacilo gramnegativo, las asociaciones posibles son: -betalactmico + aminoglucsido; -betalactmico + fluoroquinolona; -fluoroquinolona + aminoglucsido. si se trata de un estafilococo: -glucopptido + aminoglucsido.si existe amenaza sobre el pronstico vital: -betalactmico + aminoglucsido + glucopptido.  adaptadosiempre es preferible una antibioticoterapia adaptada, inicial o secundaria. se suele requerir una biterapia en el caso de los grmenes ms resistentes.las vacunas antineumoccica y antigripal son las nicas medidas de prevencin posibles. se ha comprobado la eficacia de la vacuna antineumoccica en estudios aleatorizados en los pacientes jvenes y en estudios casos-control en los pacientes con factores de riesgo.adresse e-mail: daniel.benhamou@chu-rouen.fr service de pneumologie, hpital de bois-guillaume, centre hospitalier universitaire, 76031 rouen cedex, france.cualquier referencia a este artculo debe incluir la mencin del artculo original: d benhamou. actitud diagnstica y teraputica ante la sospecha de infeccin broncopulmonar aguda en pacientes inmunocompetentes. encycl md chir (elsevier sas, paris, todos los derechos reservados), tratado de medicina akos, 6-0700, 2004, 8 p b i b l i o g r a f  athe earth is a dynamically changing planet, permanently shaped by socio-ecological interactions. variations and changes are common in a nonlinear and dynamic system such as our planet but passing certain thresholds may push the stability of the systems into a new regime which can have significant consequences at different spatial and temporal scales. understanding and early prediction of the impacts of such dramatic changes is a challenge for all sciences (including economics, social or medical sciences) but also for our society as a whole [1, 2] . extreme variations in natural processes and phenomena, in many cases enhanced or even caused by human actions, generate hazards that lead to risks for both communities and the environment, and as a result, sometimes disasters occur. the concept of disaster has evolved over time, and here we use an adapted intergovernmental panel on climate change (ipcc) definition: a disaster is an event, which severely alters the functioning of a community due to hazardous physical, biological or human related impacts leading to widespread adverse effects on multiple scales and systems (environment, economic, social). immediate emergencythe main cause of pandemic events and epidemic diseases is the close interaction between human populations with both domesticated and wildlife pathogens [27] . most pathogens pass from wildlife reservoirs and enter into human populations through hunting and consumption of wild species, wild animal trade and other contact with wildlife. urban areas are especially vulnerable through the high population density and mobility.the covid-19 dwarfs the six previous large scale epidemics of the 21st century in terms of spatial extent and societal consequences [24] , and it is the only pandemic with widespread and complex environmental impacts. we briefly present a few characteristics of the other large-scale epidemic events of the 21st century.a.the severe acute respiratory syndrome (sars) occurred in 2003, leading to more than 8000 infections with a mortality rate of approximately 10% and an impact limited only to local and regional economies [28] . the epidemic ended abruptly in july 2003 and no human cases of the sars coronavirus have been detected since. b.the 2009 h1n1 influenza virus (swine flu) was a pandemic which first appeared in mexico and the united states in march and april of 2009. it became a global pandemic as a result of global mobility and airline travel and led to an estimated 0.4% case fatality [29] . c.middle east respiratory syndrome (mers) was first identified in humans in saudi arabia and jordan in 2012 [30] . mers is considered a zoonotic pathogen, with infected dromedary camels being the animal source of infection to humans [31, 32] . by contrast to sars, which was contained within a year of emerging, mers continues to have a limited circulation and causes human disease with intermittent sporadic cases, community clusters and nosocomial outbreaks in the middle east region with a high risk of spreading globally [33] . d.the ebola virus was first detected in 1976 in zaire (presently the democratic republic of congo). since the virus was first detected, over 20 known outbreaks of ebola have been identified in sub-saharan africa, mostly in sudan, uganda, democratic republic of congo and gabon [34] . at present, no vaccine or efficient antiviral management strategy exists for ebola [35] . although the ebola virus has substantial epidemic and pandemic potential (due to the ease of international travel), as shown by the 2013-2016 west-african ebola virus epidemic with approximately 28,000 confirmed cases and 11,000 deaths [36, 37] , ebola outbreaks have been geographically limited [34] . e.the zika fever (2015-2016) was first isolated in 1947 from a febrile rhesus macaque monkey in the zika forest of uganda. since 1954, when the first cases in humans were reported, the zika virus had only limited sporadic infections in africa and asia. however, a large outbreak with approximately 440,000 to 1,300,000 cases spread from brazil to 29 countries in the americas in 2015 [38] . in november 2016, who announced the end of the zika outbreak. f.avian flu (bird flu) was first reported in 1997 in hong kong with only 18 infections and 6 human deaths. more than 700 cases of the avian flu have been reported from over 60 countries [39] of the reported outbreaks occurred in 2016 in china [40] .in the absence of any effective treatments, sars-cov, mers-cov and sars coronaviruses are of very high societal concern since they could unexpectedly become a global pandemic at any time [30] . as a result, coronaviruses in general have been studied to anticipate their societal and environmental impact. this has immediate application to the covid-19 virus. furthermore, [25] summarizes relevant knowledge on the causative agent, pathogenesis and immune responses, epidemiology, diagnosis, treatment and management of the disease, control and prevention strategies of the covid-19. a calendar of the covid-19 events potentially related to the environmental impacts is presented as list s1.the development and spread of covid-19 under the control of environmental factors justify the scientific interest for the combined studies of coronaviruses on one side and socio-ecological systems (including the interplay between climate, water, soil) on the other side. the number of scientific publications examining such topics has constantly increased in recent decades, and the covid-19 pandemic strongly motivates the 2020 record ( figure 1 ). saharan africa, mostly in sudan, uganda, democratic republic of congo and gabon [34] . at present, no vaccine or efficient antiviral management strategy exists for ebola [35] . although the ebola virus has substantial epidemic and pandemic potential (due to the ease of international travel), as shown by the 2013-2016 west-african ebola virus epidemic with approximately 28,000 confirmed cases and 11,000 deaths [36, 37] , ebola outbreaks have been geographically limited [34] . e. the zika fever (2015-2016) was first isolated in 1947 from a febrile rhesus macaque monkey in the zika forest of uganda. since 1954, when the first cases in humans were reported, the zika virus had only limited sporadic infections in africa and asia. however, a large outbreak with approximately 440,000 to 1,300,000 cases spread from brazil to 29 countries in the americas in 2015 [38] . in november 2016, who announced the end of the zika outbreak. f.avian flu (bird flu) was first reported in 1997 in hong kong with only 18 infections and 6 human deaths. more than 700 cases of the avian flu have been reported from over 60 countries [39] of the reported outbreaks occurred in 2016 in china [40] .in the absence of any effective treatments, sars-cov, mers-cov and sars coronaviruses are of very high societal concern since they could unexpectedly become a global pandemic at any time [30] . as a result, coronaviruses in general have been studied to anticipate their societal and environmental impact. this has immediate application to the covid-19 virus. furthermore, [25] summarizes relevant knowledge on the causative agent, pathogenesis and immune responses, epidemiology, diagnosis, treatment and management of the disease, control and prevention strategies of the covid-19. a calendar of the covid-19 events potentially related to the environmental impacts is presented as list s1.the development and spread of covid-19 under the control of environmental factors justify the scientific interest for the combined studies of coronaviruses on one side and socio-ecological systems (including the interplay between climate, water, soil) on the other side. the number of scientific publications examining such topics has constantly increased in recent decades, and the covid-19 pandemic strongly motivates the 2020 record ( figure 1 ). in general, temperature, humidity, wind and precipitation may favour either the spread or the inhibition of epidemic episodes. however, while some research found that local weather conditions of lowered temperature, mild diurnal temperature range and low humidity may favour the transmission [41] , other studies claim there is no evidence that warmer weather can determine the decline of the case counts of covid-19 [42] . increased ultraviolet light, as occurs particularly during the summer months, leads to inactivation of the coronaviruses and [43, 44] analyse the subject comprehensively and find that warming weather is unlikely to stop the spread of the pandemic.to understand the relative importance between physical and social parameters that favour the spread of the virus, an area in which different health and social policies have been equally in general, temperature, humidity, wind and precipitation may favour either the spread or the inhibition of epidemic episodes. however, while some research found that local weather conditions of lowered temperature, mild diurnal temperature range and low humidity may favour the transmission [41] , other studies claim there is no evidence that warmer weather can determine the decline of the case counts of covid-19 [42] . increased ultraviolet light, as occurs particularly during the summer months, leads to inactivation of the coronaviruses and [43, 44] analyse the subject comprehensively and find that warming weather is unlikely to stop the spread of the pandemic.to understand the relative importance between physical and social parameters that favour the spread of the virus, an area in which different health and social policies have been equally implemented on a variety of environmental and climatic conditions must be examined. italy is a viable experimental model to examine the impact of different health policies, as stated by the government authorities themselves [45, 46] . in italy, the regionalization of public health has addressed the pandemic following completely different schemes from one region to another and represents an important test to verify the scientific hypotheses on the behaviour of sars-cov-2.given that coronaviruses tend to spread in lowered temperatures and drier conditions during the winter months (i.e., during a period of reduced solar radiation), it is surprising that italy was the first european country severely affected by the pandemic and its hospitals were suddenly overrun. northern italy experienced a very dry and mild winter caused by the presence of a strong polar vortex. the winter of 2019-2020 was one of the driest winters in 60 years (https://www.arpae.it/dettaglio_n otizia.asp?idlivello=32&id=11052). the impact on the social and economic structure of the country immediately gave rise to concerns about the potential transmission pathways of the virus and the spread at european scale.the impact of the covid-19 pandemic on the environment raised attention from the very beginning of the crisis, consisting of (a) observations and analysis of the immediate effects and (b) estimations related to long-term changes. qualitative assumptions prevail, while consistent quantitative research must wait for relevant data sets and additional knowledge. most facets of the environmental impact of the covid-19 pandemic have not directly resulted from the virus itself. the consequence of abruptly limiting or closing economic sectors, such as heavy industry, transport, or hospitality businesses, has affected the environment directly.moreover, the impact of the covid-19 pandemic on socio-ecological systems may be highly variable, from radical changes in individual lifestyle, society and international affairs [47] , to simply facilitating a faster change than would normally have emerged [48] . from an anthropocentric perspective, the pandemic may lead to a more sustainable future, including increased resilience of the socio-ecological systems or shorter supply chains, which is a positive development. however, it is still possible that some nations will opt for less sustainability by pursuing rapid economic growth and focusing less concern on the environment. while negative impacts on the economy and society in general are probably huge, it is very likely that the global-scale reduction of economic activities due to the covid-19 crisis triggers a lot of sensible improvements in environmental quality and climatic systems. however, not all the environmental consequences of the crisis have been or will be positive. this includes an increased volume of nonrecyclable waste, the generation of large quantities of organic waste due to diminish agricultural and fishery export levels and difficulties in maintenance and monitoring of natural ecosystems [49] .the temporal resolution of the coronavirus impact ranges from immediate (days to weeks), short-term (months) and long-term (years), and different examples are provided in a matrix ( figure 2 ). while the first impacts are divided between rapid environmental improvements, such as urban air and water quality, and pollution episodes, such as the ones caused by the sanitary disposals, the estimated short-and long-term impacts are mainly positive. impacts are rarely limited to a single physical system. however, for the sake of better inventory and understanding, the impact of the covid-19 on the physical systems focuses on the air, water and soil individually, with an emphasis on urban areas.large cities or megacities are often very centralized structures providing a certain degree of comfort and protection for the citizen, but they increase the exposure to specific threats. for example, the higher population densities favour higher exposure to hazards. in contrast to rural areas, where the population tends to have gardens, the effects of the lockdown conditions in cities showed more severe effects on the mental health of individuals living in close quarters. the covid-19 crisis is driving towards a new paradigm that brings urban policies closer to present and strengthens the future needs of urban population and public health.one of the key characteristics of the pandemic event in focus in this study is the spatial extent but also versatility of the scale of the impact. no other disaster has covered the whole planet with comparable intensities over so many urban areas with multifaceted threats that are challenging our cities during the crisis.air quality is highly sensitive to anthropogenic emissions. in the european economic area countries (eu, norway, liechtenstein and iceland), the energy used by industrial processes and the road transportation sector is responsible for about 54% of the nonmethane volatile organic compounds (nmvoc), 51% of the nox, 30% of pm2.5 and 25% of sox emissions [50] . the covid-19 crisis has caused severe impacts to the energy and resources, high-tech and communications, retail, manufacturing and transportation sectors, in terms of personnel, operations, supply chain and revenue [51] . by mid-april, a 40% to 50% decline in economic activity was estimated as a result of the draconian disease-suppression policies, and severe multiquarter economic impacts in multiple markets became imminent [52] . consequently, the impact on air quality was rapidly visible at various spatial scales. even as early as the end of march 2020, reductions in air pollution were reported in china, italy and new york city, and sharp declines in global greenhouse-gas emissions have been predicted for the rest of the year [53] . moreover, an overview focused on several european countries impacts are rarely limited to a single physical system. however, for the sake of better inventory and understanding, the impact of the covid-19 on the physical systems focuses on the air, water and soil individually, with an emphasis on urban areas.large cities or megacities are often very centralized structures providing a certain degree of comfort and protection for the citizen, but they increase the exposure to specific threats. for example, the higher population densities favour higher exposure to hazards. in contrast to rural areas, where the population tends to have gardens, the effects of the lockdown conditions in cities showed more severe effects on the mental health of individuals living in close quarters. the covid-19 crisis is driving towards a new paradigm that brings urban policies closer to present and strengthens the future needs of urban population and public health.one of the key characteristics of the pandemic event in focus in this study is the spatial extent but also versatility of the scale of the impact. no other disaster has covered the whole planet with comparable intensities over so many urban areas with multifaceted threats that are challenging our cities during the crisis.air quality is highly sensitive to anthropogenic emissions. in the european economic area countries (eu, norway, liechtenstein and iceland), the energy used by industrial processes and the road transportation sector is responsible for about 54% of the nonmethane volatile organic compounds (nmvoc), 51% of the no x , 30% of pm 2.5 and 25% of so x emissions [50] . the covid-19 crisis has caused severe impacts to the energy and resources, high-tech and communications, retail, manufacturing and transportation sectors, in terms of personnel, operations, supply chain and revenue [51] . by mid-april, a 40% to 50% decline in economic activity was estimated as a result of the draconian disease-suppression policies, and severe multiquarter economic impacts in multiple markets became imminent [52] . consequently, the impact on air quality was rapidly visible at various spatial scales. even as early as the end of march 2020, reductions in air pollution were reported in china, italy and new york city, and sharp declines in global greenhouse-gas emissions have been predicted for the rest of the year [53] . moreover, an overview focused on several european countries reveals that the reduction of the weekly no 2 , pm 10 and pm 2.5 concentrations during march and april 2020 is quasigeneral ( figure s1 ).one possible cause of the impact of the pandemic in northern italy is that a high concentration of particulate matter (pm, including pm 10 and pm 2.5 ) makes the respiratory system more susceptible to infection and complications of the coronavirus disease. higher and consistent exposure to pm (particularly for the elderly) leads to a higher probability that the respiratory system is compromised before the onset of the virus. this was a serious concern right after the publication of a position paper by sima (italian environmental medical society), where correlations were found between pollution levels and the spread of the virus [54] . strong evidence exists on the greater predisposition of the respiratory system to serious diseases [55] , but the hypothesis that pollutants can be a carrier for the virus in the free atmosphere seems very unlikely. the spread of droplets produced by sneezing or coughing is necessary so that high viral concentration and a lack of air circulation and exchange can be potentially very dangerous [56] [57] [58] [59] .the analysis of the demographic and economic characteristics of the two italian regions most affected by the pandemic help to understand that the spread of the virus is dependent on parameters other than simply air transport [60] . the most affected regions are quite similar demographically; lombardy has a population density of 420 per km 2 while veneto has a density of 270 per km 2 and the average age of the populations is practically identical. economic indicators also reveal a gross domestic product of lombardy of 34,000 /capita and veneto of 29,500 /capita. the number of beds in the healthcare facilities for intensive care are nearly identical in the two regions, while there is a public health laboratory for every 3,000,000 inhabitants in lombardy and for every 500,000 people in veneto. the healthcare structure is a very important aspect that explains the notable difference between the two regions, as the home care service for the elderly and disabled is more than double in veneto than in lombardy [61] . for neighbouring regions with similar pollution levels, the infection rate is extremely uneven. thus, it appears unlikely that pm is a viable vector for the virus, but it does illustrate the concern over disparate regional healthcare systems. this also has an important impact on future exit strategies from the pandemic and on the use of personal protective equipment (ppe) as the virus may vector using healthcare workers [62] .it is very likely that the italian case provides lessons for other european countries and validates the measures taken to limit the effects of the pandemic. as for the environmental impacts, physical and ecological systems have been affected in many places, as addressed and detailed in the next sections.the massive lockdowns of entire cities, economies, schools and social life for weeks led to unknown large-scale and extensive restrictions in mobility as a response to social distancing guidance related to covid-19 ( figure 3 ). globally, largest reductions in mobility are visible for western and southern europe (e.g., spain-59%, italy-55%, france-51%) and south america (e.g., bolivia-60% or columbia-54%). in south america, mobility in the period april 1 to april 17 showed a mean decrease of 47% compared to the 5-week period 3 january-5 february 2020. other continents showed a mean decrease of around 30%. south korea was the only country that showed a slight positive trend of +1.8% for the analysed period. the reason here is that the mobility trends for places like national parks, public beaches, marinas, dog parks, plazas, and public gardens increased significantly, although other mobility categories (e.g., workplaces, transit stations) showed a decrease. even if general mobility characteristics may vary by country and the period of strongest reductions in mobility may not be evident in april, figure 3 shows the global picture of the effects of the covid-19 pandemic. in particular, one of the most hit sectors was the aviation that contributes about 1-2% of global greenhouse gas emissions [63] and about 3-5% of global co2 emissions [64] . between 23 january 2020 and 21 april 2020, travel restrictions caused air traffic to decline by around 63% in the total number of flights and about 75% in the number of commercial flights ( figure 4 ). the latest scenario of the international air transport association (iata) suggests that air traffic will fall by 48% for 2020 [65] . even if the aviation sector returns to its pre-pandemic levels, 40% of the passengers indicate they will wait at least six months before returning to air travel. specifically, 70% indicate they will wait for their financial situation to stabilize [65] . the strong decrease in both short-term and mid-term aviation travel will lead to a reduction in greenhouse gas emissions, particularly co2. additionally, the reduction in contrails may increase the daily temperature range [66] . the reduction of contrails will probably lead to a decrease in air temperature due to the decreasing greenhouse effect [67] . in particular, one of the most hit sectors was the aviation that contributes about 1-2% of global greenhouse gas emissions [63] and about 3-5% of global co 2 emissions [64] . between 23 january 2020 and 21 april 2020, travel restrictions caused air traffic to decline by around 63% in the total number of flights and about 75% in the number of commercial flights ( figure 4 ). the latest scenario of the international air transport association (iata) suggests that air traffic will fall by 48% for 2020 [65] . even if the aviation sector returns to its pre-pandemic levels, 40% of the passengers indicate they will wait at least six months before returning to air travel. specifically, 70% indicate they will wait for their financial situation to stabilize [65] . the strong decrease in both short-term and mid-term aviation travel will lead to a reduction in greenhouse gas emissions, particularly co 2 . additionally, the reduction in contrails may increase the daily temperature range [66] . the reduction of contrails will probably lead to a decrease in air temperature due to the decreasing greenhouse effect [67] . in particular, one of the most hit sectors was the aviation that contributes about 1-2% of global greenhouse gas emissions [63] and about 3-5% of global co2 emissions [64] . between 23 january 2020 and 21 april 2020, travel restrictions caused air traffic to decline by around 63% in the total number of flights and about 75% in the number of commercial flights ( figure 4 ). the latest scenario of the international air transport association (iata) suggests that air traffic will fall by 48% for 2020 [65] . even if the aviation sector returns to its pre-pandemic levels, 40% of the passengers indicate they will wait at least six months before returning to air travel. specifically, 70% indicate they will wait for their financial situation to stabilize [65] . the strong decrease in both short-term and mid-term aviation travel will lead to a reduction in greenhouse gas emissions, particularly co2. additionally, the reduction in contrails may increase the daily temperature range [66] . the reduction of contrails will probably lead to a decrease in air temperature due to the decreasing greenhouse effect [67] . regarding the transport sector, motor vehicles were responsible for 30% of the 2018 greenhouse gases emissions in austria, for example. this was the second largest source of greenhouse gas emissions in austria, behind the energy and industry sectors, which together contributed 36% [68] . regarding the transport sector, motor vehicles were responsible for 30% of the 2018 greenhouse gases emissions in austria, for example. this was the second largest source of greenhouse gas emissions in austria, behind the energy and industry sectors, which together contributed 36% [68] . regarding the transport sector, motor vehicles were responsible for 30% of the 2018 greenhouse gases emissions in austria, for example. this was the second largest source of greenhouse gas emissions in austria, behind the energy and industry sectors, which together contributed 36% [68] . the covid-19 crisis has led to a substantial reduction in motor vehicle traffic with not only a reduction in greenhouse gas emissions and particulate pollution but also a major reduction in traffic noise and tire wear on road surfaces. in vienna, with a population of 1.9 million, car and truck traffic were reduced by 52% and 50%, respectively, between 1 march and the first week of april [69] .these reductions, extrapolated to similar urban areas in europe, have led to significantly improved air quality. in milan, average concentrations of no 2 for the 16-22 march period was 21% lower than for the same week in 2019. in bergamo, average concentrations of no 2 in 2020 were 47% lower than in 2019 for the same week, and similar reduction of average no 2 concentrations have been observed in other major cities (e.g., barcelona, 55%; madrid, 41%; lisbon, 51%) [70] .data also show a reduction in the urban pm concentration. reduced concentrations of pm 2.5 in seoul (south korea) were 54% lower from 26 february to 18 march 2020 when compared to the same period in 2019. los angeles (united states) observed its longest continuous period of clean air on record, lasting over 18 days from march 7 to 28. pm 2.5 concentration levels were lower by 31% from the same time last year and down 51% from the average of the previous four years (https://www.iqair. com/blog/air-quality/report-impact-of-covid-19-on-global-air-quality-earth-day). for barcelona, [71] reported approximately 50% reduction of no 2 and black carbon, 30% decrease of pm 10 and 33-57% increase of o 3 concentrations, very likely due to the lockdown of the city. however, the favourable role of meteorological conditions was also granted.well-known for its high level of pollution, milan is considering a shift from car traffic to pedestrian and bicycle over 35 km of streets, as a result of the coronavirus crisis (https://www.theguardian.com/ world/2020/apr/21/milan-seeks-to-prevent-post-crisis-return-of-traffic-pollution). milan launched on 24 april 2020 a new strategy for adaptation asking for an open contribution from the population [72] where it is clearly stated that the mission is to elaborate a new strategy to exit from pandemic, called phase 2. the objectives are to remake the city by accounting for problems faced during the pandemic. public transportation is one of the main foci along with the protections of elderly people.the immediate impact of the covid-19 pandemic on aquatic systems and water resources is very limited, but water quality and resources may be affected on monthly and annual perspectives. due to less boat traffic and tourist activities, venice waters cleared during the coronavirus lockdown of the city in march and april 2020 (figure 7) .reference [73] first detected the presence of the sars-cov-2 in sewage and indicated it as a sensitive tool to monitor the circulation of the virus. although the viral rna has been detected in wastewater, this does not necessarily imply a risk [74], either to the public or to the environment. reference [75] showed that coronaviruses die off rapidly in wastewater and are inactivated faster in warmer water (i.e., 10 days in water at 23  c and >100 days in water at 4  c).disposal of sanitary consumables, such as ppe, is already creating concern about the impact of the pandemic event on water bodies. by may 2020, many reports have claimed significant harm on the aquatic environment especially along the shorelines (e.g., in hong kong and canada) due to sanitary disposal resulting from medical activities or personal protection.the covid-19 crisis has and probably will exhibit longer-term impacts on water resources usage and management. the economic effects of the covid-19 pandemic, changes in national budgets and changes in funding priorities may lead to lack of funding for water related infrastructure and water utilities. the impacts of underfunding (e.g., increased forthcoming losses or lack of investments to improve efficiency) may only manifest after a few years. reference [73] first detected the presence of the sars-cov-2 in sewage and indicated it as a sensitive tool to monitor the circulation of the virus. although the viral rna has been detected in wastewater, this does not necessarily imply a risk [74], either to the public or to the environment. reference [75] showed that coronaviruses die off rapidly in wastewater and are inactivated faster in warmer water (i.e., 10 days in water at 23 c and >100 days in water at 4 c).disposal of sanitary consumables, such as ppe, is already creating concern about the impact of the pandemic event on water bodies. by may 2020, many reports have claimed significant harm on the aquatic environment especially along the shorelines (e.g., in hong kong and canada) due to sanitary disposal resulting from medical activities or personal protection.the covid-19 crisis has and probably will exhibit longer-term impacts on water resources usage and management. the economic effects of the covid-19 pandemic, changes in national budgets and changes in funding priorities may lead to lack of funding for water related infrastructure and water utilities. the impacts of underfunding (e.g., increased forthcoming losses or lack of investments to improve efficiency) may only manifest after a few years.during lockdown conditions, water utilities from germany and austria report that the daily peak in water consumption in the morning is shifted by around 1.5 to 2 h. generally, a dampening effect and a more even distribution in water consumption during the day is observed. regarding the amount of water consumed, increases as well as decreases of around 5% are reported. increases are explained by higher demands due to watering of gardens-surprisingly, not due to increased hand washing-and decreases by fewer commuters, students and pupils in supply areas [76] [77] [78] [79] [80] .by contrast, municipalities with high touristic activity-a leading cause of water demand [81,82]-will exhibit important reduction in water consumption. reports from the strong tourism heritage of tirol, austria, suggest reductions in water consumption of up to 50% in municipalities where tourism plays an important role [79] . depending on the return of tourism following the end of the pandemic, a noteworthy reduction of water demand and pressures on water resources can be expected. during lockdown conditions, water utilities from germany and austria report that the daily peak in water consumption in the morning is shifted by around 1.5 to 2 h. generally, a dampening effect and a more even distribution in water consumption during the day is observed. regarding the amount of water consumed, increases as well as decreases of around 5% are reported. increases are explained by higher demands due to watering of gardens-surprisingly, not due to increased hand washing-and decreases by fewer commuters, students and pupils in supply areas [76] [77] [78] [79] [80] .by contrast, municipalities with high touristic activity-a leading cause of water demand [81, 82] -will exhibit important reduction in water consumption. reports from the strong tourism heritage of tirol, austria, suggest reductions in water consumption of up to 50% in municipalities where tourism plays an important role [79] . depending on the return of tourism following the end of the pandemic, a noteworthy reduction of water demand and pressures on water resources can be expected.industrial water consumption, a generally poorly measured quantity, has certainly decreased. the longer-term impacts on water resources will depend on economic developments following the crisis. in comparison to domestic and industrial water demand, the highest pressures on water resources come from the agricultural sector. here, long-term forecasts will depend on the return of agriculture following the crisis, although short-term effects are probably visible in reduced irrigation demand.soil provides essential ecosystem services for human society, ranging from agricultural production to carbon sequestration, which are fundamental for several sustainable development goals (sdgs), such as "zero hunger" or "life on land" [83] . the immediate impact of the pandemic or other similar disasters on the soil environment is linked with the increasing risks of food insecurity and disruption of the food supply chain.the persistence of sars-cov-2 on different surfaces is a key issue for successfully controlling its spread. reference [84] found the viruses can remain viable on surfaces for several days. other studies investigated the survival of different viruses in soils and sediments [85] . at present, there is no clear evidence about the role of the soil environment in hosting and transmission of the sars-cov-2 nor about the impact of this coronavirus on the soil surface, and calls for collecting eventual results have been issued [86] .from an ecological perspective, the covid-19 crisis is fundamentally related to the relationships between society and ecosphere. while the origin in a wuhan wet market or industrial livestock or other source is not yet fully clarified [87] , it is well known that mers-cov, sars-cov and sars-cov-2 are all animal coronaviruses which infected people and then succeeded to spread in different communities at large scale. around the globe more than 2.7 million people are dying from zoonosis in a year [88] , but the impact is even greater as the zoonosis are also affecting human health, livestock sector and agriculture and usually the poorer human populations are more affected.the coronavirus crisis is most probably one of the many challenges our society will have to face in the forthcoming decades as an indirect consequence of the impact of climate change on the ecosphere through many mechanisms, including diminishing species habitats [89] , changing species distributions [90] and an increasing influx of alien invasive species [91] . currently, economic development focuses on continuous growth without considering the conservation of natural systems.in a letter sent to the who (world health organisation) in april 2020, more than 300 animal welfare and conservation organisations stressed the need to recognise the link between wildlife markets and pandemics (https://lioncoalition.org/2020/04/04/open-letter-to-world-health-organisation/). however, this is related with the need to act on existing international conventions, such as cites (the convention on international trade in endangered species of wild fauna and flora, also known as the washington convention) to protect endangered plants and animals from trafficking. as this is not the first time such outbreaks have occurred (see the sars event between 2002 and 2003), conventions like cites should be reinforced. forest landscape fragmentation also may facilitate more often human contact with wild animals, increasing the likelihood of transmission risk of animal-to-human viruses [92, 93] .the pandemic has also had an impact on ecological research, field work and experiments. in many cases, this research activity has been diminished or halted, with important consequences on conservation of species and habitats. there is also a possible economic impact on conservation programs around the globe as a result of pandemic and different programs are assessing their long-term viability (such as the global environmental fund) [89] . even after the pandemic ends, a danger exists that both research and conservation programs will be diminished mainly due to miscommunication between decision makers and scientists.however, perhaps the most important impact of the pandemic on the ecological transition focuses on sustainability and the still possible choices that the society could make to ensure its long-term survivability. as explained in figure 8 , the coupled natural-human system is on a path of transitioning from an unsustainable development towards sustainability being under pressure from different drivers. the instability caused by the pandemic is characterized by variables that have sudden and multiple impacts on both the natural environment and on society and could push the system into three different potential states. the fast variables are characterizing the instability phase and the slow variables act as controlling variables [94] [95] [96] . only one of these potential states is the desirable one, moving away from unwanted events and ensuring that the pandemic was a painful but still a "learning event" that drove towards a "better future". the main characteristic of the pandemic is that it is acting like a shock that pushes the system towards a regime shift with difficult to predict consequences. system into three different potential states. the fast variables are characterizing the instability phase and the slow variables act as controlling variables [94] [95] [96] . only one of these potential states is the desirable one, moving away from unwanted events and ensuring that the pandemic was a painful but still a "learning event" that drove towards a "better future". the main characteristic of the pandemic is that it is acting like a shock that pushes the system towards a regime shift with difficult to predict consequences. reference [93] advocates that nature is part of the solution for recovery and sustainable reconstruction. nevertheless, the effect of the covid-19 pandemic on ecological systems has not yet been fully realized, and further monitoring will bring new findings and perspectives.it is very likely that the covid-19 pandemic will reshape the economic and environmental policies at an international scale.the strength of some bilateral agreements and international partnerships has been tested by this pandemic. whereas china persistently invested in africa's natural resources and infrastructure projects, the treatment of african citizens living in china and the frustration at beijing's opposition on granting debt relief could deteriorate the chinese economic and political supremacy in africa [97] . reference [98] also discusses the impact of the crisis on african economies with unpredictable environmental consequences. the roles that china and the usa currently play for mitigating risk include an ecological emphasis to the pandemic strategy preparedness in order to better protect the global community from zoonotic disease [99] . the coronavirus epidemic could significantly impact the italians' relationship with the eu, as indicated by the widely spread perception that the eu was not efficient in supporting the fight against coronavirus [100] , at least in february-march (i.e., 88% of italians believed so in march 2020). such changes are expected to generate indirect long-term environmental impacts.climate changes are often perceived as a risk driver at the global scale and covid-19 has offered an excellent example of how a single underestimated threat can challenge the foundations of global security, economic stability and democratic governance [101] . according to analyses before the reference [93] advocates that nature is part of the solution for recovery and sustainable reconstruction. nevertheless, the effect of the covid-19 pandemic on ecological systems has not yet been fully realized, and further monitoring will bring new findings and perspectives.it is very likely that the covid-19 pandemic will reshape the economic and environmental policies at an international scale.the strength of some bilateral agreements and international partnerships has been tested by this pandemic. whereas china persistently invested in africa's natural resources and infrastructure projects, the treatment of african citizens living in china and the frustration at beijing's opposition on granting debt relief could deteriorate the chinese economic and political supremacy in africa [97] . reference [98] also discusses the impact of the crisis on african economies with unpredictable environmental consequences. the roles that china and the usa currently play for mitigating risk include an ecological emphasis to the pandemic strategy preparedness in order to better protect the global community from zoonotic disease [99] . the coronavirus epidemic could significantly impact the italians' relationship with the eu, as indicated by the widely spread perception that the eu was not efficient in supporting the fight against coronavirus [100] , at least in february-march (i.e., 88% of italians believed so in march 2020). such changes are expected to generate indirect long-term environmental impacts.climate changes are often perceived as a risk driver at the global scale and covid-19 has offered an excellent example of how a single underestimated threat can challenge the foundations of global security, economic stability and democratic governance [101] . according to analyses before the covid-19 pandemic, if countries are unable to implement the nationally determined contributions as ratified through the paris agreement, the emissions reduction efforts would cost the whole world about 149.8-792.0 trillion dollars until 2100 [102] . plans prepared for reinforcing the emission reduction goals established under the 2015 paris agreement are not only postponed until 2021, but they will probably suffer consistent adjustments in the new economic circumstances. in the short term, it is hard to assume that climate change and environmental sustainability will be priorities for the world governments or local authorities, while the long-term cost for emission reduction could be raised. the coronavirus crisis also threatens local commitments to implement climate change adaptation and mitigation measures that have been initiated in the recent period [103] . both national and international governance will be affected.the impact of coronavirus on the eu climate plan was already the subject of discussions in several meetings in brussels and there are concerns that the targets set for 2050 now will be difficult to reach especially due to the necessity for a rapid economic recovery. poland, in particular, expressed doubts on reaching the targets set for 2050 (http://www.caneurope.org/publications/press-releases/1864-eu-aims-f or-net-zero-emissions-by-2050-now-it-needs-to-work-on-raising-the-2030-target). big industries such as car manufacturers also have expressed concerns of not being able to meet the targets set (https://ww w.carbonbrief.org/daily-brief/eu-leaders-agree-to-consider-climate-in-coronavirus-recovery-plan).during the 2010s, environmental efforts have intensively addressed the generous framework of the "transforming our world: the 2030 agenda for sustainable development" [104] . this agenda includes 17 sustainable development goals (sdgs) designed to eradicate poverty and achieve sustainable development by 2030. we argue that most of these goals were immediately impacted by the covid-19 pandemic, while longer-term effects are also expected ( table 1) , most of them directly connected to urban areas and population health. it is very likely that the concept and implementation of the agenda must be reconsidered according to the new findings related to our exposure, vulnerabilities and resilience to global disaster risks. the discovery of the permanence of the virus on surfaces and in aquifers requires a revision of the purification and sanitation systems.days to years [109] 7: affordable and clean energyalternative energy sources and backup storage and transport systems should be developed to secure societal needs during crises.years to decades [110] 8: decent work and economic growththe pandemic has shown that there are groups of workers most exposed to risk to health and life by requiring a revision of the working methods in industry, commerce and health.months to decades [105, 111] 9: industry, innovation and infrastructuretechnological innovation and a close link with the research invention, also to the advantage of a change in production methods, has proved to be an unavoidable condition for the solution of global problems months to decades [112, 113] 10: reduced inequality improvements in access to information technologies to reduce inequalities in poor and large families who have to use remote school systems and access to other resources.days to months [24, 114] 11: sustainable cities and communitiesrevisions of adaptation plans are foreseen for major cities to increase health resilience in citizens and to better protect elderly population.months to decades [72, 115, 116] revision of production systems from the global to the local scale to ensure access and distribution of strategic resources with consequent enhancement of territorial activities.months to decades [117] months to decades [92, 93] 16: peace and justice strong institutionsthe importance of strong coordination between institutions has been markedly indicated for national ones but, above all, for international ones where the exchange of exact and punctual information can indicate safe ways for solving problems on a global level.months to decades [99, 120] 17: partnerships to achieve the goalthe efficiency of international agreements have been dramatically challenged, and the need for rethinking regional and global partnerships emerged.days to decades [103] the covid-19 crisis has challenged environmental monitoring and climate services, creating both adversities in observations as well as challenges to create better preparedness.lack of reliable data on the spread of covid-19 could lead to not only a once-in-a-century pandemic but also a once-in-a-century decision fiasco [110] . the crisis has revealed the crucial need to access long-term, real-time data for supporting policy makers and reaction at different scales, and it has motivated environmental scientists to reinforce our monitoring capacity to address sustainability issues the pandemic has raised [121] .challenges like the dearth of airborne meteorological measurements or the maintenance of environmental monitoring in protected areas will gradually be resolved once previous levels of social and economic activity resume [49] . however, actions are needed now to build reliable responses to future threats.the covid-19 crisis has strongly biased the production and delivery of both weather forecasting (https://news.un.org/en/story/2020/04/1060772) and climate services (i.e., climate-based information and products tailored for various end-users related to the present climate and adaptation to different scenarios) as well as the observation of oceans and remote locations (https://www.theguardian.com/sc ience/2020/apr/03/climate-monitoring-research-coronavirus-scientists#maincontent). the pandemic has dramatically lowered the quantity and quality of aircraft weather observations, thereby adversely impacting weather forecasts and modelling efforts. the european centre for medium-range weather forecasts (ecmwf) has noted a reduction of 65% in aircraft reports received between 3 march and 23 march (figure 9 ). on 9 april, the world meteorological organization (wmo) issued its concern about the impact of the crisis on the global observing system [122] . however, the exceptional slowdown of societal activities that began in march of 2020 has generated opportunities to capture environmental information of a novel event. for example, the "noise" associated with human activities that adversely affect seismographic records dropped sharply around the world, improving the ability to detect seismic waves and the locations of number of daily aircraft reports over europe received and used at ecmwf. source: https://www.ecmwf.int/en/about/media-centre/news/2020/drop-aircraft-observations-could-h ave-impact-weather-forecasts. however, the exceptional slowdown of societal activities that began in march of 2020 has generated opportunities to capture environmental information of a novel event. for example, the "noise" associated with human activities that adversely affect seismographic records dropped sharply around the world, improving the ability to detect seismic waves and the locations of earthquake aftershocks [123] .transmission of diseases by population mobility within the context of climate change received scientists' attention before the current pandemic [124, 125] .the examination of the relationship between climate and coronavirus focuses on two queries: (a) how the climate can modulate the spread and persistence of the virus, and (b) the extent of the impact of the virus on economic policies taken to offset climate impacts. the first aspect is inherently scientific and mainly involves the atmospheric and epidemiological disciplines. the second is much more complex as the economic, political and social dynamics will affect processes that will alter our worldview.climatic effects on the coronavirus are currently difficult to estimate given that this pandemic is still under development. these effects, therefore, can only be speculated by comparing them to the characteristics of other coronaviruses. reference [118] investigated the observed growth rate of coronavirus worldwide and related it to the climate, making a prediction for forthcoming seasons. they argue a specific climate exists in which the coronavirus spreads optimally. outbreak dynamics also were investigated in terms of climate and environmental conditions [126] to link directly daily growth rates to the local climate. the correlation found was significant leading them to conclude that such a link was valid, but their study also highlighted the fact that population density could be a confounding variable. these results, although very speculative, have led to initial hypotheses on the transmission conditions of sars-cov-2 under different combinations of atmospheric parameters [127] and to forecast conditions for the summer of 2020 [128, 129] . an analogy with the other coronaviruses becomes fundamental to validate such hypotheses but it is not currently possible to establish whether the virologic characteristics of the new pathogen can be assumed to be like other coronaviruses.analysing the direct and indirect effects of the pandemic on the climate is more complicated as forecasts must resolve not just the contagion dynamics but also incorporate economic, social, and political aspects of the virus propagation.direct effects on climate change could result mainly from the global slowdown of production activities and transportation. at this stage, the overall effects are not easily determined but, for example, emissions in china-the country with the longest period of closure-have decreased by 25% [130] , corresponding to a decrease of about 200 million tons of co 2 in february alone [131] . nevertheless, the possible decrease in global co 2 emissions is likely to be around 5% worldwide [132] (reuters, 2020). for the representative concentration pathway (rcp)6 climate change scenario, scripps research institute [20] suggests a possible trend in emissions ( figure 10 ) which shows an immediate drop followed by a recovery when activities resume.this projection leads to fundamental speculations as to what indirect effects coronavirus will have on the earth's climate. we note that following the 2008-2009 economic crisis, co 2 emissions exhibited rapid growth [133] and we suggest that a similar response will follow this pandemic.experts suggest one of two sharply divergent paths will arise from the demise of the pandemic [134] . on the one hand, a feeling exists that the coronavirus will support the government, science, and business infrastructure in addressing environmental issues, including climate change [135] . although the coronavirus and climate change operate on different time scales, they represent similar phenomena in terms of the evolution and impacts of the problem. thus, lessons from the pandemic provide lessons to be learned in environmental protection. recovery from the pandemic, therefore, may lead the focus away from environmental concerns [53] .surely something has already changed. covid-19 has undermined the basic tenets of global manufacturing. companies must now reconsider the multistep, multi-country supply chains that dominated production and derivative production [132] . individuals too must reconsider life choices as profound changes also await us [131, 136] . scripps research institute [20] suggests a possible trend in emissions ( figure 10 ) which shows an immediate drop followed by a recovery when activities resume. this projection leads to fundamental speculations as to what indirect effects coronavirus will have on the earth's climate. we note that following the 2008-2009 economic crisis, co2 emissions exhibited rapid growth [133] and we suggest that a similar response will follow this pandemic.experts suggest one of two sharply divergent paths will arise from the demise of the pandemic [134] . on the one hand, a feeling exists that the coronavirus will support the government, science, and business infrastructure in addressing environmental issues, including climate change [135] . although the coronavirus and climate change operate on different time scales, they represent similar phenomena in terms of the evolution and impacts of the problem. thus, lessons from the pandemic provide lessons to be learned in environmental protection. recovery from the pandemic, therefore, may lead the focus away from environmental concerns [53] .surely something has already changed. covid-19 has undermined the basic tenets of global manufacturing. companies must now reconsider the multistep, multi-country supply chains that dominated production and derivative production [132] . individuals too must reconsider life choices as profound changes also await us [131, 136] .the covid-19 pandemic has triggered unprecedented environmental impacts in terms of spatial extent, complexity and even uniqueness. it is the first time in history that the metabolism of all the urban agglomerations with more than 1 million inhabitants from europe was virtually stopped regarding movement, traffic and economic exchanges. the societal and economic measures adopted to contain the pandemic led to local, regional and global impacts, both negative and positive, spanning from immediate to long-term consequences. the full evaluation of the impacts is far from being possible with an ongoing disaster of epic proportion and tremendous complexity, and this paper pledges for several directions to be pursued by further research.the covid-19 pandemic provides a clear demonstration that human and planetary health are intimately interconnected [137] , and the role of interdisciplinary approaches in finding solutions has been clearly highlighted [138] . the disaster reached the planetary scale within only two months (i.e., february through march 2020). despite six other pandemic outbreaks having occurred during the 21st century, humankind was still not prepared to deal with a global event. most countries adopted a strict lockdown of economies and societal activities, triggering immediate impacts on many physical and ecological systems. longer-term consequences are also assumed, and a systemic approach is required to support the prevention, early warning, and similar impacts of environmental degradation. the covid-19 pandemic has triggered unprecedented environmental impacts in terms of spatial extent, complexity and even uniqueness. it is the first time in history that the metabolism of all the urban agglomerations with more than 1 million inhabitants from europe was virtually stopped regarding movement, traffic and economic exchanges. the societal and economic measures adopted to contain the pandemic led to local, regional and global impacts, both negative and positive, spanning from immediate to long-term consequences. the full evaluation of the impacts is far from being possible with an ongoing disaster of epic proportion and tremendous complexity, and this paper pledges for several directions to be pursued by further research.the covid-19 pandemic provides a clear demonstration that human and planetary health are intimately interconnected [137] , and the role of interdisciplinary approaches in finding solutions has been clearly highlighted [138] . the disaster reached the planetary scale within only two months (i.e., february through march 2020). despite six other pandemic outbreaks having occurred during the 21st century, humankind was still not prepared to deal with a global event. most countries adopted a strict lockdown of economies and societal activities, triggering immediate impacts on many physical and ecological systems. longer-term consequences are also assumed, and a systemic approach is required to support the prevention, early warning, and similar impacts of environmental degradation.the coronavirus pandemic has generated an active involvement of the research community and has garnered an early response from international, national, and local authorities. since the events are ongoing and the end is still difficult to predict, we shall refer only to preliminary results and possible lessons to be learned. the reaction of the scientific community to the crisis was prompt and led to rapid accumulation of knowledge and operational decisions. faced with an unprecedented interruption of data from aeronautical meteorological service providers (amsps) and other observational platforms, the wmo has enumerated preliminary guidelines to assist the amsps [122] at the beginning of april 2020. eventually, problems associated with environmental monitoring have reinforced the need to secure backup systems to collect information, as such data are crucial for operational forecasting of ecological, weather and hydrological conditions. of note, relationships between weather conditions and the spread of the virus are still unclear and more research is needed to derive relevant conclusions.the advancements of new specific techniques would be of great interest for controlling the environmental dissemination of coronaviruses [126] , and more precise and extended monitoring would favour the collection of more relevant information. early developments with this crisis have revealed that monitoring of socio-ecological conditions is crucial for an early intervention to limit the scale of the epidemic and the pandemic hazard. reference [139] argues that better monitoring of immigrant tracks and travel volumes could have helped countries be better prepared to contain the spread of the novel coronavirus. data, tools and lessons learned may provide significant improvements in preparation to fight potential pandemics in the future [140] .this global crisis has convincingly demonstrated that the disaster research, climate change diplomacy and ecosystem services must reconsider their strategic and integrated development considering even the most unlikely events. eventually, the covid-19 pandemic will determine profound changes of the social and economic behaviour at the planetary scale, and this study highlights the environmental dimension of the consequent impacts resulting from the emerging pandemic.supplementary materials: the following are available online at http://www.mdpi.com/1660-4601/17/11/4140/s1, list s1: calendar of events relevant for covid-19 impact on environment (31 december 2019-30 april 2020), figure s1 : average weekly no 2 concentration between january 2019 and april 2020 in urban areas from spain, france, united kingdom, italy, austria and poland. source: https://www.eea.europa.eu/themes/air/air-quality-a nd-covid19/monitoring-covid-19-impacts-on. we provide in this document a survey on the main open-resources for addressing the covid-19 pandemic from a data science point of view. since the number of institutions and research teams working nowadays against the virus is growing at a very fast pace, it is impossible to provide an exhaustive list of all the meaningful open-data providers. at a global world scope, it is easier to identify the relevant open-data resources. however, the enumeration of the regional institutions providing local information is so extensive that we address it specifically only for some countries (like china, italy, spain, and the u.s, among others). we focus on the variables that have an effect on the evolution and control of the disease at a global and regional scale. that is, we do not cover in this document the data specifically related to medical treatments, vaccines, etc. we do provide open resources for the number of hospitalized cases, intensive care units (icu) cases, number of tests,etc. these variables are very relevant to monitor the evolution of the pandemic and also to evaluate the actions taken by the decision-makers.with this document, we try to make accessible many significant open-data resources on covid-19 for the scientific community. in many situations, identifying adequate sources is difficult, especially for non-expert data scientists. for example, the github repository contains many meaningful data-sets of global and regional scope, but it might be challenging to discover them without adequate guidance. besides, the reliability of the data source provider can be a concern. therefore, this paper is aimed at providing a big picture of the available data source providers for analyzing covid-19 propagation. we have tried to find stable and reliable resources so that the utility of this paper endures in time.the paper is organized as follows. we first analyze in section 2 the different variables that have a significant effect on the evolution and control of the epidemic (demographics, mobility, weather conditions, government measures, etc.). the opportunities that open data resources on covid-19 offer to fight the pandemic are highlighted, from a data-driven perspective, in section 3. different limitations and inaccuracies of the currently available sources, along with the difficulties encountered when using them in a data-science context are discussed in section 4. the most relevant open data institutions at a global scale, addressing the covid-19 pandemic, are enumerated in section 5. more functionally, in section 6, we identify open source communities that facilitate access to the required data. in section 7 we identify open-data sets related to specific covid-19 variables at a global and regional scale. the open access to auxiliary variables of interest to model specific aspects of the pandemic, like seasonal behaviour or local mortality rate is described in section 8. the open e-learning on covid-19 is illustrated by means of some examples in section 9. we finish the paper with a section of conclusions.coronavirus disease 2019 (covid-19), technically known as sars-cov-2, is an infectious disease that was first identified in december 2019 in wuhan, the capital of china's hubei province. the world health organisation (who) declared the 201920 coronavirus outbreak a public health emergency of international concern on 30 january 2020 and a pandemic on 11 march 2020.the virus is mainly spread during close contact and by small droplets produced when those infected cough, sneeze or talk. these small droplets may also be produced during breathing; however, they rapidly fall to the ground or surfaces and are not generally spread through the air over large distances. people may also become infected by touching a contaminated surface and then their face. although animals can be infected with covid-19, there is not any evidence to suggest the transmission of the virus from them to human beings.the virus can survive on surfaces for up to 72 hours such as plastic and stainless steel [44] . it is most contagious during the first three days after onset of symptoms, although spread may be possible before symptoms appear and in later stages of the disease [4] . the time from exposure to onset of symptoms is typically around five days but may range from two to 14 days.recommended measures to prevent infection include frequent hand washing, social distancing (maintaining physical distance from others, especially from those with symptoms), covering coughs and sneezes with a tissue or inner elbow and keeping unwashed hands away from the face. the use of masks is recommended for those who suspect they have the virus and their caregivers. on 29 january, the who provided some guidelines on the use of masks [22] . nevertheless, recommendations for mask use by the general public vary. in addition, the use of plastic gloves has also been recommended. currently, there is no vaccine or specific antiviral treatment for covid-19. management involves treatment of symptoms, supportive care, isolation and experimental measures.to monitor the spread of covid-19, the different regional institutions are measuring the number of confirmed cases, deaths, recovered, hospitalized cases, intensive unit care (iuc) cases, etc. because of the incubation period, all these variables are related with the number of infected cases in a delayed way. the main objective is to calculate the basic reproductive number r 0 of the well-known susceptible-infectious-recovered (sir) model. several works have calculated r 0 for some outbreaks of specific locations. the estimated values are ranging from 2 to 3 [29] . however, only limited data have been used in the majority of works. achieving an accurate model of the reproduction of the virus is a challenging task, which involves many variables. unfortunately, the open data sets available nowadays are locally collected, imprecise with different criteria (lack of standardization on data collection), inconsistent data models and incomplete.one of the limitations of the data sets is that only cases confirmed by a laboratory test are included in them. the standard method of diagnosis is by real-time reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (rrt-pcr) from a nasopharyngeal swab. the infection can also be diagnosed from a combination of symptoms, risk factors and a chest ct scan showing features of pneumonia. thus, the infected cases without a positive laboratory test are not considered confirmed cases, on a general basis, in the time-series data available in the different open-source repositories. the same problem can be encountered when analyzing death cases. in many situations, only the ones that were previously confirmed by a laboratory test are included in the data sets.there are relevant variables that are not properly measured. for example, the fraction of infected non-asymptomatic cases in a given population can be only estimated by means of massive tests, which are rarely being done because of lack of resources. some exceptions are the massive tests done in small towns (for example in the north of italy) in which the tests indicated that the fraction of asymptomatic cases in the population could be significant (comparable or even larger than the symptomatic cases). therefore, asymptomatic cases play an important role in virus transmission [4] . furthermore, important inaccuracies have been reported on the use of fast tests. it is an important issue since their massive usage can improve the counting of real cases.the above limitations on the available data-sets have to be taken into consideration in any data-driven method to model or forecast the future spread of the pandemic.being able to predict the number of patients that will develop life-threatening symptoms is important since the disease frequently requires hospitalisation (and even intensive care unit admission) and challenges the healthcare system capacity [20] . one of the most important ways to measure the burden of covid-19 is mortality. the probability of dying when getting infected depends on different factors [49] , [36] , [26] : demographics [35] : age, gender, prevalence of diabetes, high blood pressure, obesity, etc. health system [26] : availability of artificial respiration equipment, intensive care units, specialized medical surveillance and treatment, etc.on the one hand, several studies have reported a higher level of mortality for older people [35] and even more aggravated in men. thus, protection strategies should be focused on more vulnerable age and gender groups.on the other hand, the capacity of each regional health system to cope with the pandemic is time-varying. most of the countries that had already suffered in a severe way the pandemic had their hospitals and physicians overwhelmed by the numbers of critical cases (e.g. italy, spain, the u.s.) [10] . the main objective in the control of the disease is to prevent the saturation or overload of the health system because it will be directly translated into a significant increase in mortality.many respiratory viruses have a seasonality because lower temperature and lower humidity help facilitate the transmission of the virus. there is no clear evidence that covid-19 is going to behave seasonally, reducing its transmission in summer. in the summer season in the southern hemisphere, in some regions of south america and australia, significant covid-19 outbreaks have been already reported. in [41] the authors show that in march 2020, the areas with significant community transmission of covid-19 had distribution roughly along the 30-50 n corridor at consistently similar weather patterns consisting of average temperatures of 5-11c, combined with low specific (3-6 g/kg) and absolute humidity (4-7 g/m3). in [45] , the authors study the relationship between temperature, humidity and the transmission rate of covid-19. they used data collected from all the cities in china with more than 100 cases. the authors use a lineal regression framework as a model. results indicate that one-degree celsius increase in temperature and one per cent increase in relative humidity lower r 0 by 0.0225 and 0.0158, respectively. the authors developed a web application 1 , where r 0 values for major worldwide cities can be obtained from temperature and humidity.for the control community, the different confinement strategies that can be implemented by a government clearly constitute control inputs to the system [3] . public health and social measures to slow or stop the spread of covid-19 are being implemented, with different intensities, worldwide.however, these are not the unique actions that a government can undertake in order to control the pandemic. for example, forcing the population to wear masks or scarves, and plastic gloves might have an inhibitory effect on the spread of the virus [13] and has not a significant impact on the economy (provided masks are produced at large scale).from a control point of view, the objective is twofold. on the one hand, it is important to assess the effectiveness of the different measures against the spread of the virus. on the other hand, actions should be planned in advance in order to mitigate the effects of the pandemic on the health system, the economy and society.it is not simple to determine the effect of the possible anti-measures to be undertaken by the regional governments. this is not a simple task for several reasons: (i) several inhibitory actions are generally implemented simultaneously. therefore, it cannot be evaluated which one has more impact, ii) the efficacy of the anti-measures depends on a number of factors, like demographics and weather conditions of the specific region under consideration, iii) the available data is, in many situations, imprecise and incomplete. the difficulties in predicting the effects of the covid-19 anti-measures on the regional evolution of disease is one side of the problem. another one is the inherent time-delay system nature of the dynamics of the disease. the effects of the undertaken measures are observed only weeks later. another issue is the level of fulfilment of the confinement measures found in each country.following the emergence of a novel coronavirus (sars-cov-2) and its spread outside of china, europe is now experiencing large epidemics. in response, many european countries have implemented unprecedented non-pharmaceutical interventions including case isolation, the closure of schools and universities, banning of mass gatherings and/or public events, and most recently, wide-scale social distancing including local and national lockdowns. in [9] , authors use a semi-mechanistic bayesian hierarchical model to attempt to infer the impact of these interventions across 11 european countries. they assume that changes in the reproductive number a measure of transmission -are an immediate response to these interventions being implemented rather than broader gradual changes in behaviour. in particular, this model estimates these changes by calculating backwards from the deaths observed over time to estimate transmission that occurred several weeks prior, allowing for the time lag between infection and death.one of the key assumptions of the model is that each intervention has the same effect on the reproduction number r 0 across countries and over time. this allows leveraging a greater amount of data across europe to estimate these effects. it also means that these results are driven strongly by the data from countries with more advanced epidemics, and earlier interventions, such as italy and spain. the main conclusion of this research was that it is critical that the current interventions remain in place and trends in cases and deaths are closely monitored in the coming days and weeks to provide reassurance that transmission of sars-cov-2 is slowing.many governments around the world closed the educational institutions in an attempt to contain the spread of the covid-19 pandemic, impacting over 91% of the worlds student population [42] .another important aspect has been tackled by the new york times: how income affects peoples abilities to stay home and practice social distancing [43] . wealthier people not only have more job security and benefits but also may be better able to avoid becoming sick.the authors in [46] use the baidu mobility index, measured by the total number of outside travels per day divided by the resident population, to find that reducing the number of outings can effectively decrease the new-onset cases; a 1% decline in the outing number will reduce about 1% of the new-onset-cases growth rate in 7 days (one serial interval). a first quantitative assessment of the impact of the italian government on the mobility and the spatial proximity of italians, through the analysis of a large-scale dataset on de-identified, geo-located smartphone users can be found in [37] .technology can play an important role to obtain mobility measures [34] . nowadays, everyone has a mobile phone equipped with a number of sensors, including gps, that are able to collect data about people mobility. furthermore, the internet and mobile phone operators can use their telecommunications towers to gather mobility patterns. of course, citizen privacy is an issue that has to be taken into consideration for data anonymization.the distinction between diagnosed and non-diagnosed is important because non-diagnosed individuals are more likely to spread the infection than diagnosed ones, since the latter are typically isolated, and can explain misperceptions of the case fatality rate and of the seriousness of the epidemic phenomenon [20] .currently, the majority of data available on covid-19 is used for describing the pandemic in terms of reports and visualizations 2 . although these techniques are useful to highlight the magnitude of the crisis, they are not enough for mitigating the problem. also, these are insufficient for decision-makers to anticipate the response to the virus propagation and evaluate the effectiveness of the implemented actions. for this reason, it is obvious that more efficient approaches are needed rapidly to i) model and forecast the spread and the consequences of the pandemic and ii) evaluate mitigation approaches that have been carried out. data-driven models, see for example [20] , [21] , can be such solution [48] , [15] . many data-based techniques can be applied. nevertheless, regression models, as in [6] , are the main tools for forecasting the effect of covid-19, ranging from classical machine learning approaches like linear regression [38] and gaussian processes [16] to sophisticated models based on neuronal networks [11] . variable screening can also help to detect the parameters that impact more on the propagation of the virus. these techniques require sufficient and high-quality data to provide a good estimation. depending on the model used, the quantity of data can vary notably from hundreds to millions of samples. moreover, a wide variety of data is necessary for accomplishing a good model of a complex system like the covid-19 pandemic. data from different disciplines is required, which hinders the data collection task. we highlight three pillars of data-driven approaches for fighting covid-19: i) informative variables for developing an accurate model, ii) objectives of the model: characterizing covid-19 pandemic, epidemic models and forecasting, etc. and iii) its use for efficient decision making. wish-list of variables: the list of variables is large since many aspects should be taken into consideration to develop accurate models. the considered variables can be divided into different categories according to their discipline 3 .-covid-19 variables: regional time series of the number of confirmed cases, suspicious cases, deaths, recovered, number of tests, hospitalized cases, icu cases, isolated positive cases, etc. when possible, the data should be divided per gender, age range, etc.-geographic variables: locations of covid-19 variables. the locations can be obtained from names (i.e. countries, cities. etc.) and/or gps coordinates: longitude and latitude.-demographic variables: population and density of population by location. these variables are required for normalization of the rest of the variables. also, the age structure of the population, the prevalence of secondary health conditions related to higher covid-19 mortality, etc.-health system variables: total number of icu beds, number of doctors and nurses, personal protective equipment (ppe), respirators, number and types of tests.-government measures: social distancing, movement restrictions, lockdowns, etc.-weather variables: temperature, relative humidity, radiation, among others.-contamination variables: air pollution, i.e. fine particulate matter p m 2.5 . the use of data in epidemic and forecasting models: by using the aforementioned variables, different models can be developed to anticipate the response to the propagation of covid-19. examples of forecasting analysis:-estimation of the infected population.-forecast of impact in health-system.-assessing the impact in terms of mortality. 3 the following list can be incomplete since other disciplines and variables can also be included.-analysis of seasonal behaviour. decision making: the final objective of the data-driven models is developing useful tools for helping governments and institutions to anticipate the response to the covid-19 propagation and evaluate their actions.-assessing the effectiveness of the measures.-planing ahead government actions.there exist different issues that can hinder the use of open data to address the challenges raised by the covid-19 pandemic:the different sources and variables required to undertake a given analysis is often addressed assembling several data sets into a single one. although the increased quantity of data sources presents new opportunities, working with such a variety of data reinforces the validity challenges [31] . another issue is that the sources of data are coming from a wide range of disciplines that can be familiar with very different formats and data representation. for instance, some available apis to get data on covid-19 provide json files. this format is widely used in computer science in web applications. however, for instance, mathematicians or epidemiologists cannot be familiar with such format.the needs of the outbreak require immediate response, which translates in obtaining the latest information available. this raises some important challenges. for example, government measures are changing rapidly. often information is outdated by the time it has been identified. the number of countries implementing or amending measures increases daily [2] . the daily availability of the data can be an issue for working with multiple data sources simultaneously.the world health organization defines, in its global covid-19 surveillance document, a confirmed case as a person with laboratory confirmation of covid-19 infection, irrespective of clinical signs and symptoms. at the outbreak of the pandemic, the access to massive tests was very limited, and often, only a reduced fraction of the hospitalized cases were tested at a laboratory level. furthermore, very few data sets provide information about the number of suspected cases. even under the hypothesis that everyone with minor symptoms is tested, this would only provide an estimate of the symptomatic cases of the disease. the study of the fraction of asymptomatic cases is an active field of research (e.g. [30] ) not only because it is key to the estimation of the total number of infected cases, but because it plays a fundamental role in the spread of the virus.during the most severe periods of the virus spread in a country, the number of death cases reported by the administration differs in many situations considerably from the real one because only the deaths with previous laboratory confirmation of the disease are included. thus, the study of national death registers suggests that there are notably and unexpected increases in death rates according to the historical numbers. for instance in new york city, it has been reported 5330 more deaths than expected in the last month 4 , only 3350 of these can be accounted for covid-19 reasons. these figures suggest that there exist undercounting on the real number of deaths. another example can found in spain, where the "sistema de monitorizacin de la mortalidad diaria (momo) 5 system registers the total number of deaths under any circumstances. the last report on april 7th indicates an increase of more than 50% of unexpected deaths in the last month. such increment is even more significant in men, where it reaches more than 60%.the mortality rates are much more difficult to estimate since the estimates are often based on the number of deaths relative to the number of confirmed cases of infection, which can be a small fraction of the real ones [5] . consequently, mortality rates comparisons between countries make compulsory the implementation of correcting factors based on the estimation of covid-19 infected cases and deaths non registered by the respective administrations.also, when considering the increase of mortality due to saturation of the health care system, one has to take into consideration the fact that the patients who die on any given day were infected much earlier, and thus the denominator of the mortality rate should be the total number of patients infected at the same time as those who died [5] .another important parameter to evaluate mortality is to have stratified data according to age groups. however, such information is not provided by the majority of data sources.in order to better understand the disease, and improve the models and strategies to fight covid-19, every case should be tracked with its own timeline. that is, for each case, relevant information about when symptoms appeared, medical treatments, evolution, degree of isolation, etc. should be available on a country-wide level. this data should be published anonymously, with a de-identification process to prevent personal identity from being revealed. the data, and the time corresponding to the change of each individual, should be published by an official source in a structured way, at least, with daily frequency. this is the opinion of many experts and members of the open-source community 6 .an effort of obtaining individual case data can be found in [33] . the authors carried out a survey of 24 questions related to the impact of covid-19 (covid19impact) on citizens in spain 7 . the survey was responded to by 146.728 participants over a period of fewer than two days (44 hours). the questions were about social contact behaviour, financial impact, working situation and health status. the results of the survey show the negative impact of covid-19 on the life of citizens. it is a clear example of how the collaboration of the citizens can be relevant to gather information on the effects of covid-19. a similar work in uk can be found in [27] , where the authors created the e real world worry dataset of 5,000 texts 8 . the data analysis suggests that people in the uk worry about their family and the economic situation.since the governments are continuously adjusting their response to the virus, it is not unusual to find out abrupt changes in the trend of a time series because a new methodology has been implemented. for example, on 12th february, a sudden spike in new cases in china with covid19 (15.152 new cases) was due to changed diagnosis method: a combination of sarscov2 nucleic acid test and clinical covid19 features [47] .another relevant issue is that regions in the same country may provide data under the same label, but with a different meaning. a good example is the number of uic cases; there might be regions reporting the accumulative number of confirmed cases that required these units, and others the number of uic units used by covid-19 patients. something similar happens with the number of laboratory tests. sometimes they refer to the total number of tests carried out and sometimes to the number of individuals that were tested (in many situations, the sources do not describe accurately the meaning of the counts).the open-data sources on covid-19 are constantly improving. in order to provide more meaningful information, new variables are incorporated into data sets. this translates into a change in the structure of the data, which requires adjusting the code to download and process the information. when regional data is collected from the official open-data portals of different countries, a surveillance effort is required to keep track of the different modifications. in many situations, the new data-files appear in different locations with different names.there are important differences in the ways that the governments are reporting the data related to covid-19. furthermore, there are some concerns about the transparency of countries regarding the data provided.some institutions are providing daily reports on the evolution of the pandemic in the world. they are of different nature: global institutions, european union institutions, universities, newspapers, etc. we enumerate here the most relevant ones, at least from our experience. we highlight the ones that provide updated information on a regular basis in the open-data repository with easy access. some of the enumerated institutions are making a great effort to provide consolidated data, describing in a rather exhaustive form, the sources and limitations of the provided datasets. we describe in this section the nature and characteristics of the information provided, without detailing the specifics of the data sets that can be recovered from them (this is done for relevant data sets in subsequent sections).the primary role of the world health organization (who) is to direct international health within the united nations' system and to lead partners in global health responses. in the framework of the pandemic covid-19, the who is providing continuous updates about the current situation all around the world 9 . in [23] , the who provides guidelines to follow in the privacy of our house as well as in public, q&a pages on the most common questions about the virus, how it spreads and how it is affecting people worldwide, and it addresses myth busters related to covid-19, in order to provide a reliable source of information (see [24] ).johns hopkins experts in global public health, infectious disease, and emergency preparedness have been at the forefront of the international response to covid-19 (see https: //coronavirus.jhu.edu/). this university provides a daily update on the global map of the pandemic. the data set provided by jhu (see sub-subsection 7.1.1) is one of the most frequently used by researchers and journal media.the blavatnik school of government is a department in university of oxford. they are working on to understand the covid-19 pandemic and the policy responses we see around the world. one of their projects related to the study of covid-19 is tracking what governments around the world are doing, and how they compare to others 10 .regarding the comparison of confinement strategies developed by governments, they have created a common index named stringency index. this index is based on data obtained by the oxford covid-19 government response tracker (oxcgrt), which systematically collects information on several different common policy responses governments have taken.the european union open data portal 11 gives access to open data published by eu institutions and bodies. the european data portal (edp) acts as single access to point to open data that is published by national open data portals and institutions in the eu member states and additional countries. there are numerous datasets on edp that reference "covid" or "corona". also, less specific data sets describing former health infections, epidemics or pandemics are also provided 12 .the joint research centre (jrc) is the european commission's science and knowledge service 13 which employs scientists to carry out research in order to provide independent scientific advice and support to eu policy.the european center for disease prevention and control (ecdc), established in 2004 after the 2003 sars outbreak and located in solna, sweden, is an independent agency of the european union (eu) whose mission is to strengthen europe's defences against infectious diseases. ecdc publishes numerous scientific and technical reports covering various issues related to the prevention and control of transmission (medicine) communicable diseases. towards the end of every calendar year, ecdc publishes its annual epidemiological report, which analyses surveillance data and infectious disease threats. as well as offering an overview of the public health situation in the eu, the report offers an indication of where further public health action may be required in order to reduce the burden caused by communicable diseases. as other organizations, ecdc is closely monitoring the covid-19 pandemic, providing risk assessments, public health guidance, advice on response activities to the eu member states and the eu commission, and daily-updated data on current outbreak [14] .for eu level surveillance, ecdc requests eu/eea countries and the uk to report laboratory-confirmed cases of covid-19 within 24 hours after identification. this is done through the early warning and response system (ewrs).the european centre for medium-range weather forecasts (ecmwf) is an independent intergovernmental organization supported by 34 states based in reading [7] . ecmwf is both a research institute and a 24/7 operational service, producing and disseminating numerical weather predictions to its member states, co-operating states and the broader community. ecmwf also archives data and makes this available to authorized users. some data is also made available under licence, and some are publicly available. 11 https://data.europa.eu/euodp/es/data/ 12 https://www.europeandataportal.eu/en/highlights/covid-19. 13 https://ec.europa.eu/knowledge4policy/organization/jrc-joint-research-centre en.good examples of open-data provided by the united nations are reported in [32] . moreover, [25] contains the most up-to-date covid-19 cases and latest trend plot. it covers china, canada, australia (at province/state level), and the rest of the world (at country level, represented by either the country centroids or their capitals) and the us at county-level.the new york times is releasing a series of data files with cumulative counts of covid-19 cases in the united states, at the state and county level, over time. the time series data is compiled from state and local governments and health departments. since january 2020, the times has tracked cases of coronavirus in real time as they were identified after testing. the data have been used to power maps and generate reports about the outbreak. the data begins with the first reported coronavirus case in washington state on jan. 21, 2020. the times publishes regular updates to the data in a github repository 14 .our world in data (owid) is an online scientific publication that focuses on large global problems such as poverty, disease, hunger, climate change, war, existential risks, and inequality. covid-19 data provided by our world in data can be found at their open-data portal 15 .the multinational technology company google has developed a visual covid-19 map, where also relevant information can be found worldwide and by country https://google.com/ covid19-map/. the map is continuously updated, and the data is taken from wikipedia 16 . they also present statistics about the number of confirmed cases, cases per 1 million of people (normalized data), number of people recovered, and deaths.another tool developed by google that can be used to obtain data about covid-19 is google dataset search 17 . numerous data sets can be found by the term covid-19. the application allows users to filter the data sets by several fields such as last updated, download format, usage rights, topic, and accessibility.acaps is an independent information provider (https://www.acaps.org). it is not affiliated to the un or any other organization. the acaps analysis team is mainly dedicated to researching and analyzing global and crisis specific data. acaps was established in 2009 as a non-profit, non-governmental project with the aim of providing independent, groundbreaking humanitarian analysis to help humanitarian workers, influencers, fundraisers, and donors make better decisions. they provide regional reports on the pandemic, and additional information like description of the worldwide measures against the spread of the virus available at https://www.acaps.org/what-we-do/reports and in [2] .organization for economic co-operation and development (oecd)the organisation for economic co-operation and development (oecd) 18 is an international organization that, together with governments, policymakers and citizens, has the goal of establishing evidence-based international standards and finding solutions to a range of social, economic and environmental challenges. from improving economic performance and creating jobs to fostering strong education and fighting international tax evasion, they provide a forum and knowledge hub for data and analysis, exchange of experiences, best-practice sharing, and advice on public policies and international standard-setting. oecd provides different reports and data about the pandemic 19 : government actions, economic impact, etc.the mrc centre for global infectious disease analysis (mrc gida) is an international resource and centre of excellence for research and capacity building on the epidemiological analysis and modelling of infectious diseases, and to undertake applied collaborative work with national and international agencies to support policy planning and response operations against infectious disease threats. the mcr presents reports on covid-19 under five categories 20 : i) weekly-forecasts, ii) resources, iii) information, iv) video updates, and v) publications.furthermore, in collaboration with several departments of imperial college london (imperial college covid-19 response team) and oxford university, they have developed a model 21 for estimating the number of infections and the impact of non-pharmaceutical interventions on covid-19 in 11 european countries [16] .the ihme is an independent global health research center at the university of washington 22 . they have developed a model to determine the extent and timing of deaths and excess demand for hospital services due to covid-19 in the us [10] . the work use data on confirmed covid-19 deaths from who and local and national governments; data on hospital capacity and utilization for us states; and observed covid-19 utilization data from different locations. the model for death rate is based on curve-fitting using wuhan data, considered more stable. then, from the projected death rates, the model estimates hospital service utilization using an individual-level microsimulation model. individuals requiring admission in hospital and date of admission, and the age-specific fraction of admissions requiring icu care, by using the average age pattern. for the simulation of deaths, they used data from italy, china, south korea, and the us (they did not have enough data only from the usa at the time of developing the model). the main outputs of the model are: the number of deaths, bed and icu occupancy, and ventilator use. the main conclusion of the work is that the epidemic will cause an unmanageable load on health systems in the us in the following weeks. a web service, where the projections of the model can be determined for each country and for the following four months, is available 23 . the information provided is: i) hospital resources needs, including the number of beds, the number of icu beds, and ventilators; ii) the number of death per day, and iii) the total number of deaths.midas is a global network of scientists and practitioners from academia, industry, government, and non-governmental agencies, who develop and use computational, statistical and mathematical models to improve the understanding of infectious disease dynamics as it relates to pathogenesis, transmission, effective control strategies, and forecasting 24 . they have created a portal for covid-19 modeling. the portal makes available an important catalogue of data resources, including data sets, webinars, and funding announcements.open data watch is a non-profit, non-governmental organization founded by three development data specialists (https://opendatawatch.com/). it monitors progress and provides information and assistance to guide the implementation of open data systems. the open data watch team is experienced in the development of data management and statistical capacity-building in developing countries. they have collected data from different sources all around the world related to the covid-19 pandemic. indeed, to address the ongoing need for data-driven decision making, open data watch has put together some articles, organized by the stages of the data value chain: availability, openness, dissemination, and use and uptake. these papers are updated as new information becomes available. these references and related links can be found in [12] .this section covers repositories of open source communities. open sources communities are dedicated to joining people with similar interests. these have been widely developed in the software field, where many professionals and practitioners join their efforts to achieve bigger goals on software projects. these communities are playing a very active role in facilitating access to covid-19 data sets from official open portals all over the world.github is a company (a subsidiary of microsoft) for hosting software development using git. it provides control versions and project management, among other tools. numerous open software projects are daily posted free of charge. since covid-19 outbreak, many projects, including the data used for these projects, have been posted. the majority of the data sets included in this paper can be obtained from github.examples: kaggle is a community for data scientist and machine learning practitioners. kaggle allows users to find and publish data sets, explore and build models in a web-based data-science environment, work with other data scientists and machine learning engineers, and enter competitions to solve data science challenges. regarding covid-19 pandemic, the portal opens a new challenge weekly to work on covid-19 data 25 . the challenge consists of forecasting confirmed cases and fatalities for the following week. furthermore, some data analysis posts can be found for each competition 26 . the challenges opened up to the date (10/04/2020) can be found at.https://www.kaggle.com/c/covid19-global-forecasting-week-1 https://www.kaggle.com/c/covid19-global-forecasting-week-2 https://www.kaggle.com/c/covid19-global-forecasting-week-3 https://www.kaggle.com/c/covid19-global-forecasting-week-4moreover, they have opened the covid-19 open research dataset challenge (cord-19), a competition aimed at developing text and data mining tools that can help the medical community develop answers to high priority scientific questions https://www.kaggle.com/ allen-institute-for-ai/cord-19-research-challenge. the available data set is composed of a corpus of more than 44.000 full text documents, bout covid-19, sars-cov-2, and related coronaviruses.this section presents the main available data sets that can be found on the internet related to covid-19. the section is divided into two parts. first, we present international data sets that provide global information related to the virus impact of each country, such as number of total/new confirmed cases and number of total/new confirmed death. second, we 25 https://www.kaggle.com/tags/covid19. 26 for example: https://www.kaggle.com/frlemarchand/covid-19-forecasting-with-an-rnn include a number of regional data sets, where local information can be found. although the information can be redundant on several data sets, we believe that it could be interesting to validate the developed models/analysis.in this section, we briefly introduce the institution that provides the data and includes the link (url) to access it easily.johns hopkins experts in global public health, infectious disease, and emergency preparedness have been at the forefront of the international response to covid-19 27 . this university provides a daily update on the global map of the pandemic 28 .the covid-19 data set of johns hopkins university can be downloaded in .csv format from the folder /csse covid 19 data/csse covid 19 time series at github repository https://github.com/cssegisanddata/covid-19. six .csv files can be downloadedthe global files refer to worldwide covid-19 data. a reduced number of countries are further divided into regions (e.g. china and australia). however, most of them, like spain, or italy, are not divided into regions. the us data .csv files correspond to the united states. all the data refer to accumulated cases. that is, cases up to the date of the row in which the data is consigned. furthermore, the geographical coordinates of each region/country are also available.jhu also provides information on how the data could be smoothed in order to analyze if the "curve has flattened". flattening the curve involves reducing the number of new covid-19 cases from one day to the next. this helps prevent healthcare systems from becoming overwhelmed. the data plots that can be found at https://coronavirus.jhu.edu/data/ new-cases are obtained by means of a 5-day moving average that is obtained for each day by averaging the values of that day, the two days before, and the two next days. this approach helps to avoid major events (such as a change in reporting methods) from skewing the data.this dataset is sourced from the european centre for disease prevention and control (ecdc). the ecdc publishes full time-series data for the number of confirmed covid-19 cases and deaths daily for countries around the world.each day the ecdc collects data from 6am to 10am cet and publishes this data via its covid-19 dashboard 29 . this data set is then also made publicly available through downloadable files in different formats 30 .this data set can be also downloaded from the open-portal of our world in data: the majority of the following data sets can be found in github, searching by the term covid-19.the argentina ministry of health provides daily updates on the covid-19 spreading, including data on the number of infected people divided by regions 34 .the data corresponding to the different regions of australia can be downloaded from the johns hopkins university github repository 35 . the regional australian covid-19 data is integrated into the global time series .csv files. the available information is: i) confirmed cases, ii) death cases, iii) recovered cases. see sub-subsection 7.1.1 for further details.the data corresponding to the different regions of china can be downloaded from the johns hopkins university github repository 36 . the regional covid-19 chinese data is integrated into the global time series .csv files. the available information is: i) confirmed cases, ii) death cases, iii) recovered cases. see sub-subsection 7.1.1 for further details.the national health commission of the people's republic of china daily updates the available information on the situation in china 37 .the so-called dipartimento della protezione civile (civil protection department), i.e. the national body in italy that deals with the prediction, prevention and management of emergency events, daily updates a github repository, where the covid-19 time series by regions, and provinces, can be downloaded (https://github.com/pcm-dpc/covid-19). the csv file corresponding to the daily data of each of the 20 italian regions 38 provides the number of confirmed cases, deaths, recovered, hospitalized, confined at home and icu cases. moreover, the daily number of tests is also available.in addition, gedi gruppo editoriale, a relevant italian media conglomerate, provides a portal where those data are arranged in several interactive graphs, including also the impact on the local mobility 39 . the data corresponding to france is provided by the different regions and published by the public france health system at the official open data portal https://www.data.gouv.fr/.among the different data sets available under the search of the term covid, three are highlighted by the portal (organized into .csv files): covid-19 hospital data: hospitalized cases, iuc cases, deaths per department, region, gender and age range [17] . covid-19 emergency room admissions: hospitalized cases, iuc cases, deaths per department, region, gender and age range [39] . covid-19 laboratory tests: number of positive and negative laboratory tests per department, gender, and age group [18] .french covid-19 data sets in github are: covid-19 epidemic french national data 40 . projet d'historisation du nombre de cas par rgion du covid-19 41 .the main official open data provider in germany is the robert koch institute 42 , a public health institute in germany. it provides, by means of a catalogue of infectious diseases 43 , pertinent information on each one (e.g. sars). in particular, risk assessments, the spread of the epidemic, epidemiological studies, etc. for the covid-19 can be found 44 . moreover, it provides daily situation reports of covid-19 in germany [28] . covid-19 case numbers in germany by state, over time, can be found at the github repository https://github.com/jgehrcke/covid-19-germany-gae.the official portal for data reports on covid-19 is https://www.mspbs.gov.py/reporte-covid19.html. the data is provided by the public health system. the reports are stratified by age and gender, including data about the number of cases, number of deaths, and recovered people. furthermore, data on covid-19 spreading in paraguay can be found at https://github.com/torresmateo/covidpy-rest/blob/master/data/covidpy.csv as github repository. the information on covid-19 spreading in south africa can be found at https://github.com/ dsfsi/covid19za as github repository. the repository, named covid-19 data for south africa is maintained and hosted by data science for social impact research group, led by dr vukosi marivate, at the university of pretoria.the regional covid-19 spanish data is collected by the spanish government. it is available at the national open data portal (https://datos.gob.es/). different health data sets can be searched at its open data catalogue 45 . the specific search "covid" provides data sets related to the global spanish data classified into regions (e.g. evolucin de enfermedad por el coronavirus (covid-19) ) or specific of a particular spanish region (e.g. evolucin del coronavirus (covid-19) en euskadi ). in the github repository https://github.com/datadista/ datasets/tree/master/covid%2019, the covid-19 time series by regions (ccaa) can be downloaded. also, auxiliary information like available iuc posts per region before the outbreak of the epidemic, age distribution of confirmed cases, etc. can be found there. furthermore, similar data can be found at https://www.epdata.es/ searching by the term covid-19. it is important to notice that each of the different regions might report case numbers with different criteria.the u.k. government is collecting data and making them officially available by the public health england (phe), i.e. the executive agency of the department of health and social care in the u.k. the phe took on the role of the health protection agency, the national treatment agency for substance misuse and a number of other health bodies. the official open-data resource provided by the u.k. government can be found at https://www.gov.uk/ government/publications/covid-19-track-coronavirus-cases. this dashboard is showing reported cases by upper tier local authority in england (utla). an excel file with relevant information can be downloaded from the dashboard. the information is organized at different levels: u.k.: total number of confirmed cases and deaths in the u.k. deaths by country: england, scotland, wales and north ireland. deaths by nhs regions: london, south east, south west, east of england, midlands, north east and yorkshire, north west. deaths by utla authorities: daily cases at each of more than 149 different upper tier local authorities.a description of how the confirmed and deaths cases are counted is also available at https:// www.gov.uk/guidance/coronavirus-covid-19-information-for-the-public#number-of-cases-and-deaths. the .csv files corresponding to the number of confirmed cases and deaths can also be downloaded from the official public health system 46 . additional data set reporting the uk covid-19 cases can also be found at https:// github.com/tomwhite/covid-19-uk-data as github repository.the data corresponding to the united states can be obtained from the 2019 novel coronavirus covid-19 (2019-ncov) data set from johns hopkins university center for systems science and engineering (jhu csse). this data set is available in github repository https://github.com/cssegisanddata/covid-19/, which is updated daily by jhu-csss [25] .another relevant source for the u.s. is the centers for disease control and prevention 47 . this entity publishes different data on the covid-19 cases by state and auxiliary information as the number of tests carried out. the cdc also publishes weekly surveillance reports 48 .moreover, the covid tracking project collects and publishes 49 the testing data available for u.s. states and territories, divided by states. similar information can also be obtained from https://coronavirus.1point3acres.com/en, including canada.last, the new york times is releasing a series of data files with cumulative counts of covid-19 cases in the united states, at the state and county level, over time. these data can be found at https://github.com/nytimes/covid-19-data as a github repository.in this section, we include data sets relevant for the study and development of models of covid-19, such as demography, government measures, weather and climate data. these are variables that have been demonstrated to impact on the virus propagation. -european environment agency: the data set "population density dis-aggregated with corine land cover 2000" provides a geotiff format file 51 . age structure: our world in data provides a report on the present situation of age structure in the planet and by countries [40] . the corresponding data set is available at https://ourworldindata.org/age-structure. the oxcgrt of oxford university provides an online api to access the country stringency data at https://covidtracker.bsg.ox.ac.uk/about-api. in addition, the full data set can be found at https://www.bsg.ox.ac.uk/research/research-projects/oxfordcovid-19-government-response-tracker.the epidemicforecasting.org website provides a data set about mitigation measures carried out by countries at http://epidemicforecasting.org/about. moreover, they also offer the gleamviz simulator to explore realistic epidemic spreading scenarios at the global scale 52 .the academic medical center pennmedicine from the university of pennsylvania has developed an application named chime (covid-19 hospital impact model for epidemics). it is designed to assist hospitals and public health officials to understand hospital capacity needs as they relate to the covid-19 pandemic. the application is based on a data model available at https://code-for-philly.gitbook.io/chime/.the open government partnership (opg) organization has created a list of open government approaches to fight covid-19 https://www.opengovpartnership.org/collectingopen-government-approaches-to-covid-19/. the approaches are separated by country and regions. also, a brieft description and url of each one can found. -european climate data store: the european commission has entrusted ecmwf with the implementation of the copernicus climate change service (c3s). the mission of c3s is to provide authoritative, quality-assured information to support adaptation and mitigation policies in a changing climate. at the heart of the c3s infrastructure is the climate data store 53 (cds), which provides information about the past, present and future climate in terms of essential climate variables (ecvs) and derived climate indicators.-the copernicus climate change service (c3s*) has worked with environmental software experts b-open 54 to develop an application that allows health authorities and epidemiology centres to explore whether temperature and humidity affect the spread of the coronavirus. this application is freely accessible from the c3s climate data store [8] . european commissions joint research centre (jrc): different open-data projects at jrc can be of interest for the scientific community fighting covid-19. we highlight here the following one:-photovoltaic geographical information system (pvgis): the focus of pvgis is research in solar resource assessment, photovoltaic (pv) performance studies, and the dissemination of knowledge and data about solar radiation and pv performance. the pvgis web application 55 , allows to access to meteorological data pertinent to the study of the seasonal behaviour of the pandemic. three tools are available: i) photovoltaic performance, ii) solar radiation, iii) typical meteorological year (tmy tool).the national oceanic and atmospheric administration (noaa) is an american scientific agency within the united states department of commerce that focuses on the conditions of the oceans, major waterways, and the atmosphere. it provides thought its open climate data portal 56 provides free access to global historical weather and climate data in addition to station history information. these data include quality controlled daily, monthly, seasonal, and yearly measurements of temperature, precipitation, wind, etc.nasa's goal in earth science is to observe, understand, and model the earth system to discover how it is changing. from an open-data perspective, nasa's project prediction of worldwide energy resource (power) can be very useful to recollect time series and monthly means of the most relevant weather and climate variables for a given location. power project 57 was initiated to improve upon the current renewable energy data set and to create new data sets from new satellite systems. the power project targets three 53 https://cds.climate.copernicus.eu/. 54 https://www.bopen.eu/. 55 https://ec.europa.eu/jrc/en/pvgis 56 climate data online (cdo): https://www.ncdc.noaa.gov/cdo-web/. 57 https://power.larc.nasa.gov/ user communities: (1) renewable energy, (2) sustainable buildings, and (3) agroclimatology. the access to the information can be done through the data access viewer 58 , which is a responsive web mapping application providing data subsetting, charting, and visualization tools in an easy-to-use interface.there are many online apis that provide weather data 59 . some of them can be used free of charge for a limited number of requests. as an example, see worl weather online 60 . outbreak simulator: a simplified model of a disease process. the goal is to learn how epidemics unfold in general 65 . coronavirus: why you must act now politicians, community leaders and business leaders: what should you do and when? 66 .in this paper, we provide a review of relevant open-data sources for better understanding the worldwide spread of the covid-19. we enumerate the variables required to obtain consistent epidemiological and forecasting models. we focus not only on the specific covid-19 timeseries but also on a set of auxiliary variables related to the study of its potential seasonal behaviour, the effect of age structure and prevalence of secondary health conditions in the mortality, the effectiveness of government actions, etc. we analyze the present situation of the available covid-19 open-data. unfortunately, it is far from ideal because of a good number of issues like data inconsistency, changing criteria, a large diversity of sources, non-comparable metrics between countries, delays, etc. despite the difficulties, the availability of open data resources on covid-19 and related variables provides many opportunities to different communities. in particular, epidemiologists, datadriven researches, health care specialists, machine learning community, data scientists, etc. with the goal of facilitating these communities the access to the required open-sources, we identify the principal open-data entities pertinent to the study of covid-19. we enumerate different open data sets (and their corresponding repositories) related to covid-19 cases at a worldwide scale, but also at a more regional level. we provide specific information about the data resources for a selection of countries that have been selected because of the intensity with which the pandemic has impacted them, or for their relevance in the seasonal study of covid-19 (south-hemisphere). finally, we provide other open resources that facilitate the incorporation of demographics, weather and climate variables, etc.to keep pace with the pandemic, this paper will be updated regularly in arxiv 67 during the covid-19 pandemic. we thank feedback and collaboration from the community to enrich and update the paper. contributors can contact the conco-team via e-mail: conco.team@gmail.com.las laringitis agudas son enfermedades inflamatorias muy frecuentes de la mucosa larngea y de instauracin rpida. la inflamacin produce molestias faringolarngeas y disfona autolimitada. cuando los sntomas se mantienen sospechamos laringitis crnica u otras patologas como parlisis o tumores larngeos. la laringitis crnica supone inflamacin de la submucosa e hiperplasia epitelial con o sin displasia. los pacientes con laringitis crnica pueden desarrollar lesiones premalignas y malignas. todo paciente en el que la disfona persiste 3 semanas debe remitirse a la consulta de otorrinolaringologa (orl)1.la mayor parte de las laringitis agudas son de causa vrica en el contexto de una infeccin de las vas respiratorias altas. se producen en meses invernales, a veces de forma epidmica, por rinovirus, adenovirus, virus influenza, herpes simple (lesiones orofarngeas con laringitis asociada) y coronavirus2. las laringitis bacterianas se adquieren por contagio de un paciente o ms habitualmente por sobreinfeccin de una laringitis vrica. la epiglotitis o supraglotitis es la infeccin bacteriana ms grave. en los adultos se produce por streptococcus viridans, streptococcus pyogenes, diplococcus pneumoniae y haemophilus influenzae b 1 . candida albicans produce laringitis aguda que puede cronificarse.los traumatismos, el abuso vocal, la alergia a inhalantes o reacciones alrgicas medicamentosas, alimentarias o por picadura de insectos, y enfermedades autoinmunes pueden producir inflamacin larngea aguda. las laringitis agudas por inhalacin de sustancias nocivas afectan el epitelio y la lmina subepitelial, pero si la causa es trmica las lesiones sern ms profundas. la tos crnica, el aclaramiento vocal repetido y procedimientos como laringoscopia, broncoscopia, esofagoscopia o intubacin traqueal pueden tambin inflamar la laringe.puntos clave laringitis aguda. las laringitis agudas suelen deberse a infecciones vricas. la laringitis aguda produce disfona, en general autolimitada, pero a veces da origen a lesiones en la mucosa gltica que cronifican la disfona. el paciente con disfona de 3 semanas de evolucin debe explorarse en consulta de orl. laringitis crnica. supone una inflamacin de la submucosa e hiperplasia epitelial con o sin displasia. el reflujo faringolarngeo junto con el tabaco son causas frecuentes de laringitis crnica. faringitis aguda. entre el 30 y el 60% de las faringitis de los adultos son vricas. las faringitis bacterianas representan menos del 10% y el estreptococo betahemoltico del grupo a (sbhga) es el germen responsable de la mayora de ellas. si el tratamiento antibitico se instaura antes de 10 das del comienzo de la enfermedad, se previene la fiebre reumtica, pero no la glomerulonefritis postestreptoccica. complicaciones. la presencia de trismo anuncia una complicacin supurada de la amigdalitis. enfermedades hematolgicas graves se pueden manifestar como faringoamigdalitis.  laringitis vrica. cursa con disfona, molestia/dolor larngeo y tos seca irritativa que suele persistir tras mejorar la disfona3. adems, puede haber malestar general, febrcula y escalofros. el diagnstico se basa en la clnica. cuando evoluciona bien remite en menos de 7 das. puede aadirse una sobreinfeccin bacteriana (haemophillus influenzae, moraxella catharralis y streptococcus pneumoniae) que hace la tos productiva con expectoracin mucopurulenta. si llegamos a explorar la laringe mediante laringoscopia indirecta o mediante fibroscopia, encontraremos edema y enrojecimiento difuso de la mucosa (fig. 1 ). la presencia de secreciones mucopurulentas puede indicar infeccin bacteriana. supraglotitis. es ms frecuente en varones (4:1). en fases iniciales los sntomas parecen los de la laringitis vrica, pero progresa produciendo disfagia y odinofagia intensas (el paciente no traga su saliva), hay una afectacin marcada del estado general, fiebre alta y voz apagada (ocupacin farngea). puede producir estridor inspiratorio y marcado trabajo respiratorio que aumenta en decbito, por lo que el paciente se mantiene sentado inclinado hacia delante. no suele haber propiamente disfona, dado que las cuerdas vocales por lo general no estn afectadas3. los pacientes con supraglotitis presentan orofaringe normal o levemente eritematosa. en los adultos se intentar la visualizacin de la hipofaringe y laringe mediante laringoscopia indirecta o fibroscopia (estas maniobras deben evitarse en los nios por el riesgo de producir asfixia). encontraremos edema y eritema en la regin supragltica. en los adultos la hinchazn y enrojecimiento de la epiglotis suele ser menor que en los nios. la pared posterior de la hipofaringe puede estar tambin afectada. la radiografa simple cervical pstero-anterior y lateral se solicita cuando no es posible visualizar la laringe. candidiasis. se presenta tpicamente como disfona con o sin sensacin de cuerpo extrao. la candida saprofita afecta ms frecuentemente a pacientes inmunosuprimidos (virus de la inmunodeficiencia humana [vih], alcoholismo), pacientes que utilizan corticoides inhalados o que han recibido radioterapia. en la exploracin encontraremos zonas blanquecinas sobre la mucosa de supraglotis o de las cuerdas vocales. reacciones alrgicas. cursan con sensacin de globo farngeo, disfona y en casos ms graves disfagia, estridor inspiratorio y compromiso total de la va area secundario al marcado edema de la epiglotis y de los repliegues aritenoepiglticos. el edema lingual y de vula, junto con el posible antecedente de episodios similares orienta el diagnstico. en la laringitis inhalatoria la clnica asocia disnea en mayor o menor grado, disfona, tos y odinofagia de instauracin progresiva. la inflamacin afecta a la epiglotis y vestbulo larngeo y puede intensificarse durante las primeras 12-24 horas3.afortunadamente, la mayora de las laringitis agudas tienen un curso autolimitado, requiriendo slo tratamiento sintomtico, usualmente ambulatorio. no obstante, la curacin de las laringitis agudas previene la formacin de lesiones que a su vez hacen traumtica la fonacin y pueden producir disfona crnica.la afectacin larngea puede comprometer la va area. los criterios de gravedad en la valoracin de pacientes con disnea aguda son: presencia de obnubilacin, agitacin psicomotriz, cianosis, signos de mala perfusin tisular, imposibilidad de toser o hablar, uso de musculatura accesoria para respirar, incoordinacin traco-abdominal, frecuencia respiratoria superior a 30 r.p.m., frecuencia cardiaca mayor de 125 l.p.m., saturacin de o2 [sao2] inferior al 90% con oxigenoterapia, presin parcial de o2 [po2] inferior a 60 mm hg o ph menor de 7,25. los pacientes con disnea grave deben tener un tratamiento que garantice el soporte vital avanzado, en algunos casos con intubacin orotraqueal o traqueotoma.en general, los sntomas y la exploracin conducen al diagnstico. el anlisis de sangre mostrar leucocitosis con neutrofilia en las laringitis bacterianas. la tomografa computadorizada (tc) cervical para el diagnstico de posibles infecciones de los espacios profundos del cuello (absceso periamigdalino, angina de ludwig, absceso retrofarngeo) se realiza en casos dudosos cuando no hay compromiso de la va area o hemos asegurado la va area.las laringitis agudas catarrales suelen evolucionar favorablemente con tratamiento antiinflamatorio (ibuprofeno 600 mg cada 8 horas por va oral (vo), abundante hidratacin y reposo vocal. en pacientes ms comprometidos, que son afortunadamente la minora, la epinefrina nebulizada y los corticoides pueden ser tiles. el uso de antibiticos en la laringitis aguda no ha demostrado beneficio sobre el uso de placebo, por lo que no se recomiendan salvo que exista evidencia de sobreinfeccin bacteriana4.en el tratamiento de la supraglotitis, lo primordial es el control de la va area. est indicado en todos los casos terapia de soporte con oxgeno, monitorizacin estricta, perfusin de sueros intravenosos (iv) y antibiticos como cefotaxima 1-2 g cada 8 horas iv o ceftriaxona 1-2 g al da iv o amoxicilina/clavulnico 1 g cada 6-8 horas iv. en caso de alergia puede emplearse cloramfenicol o aztreonam asociados a vancomicina. el tratamiento debe durar entre 7 y 10 das, pero se puede administrar vo cuando los sntomas han remitido. aunque no existen estudios que demuestren su eficacia, el uso de corticoides iv en dosis de 1 m/kg al da es una prctica habitual5. hasta un tercio de los pacientes con epiglotitis aguda pueden requerir intubacin orotraqueal o traqueotoma.en las afecciones larngeas micticas, adems de controlar los factores de riesgo, se deben incluir antifngicos orales como fluconazol (50-100 mg cada 24 horas) o itraconazol (100-200 mg cada 24 horas en 1-2 tomas) durante un mnimo de 10 das.el tratamiento de la laringitis alrgica depender de la gravedad del cuadro. si es leve, se indicarn antihistamnicos (loratadina, fenoxifenadina) y en cuadros moderados o graves corticoides iv (1 mg/kg al da) y/o epinefrina subcutnea en dosis nica de 0,2 a 0,4 mg. en caso de compromiso respiratorio importante el paciente puede llegar a requerir intubacin orotraqueal o incluso traqueotoma.si la lesin ha sido por gases inhalados y/o lesin trmica se debe dejar al paciente en observacin en el mbito hospitalario, con oxigenoterapia mediante mascarilla o gafas nasales, humidificacin e hidratacin adecuada. el uso de antibiticos y corticoides es controvertido.la mayor parte de los casos de laringitis agudas evolucionan favorablemente. los casos graves requieren, una vez superado el episodio agudo, la valoracin de la integridad anatmica y funcional de la laringe. cuando los sntomas de la laringitis aguda se cronifican, es obligada la consulta a orl.las laringitis crnicas especficas o secundarias son infrecuentes. se relacionan con infecciones crnicas o pueden ser la expresin de enfermedades sistmicas6. las laringitis crnicas ms frecuentes son las que denominamos inespecficas o primarias, en relacin con la exposicin a agentes externos como puede ser el tabaco7.las laringitis crnicas infecciosas pueden ser bacterianas, vricas, micticas o parasitarias (tabla 1 ). mycobacterium tuberculosis produce granulomas larngeos en pacientes que sufren tuberculosis pulmonar (diseminacin directa).el virus del papiloma humano (vph) infecta el epitelio y produce lesiones neoplsicas que pueden transformarse en neoplasias malignas.la irritacin debida al reflujo gastroesofgico (rge) puede producir sntomas larngeos por afectacin de la zona interaritenoidea y del tercio posterior de ambas cuerdas vocales8. llamamos reflujo faringolarngeo (rfl) a la manifestacin extraesofgica del rge en la faringe y la laringe, en general en pacientes que no sufren pirosis. la tos crnica y la necesidad continua de aclaramiento vocal, suponen un traumatismo repetido que cronifica los sntomas.la amiloidosis larngea puede ser primaria o idioptica, o secundaria cuando los depsitos de amiloide (protenas monoclonales) se producen en relacin con enfermedades como la tuberculosis o la artritis reumatoide, entre otras. los depsitos suelen asentar en la regin anterior de la subglotis y de la vertiente subgltica de las cuerdas.la accin del tabaco sobre la mucosa larngea, a menudo en conjuncin con el hbito enlico, provoca a largo plazo una inflamacin crnica en la misma con cambios irreversibles en forma de edema, hiperplasia, queratinizacin y fibrosis (laringitis crnica inespecfica). la exposicin laboral a txicos industriales produce efectos similares. no hay que olvidar que en un mismo paciente pueden concurrir diversos factores. el rfl tiene alta prevalencia y es ms frecuente en fumadores y bebedores. tras los cambios histolgicos iniciales se puede desarrollar displasia intraepitelial de mayor o menor grado (lesiones premalignas) y posteriormente puede aparecer carcinoma epidermoide. la media de edad de los pacientes con diagnstico histolgico de lesiones premalignas (52 aos) es 10 aos menor que la media de edad de los pacientes con diagnstico de carcinoma epidermoide (62 aos)9.en general, el sntoma principal es la disfona, acompaada a menudo de molestia o dolor farngeo, sensacin de cuerpo extrao y necesidad constante de aclaramiento vocal (carraspeo).la tuberculosis (tb) larngea se da en pacientes con tuberculosis pulmonar y es la enfermedad granulomatosa ms frecuente de la laringe. produce disfona, disfagia y tos productiva3. se da ms entre la segunda y tercera dcadas de la vida. son lesiones rojizas abollonadas que suelen afectar la mucosa aritenoidea o las cuerdas vocales.la papilomatosis larngea se da ms frecuentemente en varones de entre 2030 aos. los subtipos implicados con ms frecuencia son el 6 y el 11. suelen ser lesiones multicntricas, excrecentes y leucoplsicas que pueden diseminarse por la faringe y el rbol traqueobronquial. tiende a la recidiva tras el tratamiento quirrgico. la malignizacin que se produce en el 2% de los casos se relaciona con algunos subtipos del virus del papiloma (16 y 18).el rfl produce disfona crnica a menudo intermitente, tos, carraspeo y sensacin de bolo farngeo, en general, sin sntomas gastroesofgicos.la amiloidosis larngea produce disfona y estridor en funcin de la localizacin de los depsitos.las laringitis crnicas inespecficas producen disfona progresiva y constante que puede asociar una clnica inespecfica de molestias farngeas (fig. 2 ). la disfagia o la disnea son excepcionales. el estudio de los pacientes con disfona permite el diagnstico precoz del carcinoma gltico. el mtodo ideal para valorar el movimiento vibratorio de las cuerdas vocales es la exploracin larngea con luz estroboscpica. la disminucin o ausencia de onda mucosa en la exploracin estroboscpica obliga a realizar laringoscopia directa y biopsia bajo anestesia general. no obstante, la presencia de onda mucosa no excluye de forma absoluta la posibilidad de que la lesin de la cuerda sea maligna9, por lo que lesiones queratsicas persistentes o que aumentan de tamao deben tambin ser biopsiadas.se suele llegar al diagnstico de tuberculosis mediante la deteccin de bacilos cido-alcohol resistentes en las biopsias. el diagnstico de la papilomatosis requiere biopsia mediante laringoscopia directa bajo anestesia general. para que la muestra sea representativa tiene que tener suficiente profundidad para estudiar una posible patologa profunda respecto a la membrana basal del epitelio, que es criterio de malignizacin. la respuesta al tratamiento confirma la etiologa de la laringitis por rfl. el diagnstico de la amiloidosis es histolgico (tincin con rojo congo).las laringitis crnicas no explican alteraciones de la movilidad larngea (adduccin/abduccin), de manera que alteraciones de la movilidad obligan a completar el estudio con pruebas de imagen (tc crvico-torcico) y/o exploracin mediante laringoscopia directa con anestesia general. la disminucin o ausencia de onda mucosa en la exploracin estroboscpica, lesiones excrecentes que aumentan de tamao o lesiones friables con restos hemticos tambin deben ser biopsiadas1. al biopsiar tenemos el objetivo de obtener una muestra representativa alterando en la menor medida posible la estructura anatmica y funcional larngea, principalmente respetando el ligamento de la cuerda vocal.la tb responde bien al tratamiento mdico de la enfermedad primaria. ocasionalmente puede precisar ciruga.el tratamiento de la papilomatosis larngea se realiza mediante laringoscopia directa con anestesia general, recomendndose la utilizacin de lser co2. las recidivas son frecuentes. no existen tratamientos mdicos de eficacia demostrada10.para la laringitis por rfl parece evidente el beneficio de una terapia basada en inhibidores de la bomba de protones11 y siempre recomendamos normas antirreflujo que incluyen evitar el decbito hasta 2 horas despus de la comida o la cena, mejor 5 comidas al da que 2 muy copiosas, evitar o ajustar dosis de teofilinas y 2-adrenrgicos que disminuyen la motilidad gstrica, evitar bebidas gaseosas, grasas, chocolate, alcohol, picantes, cafena etc.el tratamiento de la amiloidosis larngea se realiza mediante exresis con lser co2.medidas higinicas encaminadas a evitar la exposicin al tabaco, alcohol, cido gstrico y cualquier otro tipo de irritante son obligatorias como primera accin en pacientes con laringitis crnica inespecfica. adems, se podr asociar un tratamiento con mucolticos, antiinflamatorios, aerosoles, etc. el tratamiento rehabilitador fonitrico est indicado cuando existe abuso vocal.el paciente con laringitis crnica requiere controles repetidos mediante fibroscopia larngea y estroboscopia. los posibles diagnsticos no son excluyentes. adems, pacientes que tienen laringitis crnica con biopsia negativa para malignidad en una determinada fecha pueden desarrollar ms tarde lesiones malignas, incluso habiendo suprimido los factores que la originaron.la inflamacin de la faringe afecta a la mucosa y/o al tejido linfoide que se distribuye de forma diseminada en la submucosa o formando aglomerados como las amgdalas palatinas, la amgdala farngea (vegetaciones adenoides) o la amgdala lingual. las causas, que son muchas y diversas, afectan en los adultos fundamentalmente a la orofaringe. la inflamacin produce dolor de garganta, que es el tercer motivo de consulta ms frecuente en atencin primaria12. aunque en menores de 16 aos, hasta un 40% de los episodios de faringitis son de causa bacteriana, en los adultos slo suponen el 5-10% de los casos13. en la prctica, muchos casos de faringitis se tratan con antibiticos por si la causa es bacteriana.clasificamos las faringitis como14., 15.:1.infecciones agudas (bacterianas, vricas y micticas).2.faringitis asociadas a enfermedades hematolgicas.3.faringitis idiopticas (eritema multiforme, sndrome de behfet, pnfigo).4.faringitis crnica inespecfica. adems del sbhga, otras bacterias causantes de faringitis son: streptococcus de los grupos c, g y f, arcanobacterium hemolyticum, neisseria gonorrhoeae, treponema pallidum, chlamydia pneumoniae, mycoplasma pneumoniae, mycobacterium tuberculosis, corynebacterium diphtheriae, yersinia enterocolitica, fusobacterium necrophorum, y asociacin fusoespirilar.los virus que causan faringitis son: rhinovirus, coronavirus, influenza, parainfluenza, vih, adenovirus, virus de eptein-barr, herpes simple 1 y 2, y citomegalovirus.la micosis farngea ms frecuente es la producida por candida. el sbhga es responsable de la mayor parte de las faringitis bacterianas del adulto. es slo patgeno en seres humanos y algo menos del 5% de los adultos son portadores asintomticos16.las llamadas faringitis crnicas se relacionan con factores irritantes locales: tabaco, alcohol, sequedad ambiental, temperaturas extremas, patologa nasosinusal (rinorrea posterior y respiracin oral) y rfl. pueden ser factores patognicos: diabetes, dislipemia o depresin.la faringitis por sbhga afecta las amgdalas palatinas, el paladar blando y la pared posterior. bruscamente se presenta dolor de garganta, odinofagia, adenopatas cervicales anteriores, fiebre, escalofros, malestar y dolor de cabeza. no tiene por qu haber ronquera, tos, conjuntivitis, diarrea ni rinorrea17 que son sntomas propios de las viriasis. si hay trismo sospechamos flemn o absceso periamigdalino. la faringe tiene eritema, edema y exudados blanco-grisceos en las amgdalas que estn inflamadas (fig. 3a ). puede haber petequias en paladar blando y suele haber halitosis. tambin puede haber rash escarlatiniforme.sin tratamiento, la enfermedad suele curar antes de 7 das. el paciente es contagioso mientras est enfermo y durante una semana despus. no existen criterios clnicos fiables que lleven al diagnstico de amigdalitis por sbhga18. centor19 estableci cuatro criterios: a) fiebre, b) adenopatas cervicales anteriores, c) exudado amigdalar y d) ausencia de tos. la presencia de 34 de ellos tiene un valor predictivo positivo del 40-60%. la ausencia de 34 de los mismos tiene un valor predictivo negativo del 80%. por otra parte, en pacientes con dficit inmunitario, que presentan comorbilidades, antecedentes de fiebre reumtica o contacto con nios en edad escolar, la posibilidad de que la faringitis se deba a sbhga es mayor.los test de deteccin rpida de antgeno (tdra) del sbhga tienen una sensibilidad del 65-80% y una especificidad superior al 95%. el cultivo farngeo requiere 2428 horas.matthys y sus colaboradores20 revisaron 6 guas clnicas de europa occidental y 4 norteamericanas (3 de ee. uu. y una de canad), tras excluir 4 guas exclusivamente peditricas. el uso de los tdra se recomienda en las 3 guas de ee. uu. y en 2 europeas (francesa y finlandesa). las dems no los recomiendan porque la sensibilidad no es suficientemente alta y por la existencia de portadores. el cultivo farngeo no est indicado en adultos en las guas de pases desarrollados21.a diferencia del sbhga, los streptococcus de grupos no a pueden causar glomerulonefritis pero no fiebre reumtica. arcanobacterium causa algo ms del 1% de las faringitis agudas, afectando ms a adolescentes y adultos jvenes, puede asociar rash en tronco y extremidades15. neisseria gonorrhoeae en ocasiones produce faringitis de transmisin sexual, la infeccin puede diseminarse provocando artritis o dermatitis15. la primoinfeccin por treponema pallidum produce una lesin ulcerada no dolorosa en genitales, labio, lengua y raramente en la faringe que cura en pocos das. tras 212 semanas se origina un exantema cutneo mucoso. en la faringe aparecen lesiones erosivas algo sobreelevadas rodeadas de halo eritematoso que son muy contagiosas. las lesiones de esta fase secundaria remiten, pero en la mitad de los casos de forma muy diferida aparece una lesin granulomatosa o goma que puede asentar en la pared posterior de la faringe y al ulcerarse evacuar material grumoso amarillento. tras cicatrizar origina estenosis14. en los adultos corynebacterium pneumoniae produce en general neumona y bronquitis, pero es frecuente la faringitis asociada. igualmente mycoplasma pneumoniae ocasiona neumona en jvenes de 1520 aos, en general sin exudados ni adenopatas14. mycobacterium tuberculosis produce excepcionalmente hipertrofia amigdalar con ulceracin y exudado blanquecino. la difteria est prcticamente erradicada en nuestro medio. el germen crea una exotoxina que desvitaliza el epitelio produciendo pseudomembranas que desbordan los pilares amigdalinos. el intento de despegarlas origina caractersticamente sangrado. la toxina produce miocarditis, neuritis y necrosis tubular. yersinia enterocolitica puede provocar amigdalitis sin enteritis en adultos, especialmente si ha habido contacto con cerdos22. los pacientes presentan exudado amigdalar, adenopatas cervicales dolorosas, fiebre y leucocitosis. fusobacterium necrophorum es un germen anaerobio que puede producir absceso periamigadlino y sepsis por trombosis de la vena yugular interna (sndrome de lemierre, que tambin puede deberse a s. pyogenes, s. aureus o h. influenzae). la asociacin fusoespirilar (borrelia vincenti + spirochoeta denticolata) produce la angina ulceromembranosa de vincent, caracterizada por estomatitis intensa y afectacin farngea unilateral con ulceracin de bordes irregulares cubierta de exudado amarillento. cursa con febrcula, trismo, disfagia, adenopata y halitosis23. la angina ulcerosa de moure ocasiona en jvenes una discreta odinofagia unilateral con adenopata yugulodigstrica unilateral. presentan una amgdala con necrosis y ulceracin. cura espontneamente en 810 das23 (fig. 3b).los virus son los agentes causales ms frecuentes de las faringoamigdalitis. suelen dar lugar a epidemias en otoo e invierno. adems de los sntomas farngeos es frecuente que haya rinitis, cefalea, tos, mialgias o conjuntivitis. cuando la faringe presenta simplemente un enrojecimiento difuso, pensamos que la etiologa es vrica. rinovirus y coronavirus pueden asociar lesiones cutneas. virus influenza a o b producen faringitis tpicamente asociada a cefalea, tos y mialgias. hasta el 70% de los pacientes con infeccin por el vih presentan faringitis no exudativa con mononucleosis, adenopatas y, a veces, lceras mucosas a las 36 semanas de la primoinfeccin. los adenovirus afectan sobre todo a nios y es tpica la afectacin conjuntival. tambin fundamentalmente en nios el coxsackievirus tipo a produce la herpangina caracterizada por vesculas farngeas de 12 mm de dimetro que tras romperse dejan zonas ulceradas14. especial atencin merece la faringitis producida por el virus de epstein-barr que origina la mononucleosis infecciosa. la enfermedad se presenta tpicamente en la adolescencia y se transmite por la saliva (enfermedad del beso). suele comenzar con astenia y mialgias y luego aparece amigdalitis con odinofagia, cefalea y fiebre. las amgdalas aumentadas de tamao estn cubiertas por exudado amarillento23. hay adenopatas cervicales yugulodigstricas como en otras faringitis pero es tpica la presencia de adenopatas en las cadenas cervicales posteriores. es frecuente la esplenomegalia y a veces hay hepatomegalia. el diagnstico se confirma con el anlisis de sangre (linfo-monocitos activados). los virus herpes simple producen faringitis con vesculas hialinas que tambin puede afectar los labios24 (fig. 4 ). candida saprofita puede afectar la orofaringe produciendo pseudomembranas blanquecinas, pero tambin puede haber zonas eritematosas. candida albicans es el hongo aislado con ms frecuencia. pacientes inmunocomprometidos que han recibido radioterapia o que se han tratado con antibiticos de amplio espectro son ms susceptibles.dentro de las faringitis de causa hematolgica debemos mencionar el sndrome de plummer-vinson que se da predominantemente en mujeres postmenopusicas con anemia ferropnica14. hay inflamacin de la mucosa retrocricoidea y de esfago cervical con disfagia. adems estas pacientes tienen ms riesgo de desarrollar carcinoma hipofarngeo. la agranulocitosis (habitualmente producida por medicamentos) puede producir lesiones ulceronecrticas que progresan rpidamente en la mucosa bucofarngea. el paciente no tiene adenopatas cervicales y su estado general es malo con fiebre, taquicardia, subictericia, oliguria, etc. la leucemia aguda en personas jvenes se manifiesta con astenia, dolores de tipo reumtico, palidez, febrcula, epistaxis y hemorragias gingivales de das de evolucin. sobre estos sntomas, de forma brusca aparece estomatitis y amigdalitis intensas con odinofagia y adenopata cervical grande. las amgdalas agrandadas presentan exudados y ulceraciones24. en las faringitis de causa hematolgica es fundamental realizar un anlisis de sangre.el eritema multiforme se suele presentar de forma aguda, autolimitada y recidivante con lesiones cutneas o cutaneomucosas eritematosas concntricas (en diana). afecta principalmente a las extremidades pero puede afectar a labios y orofaringe como lesiones cubiertas de fibrina, sobre todo en su forma mayor o sndrome de stevens-johnson25. en adultos se relaciona con la toma de medicamentos y a veces con infecciones. la enfermedad de behet se caracteriza por aftas orales crnicas, lceras genitales recurrentes y uvetis. las aftas son dolorosas, curan sin cicatriz y pueden afectar la faringe. el pnfigo vulgar se caracteriza por vesculas que pueden alcanzar varios centmetros en la piel de la cabeza y el tronco y en las mucosas. las ampollas dejan tras romperse erosiones superficiales14.llamamos faringitis crnicas a procesos de desvitalizacin de la mucosa farngea con atrofia. adems, puede haber hiperplasia de los folculos linfoides submucosos que estn diseminados en la pared posterior o formando cordones posterolaterales en la orofaringe. estos cambios que son muy frecuentes a partir de los 40 aos, producen sensacin de sequedad y odinofagia al deglutir la saliva que mejora al tragar alimentos.las guas coinciden en no dar valor a test serolgicos ni al recuento leucocitario en la valoracin del episodio agudo infeccioso20) salvo en las faringitis hematolgicas. las complicaciones no supuradas en relacin con la infeccin por sbhga son la fiebre reumtica y la glonerulonefritis post estreptoccica, y con una relacin menos clara los trastornos neuropsiquitricos en nios. la incidencia de fiebre reumtica ha disminuido drsticamente en los pases desarrollados26. la mayora de las guas europeas consideran bajo el riesgo de complicaciones no supuradas post faringitis por sbhga en pacientes inmunocompetentes de pases desarrollados, est indicado el tratamiento antibitico, en los adultos, por la severidad de los sntomas. la realizacin de tdra en adultos se recomienda principalmente en las guas norteamericanas.la faringoamigdalitis con complicaciones como el flemn o el absceso periamigdalino requiere un tratamiento especial. las complicaciones supuradas en relacin con sbhga pueden ser: a) sistmicas, shock txico, sepsis estreptoccica y fascitis necrotizante o b) locales, flemn/absceso periamigdalino, absceso retrofarngeo, linfadenitis cervical supurada y celulitis cervical.el absceso periamigdalino producido por fusobacterium necrophorum es un cuadro grave con trombosis infecciosa de la vena yugular interna (sndrome de lemierre).la mayora de las viriasis tienen un curso autolimitado, seguramente la ms peligrosa es la mononucleosis infecciosa que se puede complicar con trombopenia, encefalitis, miocarditis, anemia hemoltica, meningitis asptica, etc. la rotura esplnica es muy infrecuente14.las lesiones ulceronecrticas pueden deberse a enfermedades hematolgicas graves que cursan con agranulocitosis. la amigdalitis puede formar parte de la clnica de las leucemias agudas.el diagnstico diferencial se basa en la anamnesis y la exploracin. las faringitis rojas sin exudados, con tos, rinitis, mialgias o conjuntivitis suelen ser vricas. cuando concurren los criterios de centor suelen ser bacterianas, especialmente por sbhga. la amigdalitis lingual se caracteriza por odinofagia intensa. para su diagnstico se realiza faringolaringoscopia. cultivos farngeos y otras pruebas se realizan excepcionalmente. la tuberculosis amigdalar es difcil de distinguir de la sarcoidosis si la prueba de zielh-neelsen es negativa. como se mencion, las pseudomembranas diftricas estn muy adheridas y desbordan los pilares anteriores.un paciente con carcinoma de va area superior puede presentar dolor de garganta ms o menos crnico. la epiglotitis en el adulto se presenta con dolor de garganta y odinofagia aguda e intensa, siendo la exploracin de la orofaringe relativamente normal. situaciones frecuentes como la rinorrea posterior o el rfl pueden producir irritacin farngea.el diagnstico diferencial de las faringitis hematolgicas se basa en los sntomas, la exploracin y el anlisis de sangre.las faringitis crnicas se diagnostican tras excluir faringitis infecciosas, neuralgia de los nervios ix y x, sndrome de eagle y patologa tumoral. anticolinrgicos, bloqueadores beta, psicotropos, pirazolonas y antihipertensivos centrales producen sequedad oral y farngea.para tratar la faringitis por sbhga podemos utilizar penicilina v: 500 mg/12 horas (10 das), amoxicilina 500 mg/8 horas (10 das), o penicilina g benzatina 1.200. 000 u intramuscular (im), una sola dosis. preparados que aaden penicilina g procana inyectados a la temperatura ambiente son menos dolorosos21., 27..en pacientes alrgicos a la penicilina podra administrarse cefalexina 500 mg/12 horas (10 das) o cefadroxilo 1g/12-24 horas (10 das) siempre que la reaccin a los betalactmicos no haya sido del tipo hipersensibilidad inmediata. en nios se encuentran mejores resultados clnicos y bacteriolgicos con las cefalosporinas en lugar de con penicilina29. otra alternativa es clindamicina 600 mg/8 horas (10) o claritromicina 250 mg/12 horas10.la faringoamigdalitis con complicaciones como el flemn o el absceso periamigdalino suele requerir hidratacin iv, metilprednisolona iv 1 mg/kg de peso (en general una dosis) y tratamiento antibitico iv (por ejemplo amoxicilina-clavulnico 1g/6-8 horas). en caso de absceso es necesario el drenaje mediante puncin o incisin (fig. 5 ). cuando se produce una mejora sintomtica con alivio del trismo se puede continuar el tratamiento vo incluyendo antiinflamatorios no esteroideos y eventualmente protectores gstricos. arcanobacterium responde mejor a la eritromicina que a la penicilina15.la infeccin por neisseria gonorrhoeae se trata con una sola dosis im de ceftriaxona o cefotaxima. tambin puede tratarse con una dosis oral de ciprofloxacino o levofloxacino. el tratamiento de la sfilis secundaria se realiza con penicilina benzatina, 1.200.000 u im a la semana, durante 3 semanas. corynebacterium pneumoniae es sensible a tetraciclinas, macrlidos y fluorquinolonas. el tratamiento debe prolongarse durante 23 semanas15. mycoplasma pneumoniae no es sensible a los -lactmicos, debe tratarse con tetraciclinas, macrlidos o quinolonas. el tratamiento de la difteria se basa en la administracin precoz de antitoxina y el tratamiento antibitico con penicilina o macrlidos. yersinia enterocolitica no es sensible a la penicilina ni a las cefalosporinas de primera generacin. el tratamiento debe hacerse con aminoglucsidos, tetraciclinas o cefalosporinas de tercera generacin15. fusobacterium necrophorum es sensible a la penicilina, pero el tratamiento debe incluir medidas de soporte, incluso la intubacin y el drenaje con eventual cervicotoma. la asociacin fusoespirilar es sensible a amoxicilina clavulnico y a cefalosporinas23.el tratamiento de la faringitis vrica se basa en medidas de higiene, hidratacin y tratamiento sintomtico con antiinflamatorios. en el caso de la mononucleosis infecciosa la convalecencia puede alargarse durante ms de un mes. el paciente debe evitar el ejercicio fsico intenso y deportes de contacto durante varias semanas (hasta que desaparezca la esplenomegalia). si hay criterios de sobreinfeccin bacteriana se utilizarn antibiticos.el tratamiento de la candidiasis farngea se basa en nistatina en suspensin oral y en casos rebeldes antifngicos orales como fluconazol14.las lesiones que se producen en el contexto de una agranulocitosis deben tratarse con antibiticos de amplio espectro que cubren los microorganismos gramnegativos saprofitos de la faringe14.no se recomienda el cultivo farngeo para el control. es necesario el seguimiento para descartar complicaciones no supuradas post faringitis por sbhga.in response to the coronavirus (covid-19) pandemic, governments around the world legislated for the cessation of non-essential contact. with the introduction of social distancing and lockdowns, it was soon apparent that the unanticipated effects upon crime could be dramatic (farrell and tilley 2020 , ashby 2020 , bump 2020 , mohler et al. 2020 ). here we study the effects on crime in the days leading up to, and following, the introduction of a national stay-at-home lockdown. while we focus on one uk police service area, the methodological approach may be more broadly applicable, and the substantive findings of relevance for comparisons both to other regions of the uk and other countries with similar socio-demographic and economic profiles.the nature of the dramatic changes to mobility that occurred allow us to approach the study as a natural experiment. we use crime data spanning 5 years to compare rates in 2020 to what would have been expected based on trends from previous years. in addition, we use community mobility reports to compare area-based mobility to crime. specifically, we compare mobility change in the retail sector to changes in shoplifting and other theft, mobility change in residential areas to burglary dwelling and theft from vehicles, and mobility in retail and recreation areas to changes in assault. this allows us to calculate the mobility elasticity of crime (mec) as the percentage change in crime due to a one percent change in mobility.our approach is informed by the theoretical perspectives of crime science, particularly the lifestyle and routine activities approaches (hindelang et al. 1978, cohen and felson 1979 ) that identify crime opportunities as central (clarke 2012) . we view mobility as a core determinant of the level of crime opportunities. changes tocrime science *correspondence: g.farrell@leeds.ac.uk 2 university of leeds, leeds, uk full list of author information is available at the end of the article mobility affect lifestyles and the likelihood of interaction between potential targets (including victims) and potential offenders, and the likelihood of surveillance and potential guardianship by others. in theory, covid-19 policies to restrict movement will affect different crime types in different ways (farrell and tilley 2020) . for instance, increased time spent in the home might be expected to increase the opportunities for domestic violence and child abuse to occur, because they are often committed by parents or guardians, and potential victims and offenders are spending more time together. at the same time, however, increased time spent in the home might increase guardianship and surveillance against burglary. reduced attendance at workplaces would be expected to reduce workplace harassment, and reduced travel on public transport would be expected to reduce the many types of crime that occur on such transport or around transport stations. widespread closure of shops would be expected to reduce shoplifting. with people spending greater work and leisure time online, the opportunity for crimes to occur via the increases in virtual mobility. hence changes to mobility would not impact uniformly but, rather, different types of crimes would be affected in different ways in different contexts, and we explore some specifics further in what follows.the timeline and context for the study is as follows. on wednesday 11 march 2020, the world health organisation (who) declared covid-19 a global pandemic. 1 five days later, on monday 16 march, the uk government recommended nationwide cessation of all nonessential travel, followed by, on friday 20 march, an announcement that all bars, cafes, restaurants, and gyms were required to close that day. on monday 23 march, a national 'lockdown' was announced. lockdown rules required everyone to stay home at all times with four exceptions; exercise (alone or with members of the same household); shopping for basic necessities; any medical need, including providing care for a vulnerable person, and; travel to or from work, but only when a person cannot work from home (cabinet office 2020). these four dates are shown as vertical lines in timeline charts in this study, and are labelled in fig. 2 .we find distinct declines in many recorded crime rates in the 2 weeks before, and in the period immediately following lockdown. the sequencing of the onset of these declines tracked the timeline of events, but with different crime types responding to different types of mobility restriction at different times. while personal theft and theft from vehicles declined from 11 march, shoplifting and assaults declined from the introduction of restrictions on non-essential travel from 16 march, while public disorder and criminal damage declined from the closure of bars, restaurants and other such facilities on 20 march. we find preliminary evidence of pre-lockdown spikes in shoplifting, likely facilitated by the extra cover in crowded stores, and a lesser spike in assaults immediately before the lockdown, likely due to anticipatory 'last chance' socialising. the first week of lockdown brought more substantial decreases in many types of recorded crime.we develop a metric to compare the changes in crime and mobility, which we term the mobility elasticity of crime. we find shoplifting responsive (if technically inelastic) to change in mobility in the retail sector, and burglary highly responsive to increased mobility in residential areas. we find, and vehicle-related theft responsive, assault inelastic though still somewhat responsive to changed mobility in the workplace sector, and in residential and retail/recreation areas, respectively. the primary conclusion of this study is that changes to mobility were the primary cause of changes to the rates of many types of crime in the early stages of the pandemic.this study uses 5 years of daily counts of recorded crime data from a uk police service covering over 5000 square kilometres (2000 square miles) with a population in 2020 of around 1.5 million. the service employed over 5000 persons with nearly 3000 police officers and over 2000 police staff. 2 crimes recorded between 8 march and 02 april 2020 are compared to the expected rates based on crimes recorded in the previous 4 years. 3 the police service's recorded crime data was assessed as 'good' in a 2019 report by her majesty's inspectorate of constabularies and fire and rescue services covering data since 2017 (hmicfrs 2017 (hmicfrs , 2019 . the report estimated recording accuracy of the police force at 93.3 percent with a confidence interval of  1.48 percent. 4 the models we used, described next, account for variation in data quality by increasing the confidence intervals, making statistically significant changes harder to detect. the overall effect is therefore to make the study findings conservative, that is, under-stated.the expected level of crime in 2020 was forecast using models that drew on data from previous years. five years' of recorded crime data was used for the period covering the latter end of february, the whole of march and the beginning of april. 5 the same 5-week period was used from each year, to minimize seasonal confounds. the 5 weeks were aligned by day of the week to minimize potential effects of differences due to day of the week. specifically, data for each year was aligned by the third friday in march. the data was then trimmed to provide a 35-day snapshot that broadly included the last week of february and all of march for each year, the process governed by the need to have whole weeks and to exclude school or public holidays (avoiding possible confounds because the dates often vary by year). the data were collected in mid-april to alleviate the delay in crime reporting that can occur. that is, although the crime series data end on 02 april, they were compiled in the days after that date, which should account for any lag between crime events taking place and being recorded by the police.time series models were built using the 2016 to 2019 data and the first week of records from 2020, the latter to account for the longer-term national crime decline. the remainder of the 2020 data, from 06 march to 02 april 2020, comprised the test data, that is, the actual rates for comparison to the expected rates from the model.for model building, the training data were transformed into a time series with frequency seven. trend, daily effects and weather effects were removed by applying separate linear regressions for each effect, and the coefficients used in the models. a piecewise linear model approach was adopted (chatfield 2016) which allowed trends to be analyzed sequentially in order to mitigate breaks in data, changes to reporting, and other changes in trend. hence, while seasonality and weather effects relate to the entire reporting period, trend information was used in a more targeted manner so that expected/forecast values contained the appropriate trends. potential weather effects were represented by the maximum daily temperature and amount of rainfall (mm) (historical weather data 2020). interaction affects within weather and day of the week were not statistically significant, which meant that the simpler models described below were adopted. the resulting residuals from the detrended and deseasoned models were analysed with arima time series models, appropriate models then selected using an automated function in r (hyndman et al. 2020 ). the automated function used a step-wise selection algorithm (hyndman and khandakar 2008) based upon akaike information criterion (aic) to iteratively determine the coefficients for the arima model which best explained the deseasoned and detrended residuals. the resulting arima model was used, along with the daily effect, the weather effect and trend, to produce a forecast value for each crime type with an associated 95% confidence interval. 6 hence the general equation for the crime rate was:where x t is the crime rate, (t) is the trend, s(t) is the daily effect, w(t) is the weather effect and  t are the random errors. all at time t.previous studies have used various data sources to explore the role of ambient populations upon crime rates (andresen 2006 , malleson and andresen 2015a , b, boivin 2018 , kounadi et al. 2018 , hipp et al. 2019 . due to the recency of the period under study, these data were unavailable. to examine mobility, we use data extracted from the google covid-19 community mobility reports 7 .the mobility reports "show how visits and length of stay at different places change" based on data from phone users who have turned on their location history (google 2020) . the reports are aggregations of locations over time and compare recent activity to a historical baseline. the six locations or spheres of activity used are: residential, retail & recreation, workplaces, grocery stores, 8 parks, and transit stations. a limitation of the data is that thebaseline is the median value, for the corresponding day of the week, during the 5-week period jan 3-feb 6, 2020 (google 2020) . this means that the mobility data baseline comparison is less rigorous than that for our crime data (and something that future research should seek to overcome).we compared changes in mobility and crime to calculate the mobility elasticity of crime (mec) as a metric of the change in crime in response to a change in mobility. the mec draws upon the concept of the price elasticity of demand, which gauges the effect upon consumer demand in response to the change in the price of a good.to operationalise the mec, we identified crimemobility combinations where there were evidential and theoretical grounds to expect a relationship. around half of the recorded theft in the study area was shoplifting, which is located largely at retail areas. around twothirds of personal theft occurred in or around a shop or supermarket, a public entertainment area or the street, or inside a pub according to the most recently available crime survey for england and wales data (csew, ons 2019). 9 consequently, we compared shoplifting and other theft to mobility in retail and recreation areas.burglary dwelling occurs in residential areas, so they were our most obvious pairing. around a third of assaults occurred at or around the workplace, but of those where the location could be grouped into one of the mobility area categories, the workplace accounted for over half (csew 2019a). so we paired assaults with workplace mobility while recognising the potential limitations 10 . over three quarters of theft from vehicles occurred at or around the home according to the most recent csew findings, so we compared trends in theft from vehicles to those in residential area mobility.a summary of the changes to crime rates for the 'prelockdown' period 11-23 march, and by one week after lockdown, are shown as fig. 1 . note that readers should interpret fig. 1 in the context of the confidence intervals for individual crime types in figs. 2, 3, 4 and table 1 . by 1 week after lockdown, all crime types had declined except for theft of motor vehicles. theft and shoplifting had declined by more than half, assault, theft from vehicles and domestic abuse between a third and a half, and burglary by a quarter.the 'all crime' category declined after 11 march (fig. 2) , and was statistically significantly different from the expected rate by 21 march, remaining so for the duration of the study period (table 1) . the decline had levelledoff by late march. all individual types of recorded crime began to decline before lockdown, with variation in the timing and extent, as discussed below. the crime-specific results that follow are chronological by date of onset of identifiable change, in order to correspond with table 3 which is discussed later.theft declined from the who 'global pandemic' announcement of 11 march and fell 20 percent by 13 march. a decline in shoplifting began around 16 march when non-essential travel ceased, but was particularly pronounced after lockdown, becoming statistically significantly low and remaining so through early april ( fig. 3 and table 1 ). by the end of march, 1 week after lockdown, shoplifting had declined 62% and all theft 40 percent. in previous years there had been a sharp decline in shoplifting on sundays, which was less marked in march 2020. theft from vehicles also declined from 11 march, and halved by mid-march (while theft of vehicles declined later, following lockdown). recorded sex offences declined from around 13 march, the trend continuing through march.the 'vulnerable child' category refers to any type of recorded crime where a child was flagged as vulnerable. this means that the 41 percent decline in all recorded crime would, other things equal, produce a similar decline in vulnerable child records. hence a preferable measure is change is the proportion of recorded crimes with a vulnerable child indicator, shown as fig. 4 .assaults declined from 16 march, continuing through march, but the weekend increases of previous years were absent. recorded domestic abuse declined from around 16 march onwards, and had declined (statistically significantly) by over 40 percent 1 week after lockdown, with weekend peaks also less prominent.criminal damage declined after 20 march. the apparent resurgence in criminal damage around 30 march-may reflect delayed reporting after a weekend. public disorder also declined from 20 march, with previous weekend increases absent, with a possible early april increase.burglary declined following lockdown on 23 march, falling by half over the next week. a possible resurgence in burglary dwelling by early april could reflect a reporting increase after the weekend. theft of vehicles, while numerically small as a daily count, declined from the lockdown of 23 march.changes in mobility in the six types of area, relative to the baseline, are shown in fig. 5 . that around residential areas increased from 16 march, and 1 week after lockdown there was around 25 percent more mobility than expected in residential areas (fig. 5) . movement around workplaces declined rapidly from 16 march and had fallen more than 50 percent by 1 week after the 23 march lockdown. mobility around retail and recreation areas decreased after 16 march and had declined by three-quarters compared to the expected rate by 1 week after lockdown. there was increased movement around grocery stores in mid-march, followed by a substantial decline beginning before lockdown on 23 march, with a decline of around a third by 1 week after lockdown. there was greater than usual movement around parks for much of march, but a sharp decline by late march. mobility around transit stations declined from 16 march and had declined by well over half by 1 week after lockdown.the visual comparisons of the deviation from baseline expectations for the crime type and mobility comparisons are shown as fig. 6 . the resulting mobility elasticities of crime are shown as table 2 .visual inspection of fig. 6 suggests that the timing and magnitude of change to shoplifting and other theft tend to coincide with those to mobility in retail and recreation areas. the respective mecs of 0.84 and 0.71 are inelastic but suggest that both are quite responsive. that is, each one percent reduction in mobility produced slightly less than a one percent change in theft.the timing and magnitude of change to burglary dwelling and residential area mobility fit quite well (fig. 6) , but inversely. that is, increased residential area mobility corresponded with decreases in burglary dwelling. the mec of  1.04 is effectively unitary which suggests that a one percent increase in residential area mobility produces a one percent reduction in residential burglary.the timing and magnitude of change to assaults and workplace mobility do not coincide quite as well as those discussed so far. after lockdown, workplace mobility declines proportionally more than assaults (fig. 5) . the mec of 0.56 supports this interpretation, suggesting that each one percent decline in workplace mobility produces a 0.56 percent decline in assaults.the weakest relationship examined here is that between the timing and magnitude of change to theft from vehicles and residential area mobility. theft from vehicles declines earlier, more rapidly and to a greater extent than residential area mobility increases (fig. 5) . the mec of -1.74 is elastic, suggesting that theft from vehicles declines more than proportionally in response to increases in residential area mobility, but the lack of good visual fit between the two suggests this should be interpreted with caution.area-based mobility and crime types are discussed separately first. the two aspects are then brought together in a discussion of their relationship.changes in area-based mobility levels in the study area fit largely with expectations and the timeline of covid-19 and related policies (beadsworth 2020) . mobility in most areas declined in the lead-up to or shortly following lockdown, reflecting restrictions on movement. the increased movement in parks prior to lockdown probably reflects the warmest march since 1957 (bbc 2020a). the shortterm pre-lockdown increase in mobility at grocery stores reflects preparatory purchases and stockpiling. mobility around areas of retail and recreation, workplaces and transit stations began to decline from 16 march, reflecting the national advisory to cease non-essential travel and work at home. 11 mobility trends in these three areas are similar, reflecting the interconnectedness of the activities that they represent. the increase in mobility around residential area occurs as people remained at home but undertook permitted local exercise.variations in the onset of change by crime type correspond largely with the timeline of change relating to covid-19 from 11 march onwards: a summary of the timeline and onsets of change is given as table 3 . the timing of the onset of decline in the 'all crime' category coincided with the who announcement of a 'global pandemic' on 11 march. theft, which as a higher volume crime contributes more to the 'all crime' category for present purposes, declined from 11 march (fig. 3) . from 16 march, as social distancing was more formally introduced, and non-essential travel reduced, the decline in mobility at retail and recreation areas, workplace areas and transit stations began (if slowly), and so too did the declines in assaults. the closure of bars, restaurants, and gyms from 20 march largely coincides with the onset of declines in criminal damage and public disorder.shoplifting had declined dramatically by the first week of lockdown. most retail (non-grocery) shops and stores were closed at lockdown, dramatically reducing shoplifting opportunities. supermarkets and other stores that remained open promoted social distancing, which may have discouraged shoplifting. it is possible that stores that remained open experienced an increase in shoplifting. however, if they did, then it was at most a small fraction of total potential crime displacement, consistent with other findings (johnson et al. 2014 ). non-shoplifting other thefts declined earlier than shoplifting. by one week after lockdown, other thefts had declined around half, that is, extensively but not as much as shoplifting. the overall decline fits with expectation that fewer potential victims of theft were available in retail and recreation areas, as well as on public transport and at workplaces where mobility had declined. the proportionally greater reduction in shoplifting than other theft is explained by the closure of almost all stores where shoplifting could take place, whereas a greater proportion of opportunities for other thefts remained elsewhere.recorded burglary dwelling declined a quarter by the first week of lockdown. by any normal measure this was a large decline. it is likely explained by increased home guardianship and surveillance (including by neighbours) as residents stayed home. however, the decline is less than that in shoplifting and arguably not as extensive as might have been expected. the mobility elasticity of burglary, being unitary, sheds light on this issue. while burglary was highly responsive to change in residential area movement, that movement only increased 25 percent. if guardianship and surveillance increased proportionally with movement then perhaps the 25 percent decline in burglary is readily explained.the one quarter reduction in burglary of non-dwellings also fits with the explanation for burglary dwelling. while many commercial premises would be closed and locked, they would not benefit from the guardianship of increased occupancy (except natural surveillance from those overlooking such premises). decreased movement of offenders might have played a greater role, but further research is needed to investigate that possibility further.elsewhere we suggested that domestic violence would be expected to increase under lockdown (farrell and tilley 2020) . other things equal, increased interactions between potential victims and offenders in domestic setting would represent an increase in the number of opportunities for domestic abuse. it is possible that the drop in recorded domestic abuse found here is genuine, and could have come about as a response to a decrease in external pressure placed on a household, for example, through reduced alcohol consumption in bars or shorter working hours. however, there is increasing evidence that an increase in domestic violence has occurred (bbc 2020b, the guardian. 2020). the 40 percent decline in recorded domestic abuse observed here is, we suggest, more likely to reflect a reduction in reporting and recording. there are multiple routes by which this could occur. in particular, social distancing may well have increased the difficulty of reporting domestic abuse if the offender remained on scene and could not be separated. if this is the case then there is evidence of a worrying increase in the number of victims not having access to the help and assistance they need, and that this is not conveyed by the recorded crime statistics.we interpret the pronounced decline in theft from vehicles as reflecting reduced use of vehicles. this means that fewer vehicles were parked in city centres during the working day, or in other non-home locations such as entertainment districts at other times, where they may have been vulnerable to theft. previous research has shown that vehicles parked at home, particularly those on driveways or in garages, are at reduced risk of theft (clarke and mayhew 1994) .the small numbers and greater daily variability in theft of vehicles makes it harder to interpret the trend. however, it is possible that, apart from the days immediately following lockdown, there is a less discernible effect upon theft of vehicles. the major reductions in vehicle theft in recent decades means that proportionally more of it has become professional or organised in recent years, requiring offenders with greater skills. this includes the commission of car-key burglaries, rfid-interception, and immobilizer-bypass technologies (wellsmith and burrell 2005, brown 2016 ). if these resourceful offenders were more likely to ignore the lockdown, and perhaps to view it as an opportunity to search for desirable on-street vehicles with less natural surveillance due to reduced footfall, then it is possible that theft of vehicle would not decline to the same extent as the less-skilled crime of theft from vehicles. these are issues that further research and larger datasets, discriminating between age, make and recovery of stolen vehicles, might explore. the workplace mobility elasticity of assault of 0.56 indicates that each one percent decline in mobility in and around the workplace produces around half the impact in terms of reduced assaults. recall, however, that only around a third of assaults occurred at or around the workplace, so it would not necessarily be expected to be a strong relationship. more generally, the declines in assault, criminal damage and public order offences found here are largely consistent with the declines in outdoor activities at retail and recreation areas. this includes attendance at sporting events and other forms of recreation and entertainment including the closure of pubs and bars.the decline in the proportion of crimes with a vulnerable child indicator may have occurred as a result of a change in the crime mix, as a result of reduced likelihood of reporting and recording of vulnerable children, as a result of an actual decline, or some combination of these possibilities. sex crimes are rarely reported and recorded, making interpretation of the trend difficult. if recorded sex offences are more likely to be outside the home, then reduced mobility in relevant areas may well explain this reduction, but further research should examine such issues.some types of crime are less likely to be reported to the police than others (office for national statistics 2020). for this study, reporting and recording will also have been affected by circumstances particular to the pandemic. this could include the effect of police staff absences due to illness or self-isolations, the need to reduce risk of infection in police work, the closure of some custody suites, and increased single-crewing of police vehicles to promote social distancing. victim surveys may, in time, provide insight into the extent to which this occurred.a potential limitation of the crime rate modelling was that, if the effects of covid-19 spread earlier than we assumed then the effect would be included in the week of 2020 data used in the forecasting model. it is also possible that other variables influenced the 2020 crime rates differentially in comparison to previous years, the most likely effect of which would be to inflate the confidence intervals for the present analysis. both these possibilities would make our estimates more conservative, under-stating the effect of change attributable to covid-19. in general, however, the size of the crime rate change in 2020 and its correspondence with both the timeline, mobility change and the fit with theoretical expectation, indicates that change relating to the covid-19 pandemic played the primary role.the google covid-19 community mobility reports data was grouped into six areas, which were imperfect for present purposes. for example, it is likely that a comparison of shoplifting to mobility in some combination of the grocery and retail areas would be preferable. proportional weighting of mobility areas according to areas where crimes occur might improve the quality of the match. ideally, both datasets would be georeferenced to allow more precise spatial analysis. hence further research would benefit from more precise geographical linking of the mobility and crime data. in addition, the baseline comparison group for the mobility data was earlier weeks in 2020, which is less robust than a baseline comparison group from several previous years of data: it is to be hoped that further research can continue to develop these comparisons.the aggregate mobility data used here did not distinguish between the movement of potential offenders and potential victims. perhaps future research, using retrospective tracking of mobility at the individual level, can develop such comparisons. for example, the movements of known offenders and those arrested during the course of events examined here, could be separately traced to determine the extent to which they varied from aggregate movement patterns and those of other sections of the population. to that extent, mobility tracking has potentially widespread implications for the study of crime. this study did not address all types of crime. this includes drug-related offences and organised crimes of various types. we recognise that new opportunities have arisen for fraud and theft of medical equipment, while many online crime types are likely to have been facilitated by increased online remote working and leisure activities, but were outside the scope of this study. in the context of mobility though, physical movement restrictions can, via increased online work and leisure, increase the virtual movement necessary for internet-related crimes from online child sexual abuse to fraud, and this suggests how the present study may shed light on changes to other types of crime.most governments around the world restricted the movement of people through some combination of social distancing and lockdown, as part of efforts to tackle the coronavirus pandemic. this produced a range of unintended consequences, including upon crime.this study examined the effects on crime in the days leading up to, and following, a lockdown. changes were found to largely fit with predictions, based on crime science theories, set out before much of the evidence was available (farrell and tilley 2020) 12 . our principal conclusion here is that variations in the timing and trajectory of crime rate changes largely reflect those in mobility that occurred in response to covid-19 and policies to address it. that is, we suggest a mobility theory of crime change in the pandemic.many crimes continued to be committed during these early stages of the pandemic. for example, shoplifting declined 60 percent which means it still occurred at 40 percent of its expected level. here the mobility elasticity of crime offers useful explanatory insight. for example, the inverse unitary relationship between residential area mobility and burglary dwelling fits with how mobility changes in residential areas were relatively smaller than those in retail and recreation areas, and so too were the effects on crime.in addition to the need for replication and extension of the work begun here, there are other issues for further research. clearly, further study of the mobility-crime relationship is needed, amongst which the potential to examine offender and victim mobility may prove particularly fruitful. more generally speaking, alternative applications of mobility reports, particularly if they can be further disaggregated, holds significant potential. victim surveys should shed light on the reporting and recording of crime in the pandemic. we also recognise that there are various types of crime not addressed here that are also important and will have been facilitated by conditions relating to the pandemic. changes to virtual mobility, that is, online traffic in different domains, may shed light on online crimes just as physical mobility has shed light on physical crimes here.as we exit lockdown and mobility levels change, our theory suggests that crime will respond. many crime types will increase as mobility increases, but a v-shape bounce-back would be negative, and policy and practice to promote an l-shaped trajectory should be encouraged. a w-shape crime trajectory might result from further covid flares-ups and lockdowns, both nationally and locally. strategies that anticipate such changes need to be developed.many crime types have been in long-term decline in recent decades, particularly in developed countries. reduced crime opportunities, mediated by improved security and reduced target suitability, has emerged as a strong explanation (farrell et al. 2014) . crime changes relating to the coronavirus pandemic are consistent with effects upon crime opportunities of changes to mobility. that is, the relatively short-term rapid changes in crime experienced during the covid-19 pandemic appear consistent with the explanation offered for the longer-term international crime drop, but so too with increases in cybercrime, fraud and other new and emerging crimes that emerged as the result of increased crime opportunities. policy and practice based on this insight are likely to differ from those seeking to address crime from other perspectives.the reduced crime opportunities to which the international crime drop is attributed have been found to disproportionately reduce juvenile offending. one study suggested this has had a longer-term 'legacy effect' because each annual cohort of juvenile offenders was smaller, meaning fewer continued in offending over the life-course, thereby further reducing crime in the decades that followed (farrell et al. 2015) . the pandemic could, conceivably, produce a similar but smaller legacy if the 2020 cohort of potential young offender remained uninitiated, or found offending more difficult and less rewarding, because of mobility restrictions. if there is something to this, the smaller 2020 cohort of continuing offenders will produce an inadvertent beneficial legacy of covid-19 policies in years to come.strategic vision to support continued provision of essential services for their residents, even as the public health crisis intensifies and spreads. in new york city, for example, local government managers worked to put 6,000 homeless individuals, some covid-19 positive, into local hotels to mitigate the crisis in homeless shelters (connelly 2020) . in baltimore, maryland, the city established a diaper delivery service to distribute 500,000 diapers to nearly 10,000 vulnerable young children over a two-month period (city of baltimore 2020). in albany, georgia, city officials held daily press briefings to inform the public about progress regarding covid-19 and initiated a grassroots effort, #maskupalbany, to encourage face masks, even before the u.s. centers for disease control and prevention (cdc) adopted the recommendation (walb news team 2020). tulsa, oklahoma and dallas, texas are also notable examples of local governments that are providing soft loans to local businesses and cash assistance to families to mitigate the impact of the crisis in their communities (city of tulsa 2020; city of dallas 2020).the covid-19 pandemic has tested government emergency preparedness efforts around the world and at all levels, and perhaps most especially, at the local government level. many local governments have become adept at managing natural weather-related disasters, as severe winter weather, hurricane season, or flooding become more frequent occurrences that instigate a network of emergency response and recovery efforts. in the case of these types of disasters, the intergovernmental system approach in the united states is federal support, state coordination, and local response in the aftermath of an event. as disasters occur, savvy local officials communicate up the chain-to the governor, congressional representatives and senators-to garner a presidential declaration of disaster in order to be able to apply for and receive federal recovery funding.importantly, localities must tally losses after disaster abates and account for such losses to federal and state governments before relief is forthcoming. this article is protected by copyright. all rights reserved.with covid-19, however, local governments have been hit by a catastrophe that does not square easily within the framework of weather-related natural disasters. in the case of a weatherrelated catastrophe, the event occurs and ends, first responders engage, damages are surveyed, and then clean up advances the recovery phase. while these types of disasters can occur across a wide swath of territory, covering multiple jurisdictions, the damage sites are visible and, once the event concludes, have borders. thomas reeves, community and media relations officer of modesto, california explained why a pandemic is different from other natural disasters his community is familiar with, such as wildfires:we will face two or more crises at the same time by this summer [2020] . with a fire, you know where it is and you can stay away from it, you can watch boundaries move, but for most people, the fire is avoidable, usually fast moving and short lived and you can see where it is.with this situation [pandemic] , it is invisible and slow-moving, and we are all at risk, no one is immune, and it is everywhere (alliance for innovation 2020).a pandemic can strike across borders, at any time, and is unseen-in the case of and without universal testing, carriers of the virus may exhibit no symptoms, adhere to preventive guidelines, but still spread it to others. viral hot spots may loosen stay-at-home restrictions as confirmed cases and deaths diminish, only to experience a resurgence in its spread later. the cdc warning of a second wave of the novel coronavirus in conjunction with the start of the flu season in late fall, 2020, attests to the insidious nature of this biological natural disaster (sun 2020) .another distinction between these types of natural disasters regards the movement of government fiscal support, how it is secured, and where it lands. in the covid-19 pandemic, there has been an exceptional flow of funds coming from the federal government with declarations of need after the fact or not necessary at all. the purpose of the funds was to support the front lines of health care-so that hospitals and health care workers can treat those physically affected by the virus. but also, federal funding sent to individuals, made available to private businesses and for all sorts of government functions like transportation and housing was meant to keep the economy going, if limply. local officials' reactions to the no (or few) strings attached money went both ways.gwinnett county, georgia grants manager, sharon candler, explained that the county received $163 million in federal dollars that must be spent by the end of the year. along with funding a cornucopia of social needs (food, housing, and childcare), the money will be used for programs that have not been high priority in the past-reducing homelessness and food insecurity. according to candler, these federal funds provide -the flexibility to address what we need to address. neighboring cobb county, georgia commission chair, mike boyce, however, expressed dismay that the federal government has left choice to local governments. -when you do that, you open it up to the political process and then it gets kind of noisy (estep and lutz 2020) . at the other end of the spectrum, local governments with under 500,000 in population have been dependent on the generosity of governors to shift federal cares act funds downward. alternatively, as noted earlier, in the case of weatherrelated disasters, local governments must account to the federal government, their state and insurance providers regarding damages and their costs first before the monetary aid arrives.this research explores insights from local government officials and managers currently at the frontlines of response and recovery efforts to the biological natural disaster. we also study results from the latest nationwide survey of u.s. local governments regarding their preparedness for weather-related natural disasters. findings indicate that local governments are innovating and taking strategic actions to fight the virus. examples abound of public officials and managers engaging and steering proactive, nimble actions espoused by new public management in conjunction with collaborative efforts promoted by new public service (denhardt and denhardt 2000) . in fact, this crisis has nudged governments not only to generate -new packages of routines and processes characteristic of agile governance, but to do so by breaking up and reforming traditional work groups and structures (mergel, ganapati and whitford 2020, 1) . such actions are occurring, in light of or in spite of the fact that covid-19 has exposed social inequities that have been exacerbated as the virus spreads and takes hold of localities (duhigg 2020; jacobson 2020; nania 2020) .on the other hand, survey findings of disaster readiness of local governments to weatherrelated disasters show that small and resource poor governments will not be able to respond well, if at all, and social inequities will grow. management and policy strategies at all levels of government need to recognize and account for these inequities, keeping the public value of social equity at the forefront of actions to support stronger, more effective readiness for the next biological catastrophe.the article concludes with action strategies that can be engaged by local governments to navigate more effectively during and following the biological natural disaster that is covid-19.we have been conducting exploratory research over the last two years regarding u.s. local government fiscal resiliency in the event of a natural, weather-related disaster. the research assesses local governments' past experiences and current preparation efforts for these types of disasters through surveys, interviews, government document searches and academic research, thus far. in september 2019, we partnered with the international city/county management association (icma) to conduct a survey of the natural disaster preparedness capacity of u.s. local governments, given the federal emergency management agency's (fema) recommended best practices on natural disaster preparedness. survey questions included those regarding the adequacy of financial resources to support response and recovery efforts, familiarity with protocols for obtaining state and federal disaster relief resources, existence of mutual aid agreements to share services, support agreements with nearby governments and other entities, and the disaster-related services and technologies in existence, such as emergency operations facilities and geographic information tracking systems.with the advent of the covid-19 pandemic, however, our work pivoted to examine how localities are managing through a biological disaster. we first went back to the u.s. federal government's national disaster response system and plan, to understand if plans vary for different types of disasters. tables 1 and 2 present these plans. within a broader system of national disaster response (table 1) is embedded a robust system for responding to pandemics ( table 2 ). the national disaster response system, generally, is designed to be bottom-up, from local to state governments and the federal government, but in the case of a pandemic, the response system more closely ascribes to a top-down approach.after assessing these plans, we began to solicit insights from local government managers currently dealing with the covid-19 pandemic who have previously managed weather-related natural disasters. thus far, we have received comments by email or telephone from local government managers in albany, georgia; athens, georgia; bay county, florida; and, huntsville, alabama. in addition to this ongoing study effort, we have collected an assortment of webinars and online conferences that include interviews of or presentations by local government managers provided by professional groups such as the american society for public administration (aspa), the international city/county managers association (icma), and the united states conference of mayors. the research also includes exploration of multiple media outlets, including newspapers, newscast interviews, and podcasts to understand how local government managers are conducting their work given covid-19. this article is protected by copyright. all rights reserved.our extant data indicates that the covid-19 pandemic is like other disasters in pushing local governments to both rescue and recover, as well as continue with business as usual. according to dayton, ohio mayor nan whaley, in a discussion about the current crisis and other types of disasters:[in 2019], our city was rocked by a series of completely unexpected events-a kkk rally, a series of mass tornadoes, and a mass shooting that claimed nine lives now while 2019 in dayton was certainly an anomaly, it can also serve as a microcosm of what nearly every city in the country is going through today. mayors must both try to lead their community through difficult and sometimes tragic times while also making sure there are sufficient resources to do the basic business of local government-picking up the trash, responding to medical emergencies, and keeping the economy moving (u.s. conference of mayors 2020).also, while actions to manage a weather-related disaster may not be exactly the same as those necessary for a pandemic, building capacity and learning from experience squares with both. city manager sharon subadan, of albany, georgia, an early hot spot of the covid-19 pandemic in the state, told us that her government -had four presidentially-declared disasters (not including the pandemic) since 2017. we are practically experts at responding to tornadoes, straight-line winds, and hurricanes. the most significant difference [from the pandemic] is that there is an established playbook' for those responses. still, past disaster management efforts can provide support to local officials in certain ways. for example, having relationships with regional, state, and federal agencies, cooperative agreements, and communications frameworks across jurisdictions can save time when any type of disaster hits. the city administrator of huntsville, alabama, john hamilton, explained to us the importance of groundwork necessary for effective disaster management: -if you are meeting your regional partners or state and federal partners for the first time after disaster strikes, you are too late. spend time developing relationships and partnerships throughout your region as a matter of regular routine so you are ready when the event strikes. managers throughout government must be ready to act quickly and decisively-to reorganize, this article is protected by copyright. all rights reserved.jacobson's work was successful in -flattening the curve, producing guidance in partnership with cdc, finding ppe for childcare facilities, creating a small business grant program, and making additional funding proposals for federal funds. yet, he explained that the social inequities of the crisis cannot be overlooked as its spread -disproportionately impacts low-income communities of color as well as indigenous, immigrant and refugee populations (jacobson 2020). jacobson (2020) determined much of the success of the command's actions to be attributable to the fact that -in king county, social equity has been an important tenet of many of our decisions for responding to this pandemic. his command's efforts going forward include assessing working conditions physically in terms of what work can remain online and what must be conducted face-to-face, examining work spaces for changes to accommodate social distancing for service delivery, considering new services and programs needed, budgetary limitations, and contemplating silver linings. silver linings are those changes made in response to covid-19 that worked, including a reduced jail population, increased homeless housing and motel occupancy, rapid acceptance of telemedicine, a normalizing of teleworking, and an uptick in online service delivery that can be maintained and even grown (american society for public administration 2020).reeves of modesto echoed jacobson's call for managers to lead, be decisive, and take instant actions, describing the role of public information officer as rising to the top and grabbing firm rein to manage frequent communications from multiple sources in a pandemic:it is absolutely critical that any city's or county's public information officer is tied to the hip to the city manager because in this crisis the lead communicator has to hear first-hand what the jurisdiction is doing. the mayor's message should be of hope and encouragement while the manager can detail what is being done and what to do. there's always going to be a place for a media source to simply give out the bad news-here are the number of cases, online capacity came to athens/clarke county, georgia through -unplanned innovation.chief financial officer, david boyd, told us:a couple of years ago, not really planning for any sort of disaster, we saw where technology was going, and instead of replacing desktop computers, we replaced with laptops and docking stations. this was so that when our employees went out and gave presentations or met with people, they had access to all the same information through their laptop. it just so happens that this worked out for us-we have voip and vpns and are prepared for any distant work that has allowed a shift from in-office to home working. so, we haven't missed a beat in that regard. now, there are things that must be done manually, so some folks have to be in the office, but we can deposit funds, conduct accounting and budgeting, and many of our functions, in-office or not. we sort of planned ahead without really planning ahead.carrie mathes, procurement manager for orange county, florida served as chorus to the public servants above. she talked about developing and implementing a telework program over a weekend, deployed march 23, 2020, and impacting 27 of 34 staff, transitioning processes into a completely electronic environment. her team converted a paper procurement system into a virtual one seemingly overnight, with all solicitations, bid openings and selection of vendors conducted online-a first virtual public opening was conducted april 29, 2020. mathes noted that her department had been contemplating online procurement processes, but the crisis pressed practically instant conversion and the department will not be returning to a paper process (american society for public administration 2020).this article is protected by copyright. all rights reserved.early revenue collection data and revenue loss estimates illustrate the depth of fiscal shock that is possible from covid-19. a survey of local governments conducted in early april, 2020, showed uncertainty around the fiscal effects from covid-19, but widespread expectations of budget shortfalls (maher, hoang and hindery 2020) . the depth of fiscal shock became ever more apparent short term budget options that every manager considers-across the board cuts, deferred maintenance, hiring freeze, and three months wait for things to cool down. but the covid-19 pandemic has put government actions on steroids. vetter discussed the requirement to rethink core services and contemplate if services stopped during the crisis that were not adding value are worth bringing back. she emphasized that change in her district spans employee reassignments to building this article is protected by copyright. all rights reserved. accepted article restructuring to accommodate social distancing for employees and the public (international city/county managers association 2020).through interviews we learned from albany manager subadan that the most considerable difference to finances in a pandemic -is that our expenses associated with the covid-19 crisis are much less than a natural disaster, but our revenue losses are much higher. and our revenue losses are not reimbursable. also, county manager of bay county, florida, bob majka, claimed -midterm and long-term revenue sources should run the same impact and recovery timeline, 12 to 36 months or more, as a hurricane. the variables that will impact the timeline are dependent on the amount of dislocation of businesses and residents, and the pace of infrastructure restoration and reconstruction. city administrator of baraboo, wisconsin kennie downing, discussed pivots by small cities during the crisis to support economic recovery. this city tapped into tax improvement district funds and undesignated economic development funds, creating a $250,000 small business emergency loan program targeted to for-profit businesses with 25 employees or less. they are making $5,000 loans available to businesses to use for mortgages, leases, payroll, whatever is needed to stay afloat.businesses must be current with all city bills and not in bankruptcy, and those securing loans will not be charged interest, with notes due, july 2021. since the program started, the city has received 15 applications and approved 14, with all transactions online. downing explained that they are working on a similar plan for nonprofits (international city/county managers association 2020). as businesses and restaurants reopen in the state of florida, city manager norton bonaparte of sanford, pressed economic development by reviewing local ordinances of public spaces, specifically lifting limits on how far restaurants can leech into these spaces to accommodate returning customers and offer social distancing at the same time (american society for public administration 2020). this article is protected by copyright. all rights reserved.in the end, the ability of local governments to continue to pay for regular services will be more challenging than paying for pandemic response. the u.s. conference of mayors (2020) has a -fiscal pain tracker to compile revenue and budget effects of the covid-19 pandemic on cities.the tracker captures immediate and projected revenue losses and budgetary reactions including, furloughs, hiring freezes, deferment of capital projects and service restrictions. examples are stark, with cities evidencing vast reductions in public safety and emergency services, among others taking a hit. the federal government provided funds to reimburse local governments for pandemic costs, but did not provide funds to counter revenue losses, at least in the first rounds of stimulus. thus, the disaster costs should not cripple local governments, but the long-term revenue fallout from the pandemic coupled with the need to fund regular, ongoing services will be a primary, perhaps overwhelming strain.local governments have innovated, repurposed, and applied lessons from past disasters; however, the ability of local governments to undertake those efforts varies significantly. this research highlights the management strategies above for the purpose of learning as the covid-19 pandemic continues, but we fully recognize that learnings without capacity cannot spread. capacity takes two paths here-underlying resource capacity of a local government and pandemic-impacted capacity.for example, one local government may be resource-poor prior to the pandemic and struggle to respond given the underlying resource constraints. another local government may be resource-rich prior to the pandemic, but then be particularly hard-hit by the pandemic based on the local economy.some communities may fall into both capacity gaps-resource-poor before the pandemic and particularly damaged due to the pandemic. this article is protected by copyright. all rights reserved.this section examines key findings from the latest national survey on weather-related natural disaster preparedness to inform policy strategies that could help spur agility and innovation across local governments during the covid-19 pandemic. the survey, conducted in partnership with icma and distributed by email to chief administrative officials in a sample of 4,932 local governments, realized a response rate of 18 percent (901 responses). weather-related natural disaster preparedness, emergency response, and subsequent economic recovery requires that local governments have critical mechanisms in place before a disastrous event. preparations include adequate financial resources available to support relief and recovery efforts, an up-to-date disaster plan that lays out roles and responsibilities of government employees and other external stakeholders, familiarity with protocols for securing state and federal disaster relief resources, mutual aid agreements to share services and lend support with neighboring jurisdictions, and specific services and technologies like emergency having financial resources available that support relief and recovery efforts (general fund reserves or this article is protected by copyright. all rights reserved. accepted article unrestricted funds, insurance, departmental funds, or contingency/emergency funds). at least twothirds have services and technologies for disaster recovery efforts (backed up data storage for key records, emergency operations center, detailed gis map of community assets, or offsite information systems). these governments are likely to have a number of plans and agreements in place to account for a disastrous event-hazard mitigation plan, continuity of operations plan, or standalone disaster recovery plan, pre-disaster contracts for emergency management and debris removal and public safety and public works mutual aid agreements with neighboring jurisdictions. further testament to groundwork relationship building, more than half have established formal partnerships with local nonprofit, community, and/or religious organizations to be activated post-disaster. a majority (at least 54 percent) have conducted a capital asset vulnerability assessment. alternatively, 61 percent of local governments have not implemented any disaster training exercises to prepare for disaster.to understand variation across governments, we analyzed survey responses using item response theory (irt). irt modeling uses a collection of items or questions in a survey to measure an unobservable latent trait and analyzes how each individual item, or group of items, relates to the latent trait (birnbaum, 1968; de ayala, 2009) . we are able to characterize survey respondents given where they fall on the latent trait. the results yield a measure of natural disaster preparedness as a latent trait; this trait is comprised of seven items from the survey (tables 3 and 4) and is scaled on a continuum from 0 to 7. the analysis differentiates local governments based on their latent trait measure across other variables such as fiscal capacity.our major finding from the irt modeling is that local governments with less fiscal capacity tend to be less ready for disasters. local governments of stronger fiscal capacity (annual budget exceeding $100 million) achieve a higher score (4.8 out of 7) on the disaster preparedness scale whereas local governments of smaller fiscal capacity (annual budget less than $100 million) achieve a lower score (3.1 out of 7) on the disaster preparedness scale. this speaks to the social inequity implications of these types of disasters-major natural disasters make the poorer, poorer, if not the rich, richer. in addition to less readiness, poor communities often suffer most heavily from disasters for several reasons-they do not have the capacity to apply for aid, are not prepared with the data needed that costs out property inventory and assets lost, or even if they do have the data, tallied costs do not reach federal minimal levels to be funded. for example, murray county, georgia, suffered damages from a tornado in april, 2020, but fema explained no support would be forthcoming.approximately 254 homes were affected by the tornado, and 62 were destroyed, comprised mostly of mobile homes. according to county commissioner greg hogan, -the dollar amount [of damages] just didn't add up. fema advised the government that -the value of the damaged property in the county did not reach the minimal $7 million to qualify for federal relief funds (oliver 2020) . while these findings about emergency preparedness are specific to weather-related events, the findings can also provide policy insights for dealing with the current biological disaster, the coronavirus pandemic.that is, localities must prepare because there is no reliable calvary. in talking of small local governments being left behind, assistant city manager good from lone tree bemoaned:[your city will] get lost in the shuffle if you are small, less than 25,000 people. the smaller you are, the harder it is to get that money. rattle your saber and make a lot of noise [to get federal relief funds]. the reality for the time being, there is no one coming to save us. we have to figure it out. a community our size is struggling (international city/county managers association 2020).importantly, -the coronavirus pandemic has taught cities that bigger bureaucracies are not all that reliable [to help] (beyer 2020) . pittsburg, pennsylvania mayor bill peduto portends a bleak future for these governments:if we don't invest in [the economically vulnerable regions], it is putting the final nail in the coffin. it is saying to an area of america that we don't have the capacity to help you. stress is always like this. areas that are vulnerable will break (u.s. conference of mayors 2020).the fiscal fallout from disasters is mind-boggling. natural, biological, and man-made disasters (like a train wreck or ransomware attack) are costly and can quickly overwhelm local governments' ability and capacity to function. globally, direct economic losses from just natural disasters alone from 1998 to 2017 amounted to $3 trillion (u.s. dollars), with the united states suffering the greatest economic losses of any other country, at $945 billion (wallemacq, below and mclean 2018) . according to a recent estimate by the asian development bank, the economic cost from the covid-19 pandemic may top $4 trillion (alegado 2020). the u.s. economy is estimated to take a hit reaching almost a quarter of the $4 trillion total at $973 billion (perryman 2020).local governments have met these challenges with leadership and tenacity, learning from each other and from past disasters. our survey research with icma points to learning on the part of local governments that have managed through prior disasters and robust preparedness on a number of fronts for weather-related disasters. vital in this current crisis, leaders and staff of these governments exhibit the values of agile governing that require strongest attention to people over process;operational digitized systems over antiquated paper trails; collaborative, not adversarial problemsolving across sectors; and nimbleness of response in the face of faulty, inadequate, old or no plans this article is protected by copyright. all rights reserved. accepted article (mergel, ganipati and whitford 2020) . ultimately, agile governing calls for the celebration of small wins gained from action rather than avoidance of failure from inaction. covid-19 has pushed local officials to engage an agile-adaptive approach to management that requires decisiveness and relatively quick actions that have led to greater efficiencies of operations, more participation by employees and the public in determining and conducting necessary work, and improved government transparency (moon 2020) .this research also highlights the critical need for officials in governments of least capacity, most especially, to become expert in initiating and perpetuating collaborations, especially those that enhance community benefits or ccb (min, lee and yang 2020) . our findings indicate that local officials in these communities are up to the task-by virtue of their agile actions evidenced and given recognition of the social inequities that covid-19 and responses to it have exposed. ccb requires boundary spanning and inclusiveness-carrying out public purposes by engaging a wide net of participants-public, private and nonprofit. such collaboration is not only mutually beneficial to contributing parties but supports the public good (min, lee and yang 2020) . given problems created by the current crisis and with the inevitability of future ones to come, small town government officials must push actions that foster a mindset that extends such a -whole of community benefit approach.nonetheless, even in the face of local governments' rather extraordinary actions to date to combat effects of covid-19, these governments, and particularly those with limited capacity, require substantial assistance from state and federal governments when confronted with disasters of this scale. even prior to the pandemic, local governments across the nation faced dire threats from more frequent and severe weather-related disasters. the pandemic has unearthed real social inequities that exist and can be exacerbated with each subsequent disaster experienced. policymakers must devise a fiscal support system that recognizes these social inequities that prevent preparation, mitigation, and recovery capacity and are intensified with every disaster. additionally, going forward, the policy arena needs fiscal thinkers to be in climate change and disaster-related conversations-bringing the full cost to bear of these events on communities and making the case for greater intervention to prevent such catastrophes. in sum, this research highlights points of evidence for practice necessary to strengthen local government response and recovery from the coronavirus pandemic: government managers must continue with agile governing actions-to lead and motivate, communicate clearly and effectively, collect intelligence, act decisively, and keep adapting and innovating. local governments must collaborate for community benefits-by creating, maintaining, and expanding networks and shared learning with neighboring jurisdictions to strengthen partnerships that advance whole of community response and recovery. federal and state fiscal support to local governments should consider and address fiscal disparities and social inequities across these governments-special attention should be given to small local governments of limited capacity. core instruments and frameworks for national emergency response (a) the national incident management system (i) it outlines a common approach to managing incidents or emergencies regardless of their size, scope, complexity, or cause. (ii) it provides a standardized but flexible incident management structure that emphasizes command and coordination among all stakeholders, as well as resource management and communication and information management.(b) national response framework (i) it provides the core emergency management guidance on how the nation should respond to all types of incidents. (ii) it defines roles, responsibilities, and actions for federal departments and agencies to coordinate support for state and local governments. (iii) it also gives structures and procedures on how governments at all levels should work in unity with the non-profit and private sectors in response to emergencies. (iv) the key components of the response framework are: -engaged partnership, tiered response, scalable, flexible, and adaptable operational capabilities, unity of effort through unified command, and readiness to act. (department of homeland security 2019, 5) core instruments for pandemic response under the national emergency response framework (a) the public health security and bioterrorism preparedness and response act of 2002 (i) it is designed to enhance the nation's ability to prevent, prepare for, and respond to public health emergencies and to provide effective assistance to state and local governments in the event of a public health emergency. (ii) the federal government will undertake surveillance and monitoring of the progress of the pandemic on a national and international scale, and support and sponsor the development and production of medical interventions. (iii) it will also support the response and mitigation efforts of state and local governments in a variety of ways, including deployment of personnel and expertise, and provision of material and equipment, diagnostic services and testing, and funding for related response activities.(b) state and local governments (i) state and local governments are primarily responsible for detecting and responding to pandemics and implementing countermeasures to mitigate the human, social, and economic consequences of the pandemic. (ii) they will coordinate their response efforts with federal departments and agencies, and when needed, request for and distribute emergency supplies and medical interventions from national stockpiles to areas of need within their communities. (iii) they will work to enhance communication between their public health departments and private sector partners engaged in the response to a pandemic.(c) nonprofit and private sectors (i) the nonprofit and private sectors will be an integral part of the national response to a pandemic. (ii) they will leverage their resources and expertise in multiple areas, including public health (e.g., health care facilities and clinical laboratories), economic development, and community planning to support local, state, and national efforts to mitigate the pandemic. (iii) businesses, corporations, and community and religious organizations will continue with the essential functions and services needed to sustain lifeline community needs.(d) individuals and families (i) individuals and families will support state and local government efforts to contain the pandemic, including stay at home orders, social distancing protocols, self-isolation procedures, and travel. (ii) individuals will also support community response efforts through volunteerism and performance of civic and humanitarian duties. experimental and observational studies demonstrate the influence of meteorological parameters on the seasonal transmission of influenza, human coronavirus (hcov), and human respiratory syncytial virus (rsv), which are often characterized by distinct increases in incident cases and detection frequency in the winter months (lowen and j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f 3 in the us. as the us begins its public health response to covid-19, the implementation of extensive public health interventions are needed at appropriate time scales to mitigate the public health and economic impacts of the covid-19 pandemic. research on the seasonality and influence of meteorological parameters on covid-19, such as temperature and specific humidity, can be used to inform the timing of effective interventions to mitigate sars-cov-2/covid-19 transmission at the local scale to save countless lives and resources.the objective of this research is to examine the association between meteorological variables and covid-19 in us cities. unlike previous studies, we will use a highresolution spatiotemporal meteorological dataset to answer the following: is there an association with meteorological parameters and covid-19? if so, which meteorological parameters predict covid 19 transmission? is the association stronger after accounting for locally implemented social distancing measures? how does this relationship vary spatially across the us? by answering these questions, the knowledge gained on the contribution of environmental factors like temperature and humidity on transmission can be paired with other nonpharmaceutical interventions related to behavioral (e.g., wearing face mask, washing hands) factors that boost immunity or the timing of social distancing measures with seasonal spikes in influential environmental parameters to reduce transmission.this retrospective case-crossover study examined the nonlinear and delayed association between environmental factors and covid-19 j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f 4 transmission. we selected the following us locations that exhibited high relative caseloads of covid-19 in the early stages of the pandemic for their underlying populations: seattle, washington; new york, ny; albany ga; new orleans, la.;bridgeport-stamford-norwalk, conn.; pittsfield, mass; detroit, mi; chicago, il. figure 1 is a map of the 8 study locations. we assumed at least a median incubation period of 5.2 days (lauer et al 2020) . case counts were log-transformed, and time series were created when cities had more than 2 new daily cases. because deidentified and anonymized data on case morbidity were obtained from a publicly accessible data portal this research did not involve participant consent and institutional review was not warranted.environmental parameters. meteorological data were derived from the european center for median range weather forecast (ecmwf) atmospheric reanalysis dataset (era-5) (c3s, 2017). era-5 provides a suite of hourly weather parameters that may affect local covid-19 transmissions at a 30-km spatial resolution. while not commonly used in environmental health studies, the advantage that era-5 data provides over individual weather station data is that spatial heterogeneity is more representative and the estimation of health effects of temperature and humidity can be derived in locations far j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f 5 from weather stations or without any station. previous research has shown that reanalysis data and weather station data show similar health risk estimates (roye et al 2020). daily average near-surface air temperature, specific humidity, and solar radiation were extracted from era-5 for each study location by a simple spatial average. because relative humidity (rh) is highly correlated with temperature, we chose to instead include specific humidity as a predictor variable in the analysis.heat mapping. preliminary studies have suggested that the combination of humidity and air temperature could affect the transmission of local covid-19 cases (e.g., sajadi et al., 2020 , lou et al., 2020 , oliveriros et al., 2020 . we examined the association between local covid-19 cases and air temperature and specific humidity using the density heatmap. to construct the density heatmap, the daily confirmed covid-19 case reports were first separated based on their corresponding daily mean air temperature (every 1c) and mean specific humidity (every 0.5 g/kg). all daily confirmed case counts were classified into the same air temperature and specific humidity conditions (e.g., 0 c < t air < 1 c and 1 g/kg < q < 1.5 g/kg) and evaluated together as a density measurement. this explanatory analysis was intended to demonstrate the association of covid-19 cases with the combined effect of air temperature and specific humidity.the heatmap could identify the range of optimal meteorological conditions for local transmissions. considering the incubation period of covid-19, we applied the analysis j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f 6 nonlinear model (dlnm). this approach is more flexible than conditional logistic regression (armstrong et al 2014) in that it allows for overdispersion. the application of the dlnm to the case-crossover design provides a means to assess the nonlinear and delayed effects, as well as the cumulative exposure-response between short-term daily average exposure to meteorological parameters and daily counts for covid-19 cases.we performed separate analyses for our primary health outcome --covid-19 morbidity --and each meteorological parameter relative to the median and quartiles (i.e., 50th versus 75th). this approach is suitable for studying the effects of time-varying exposures (e.g., intermittent changes in meteorological) on a rare, acute condition (i.e., covid-19 transmission) (armstrong et al., 2019 , malig et al., 2016 , guo et al., 2011 .we relied on the following equation:where t is the day of the observation; y t is the observed daily case counts on day t;  is the intercept; t t,l is a matrix obtained by applying the dlnm to temperature or humidity,  is a vector of coefficients for t t,l , and l is the lag days. strata t is a categorical variable of day (30 day time period) used to control for trends, and  is a vector of coefficients.sd t is a binary variable that is "1" if day t was a social distancing order, and  is the coefficient. our model was adapted from similar work by guo et al 2011 who also employed a case-crossover design and dlnm to investigate the effects of temperature on mortality (guo et al 2011). given that the incubation period between exposure and symptom occurrence is 2 to 14 days (linton et al 2020), we used a maximum 14-day lag period to explore the potential delayed association of temperature and humidity in our model for approximating the pre-and post-infection period for each case. sensitivity analysis. a sensitivity analysis was conducted to select degrees of freedom for the lag polynomial (2-8 degrees of freedom) and the response polynomial (2-8 degrees of freedom) for new orleans, la (data not shown). in addition, we changed the maximum lag to 14 and 20 days, which gave similar results (data not shown). prior research has examined a 0 day, 3 day to 5 day lags for covid-19 transmission (ma et al 2020 all the way to a lag period extending 7 to 14 days for meteorological parameters (islam et al 2020). for our initial examination of meteorological parameters independently, we compared the best model fit using quasi-akaike information criterion (q-aic) to determine the optimal degrees of freedom and lag periods. q-aic is a well-established technique for sensitivity analysis and was used to compare dlnm-only models and dlnm+case-crossover models to confirm the final model selection (guo et al. 2011) . models were also examined for the adjustment for trends, such as the day of the week. however, due to the short time series, differences were minimal or resulted in a poor fit (high q-aic) and thus we selected the most j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f 8 parsimonious model. the "dlnm" package was used to create the dlnm model (gasparrini 2011) using r statistical software (r core team 2020). we adopted the rare-disease assumption where our study hypothesis tested the association between weather exposure and a disease (i.e., covid-19) characterized by low prevalence. therefore, we assumed the odds ratio to approximate the relative risk. all relative risks (rr) were presented with corresponding 95% confidence intervals (95% cis).attributable burden of covid-19 transmission due to weather. in epidemiology, measures of potential impact are used to examine the expected impact of changing the distribution of one or more risk factors in a particular population (kleinbaum et al 1982 , szklo et al 2014 . for example, the attributable risk, also known as the etiologic fraction, is used to examine the proportion of all new cases in a given time frame that is attributable (or causally associated) to the exposure of interests (szklo et al 2014) .because the evidence-base linking covid-19 transmission and weather is new and evolving, it is too early to assume a causal association. therefore, we relied on the excess fraction (ef) as an analogous, but alternative measure to the attributable risks in our analysis, to approximate the excess caseload due to exposure. to examine the attributable burden of transmission for covid-19 due to weather we calculated the percent excess fraction for humidity and temperature for individual cities. we used the following equation: % ef = b x (rr i -1) / b x (rr -1.0 i ) + 1.0), where b is the point prevalence of covid-19 for each city. point prevalence was calculated as the number of cases over the study period divided by the total population in a specific city. we table   1 ). the crude rate of covid-19 per location was highest for new orleans, la (374 daily cases per 100,000 people), followed by new york city, ny (51 daily cases per 100,000 people), albany, ga (42 daily cases per 100,000 people), and bridgeport, ct (25 daily cases per 100,000 people). the lowest rates of covid-19 cases were in seattle, wa (4 daily cases per 100,000 people), and pittsfield, ma (8 cases per 100,000 people). the highest crude death rates were observed in new york city, ny (6 daily deaths per 100,000 people), albany ga (3 daily deaths per 100,000 people), neworleans, la (2 daily deaths per 100,000 people) and detroit, mi (2 daily deaths per 100,000 people).the density heatmap ( figure 2 ) presents a descriptive explanatory analysis of the combined association of temperature and specific humidity on covid-19 cases for the selected cities. based on the heatmap, covid-19 cases were more common in low specific humidity (2 -6 g/kg) and low temperature (2 -11 c) conditions. this association was consistent when we consider different incubation times (lag 0-14 days).all locations. table 2 shows the goodness of fit (qaic) values across model types for all locations and parameters, which is a common validation and sensitivity technique (e.g, gasparrini et al. 2010 , guo et al. 2011 . in general, the humidity was the strongest j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f 10 predictor for covid-19 cases, with a better model performance for humidity than temperature across all model types and study locations. case crossover models performed higher in seattle, wa, new york city, ny, chicago, il, and new orleans, la. the variation in the dose-response profile for humidity was negligible before and after adding temperature as a predictor into the model, indicating that humidity exhibited a robust association. model performance was poor (indicated by high qaic values) for detroit, mi, pittsfield, ma, and bridgeport, ct. results for these cities were insignificant and therefore not reported in the final results (supplemental figures 1,2) . overall, the case-crossover + dlnm model outperformed the dlnm only model. however, select locations had better model fit for dlnm only (e.g., albany, ga), although marginally better. results were presented for the following cities: new orleans, la, albany, ga, and seattle, wa, and models were selected based on qaic values. dlnm and casecrossover models were also constructed for these locations to analyze the effect of solar radiation (watts/m 2 ) on covid incidence rates.new orleans, la. the relative risk for covid-19 exhibited a u-shaped relationship with increases in cases at high and low humidity in new orleans. with reference to the median humidity, relative risk peaked at minimum (5 g/kg, rr: 1.98, ci: 1.07-3.66) and maximum (16 g/kg, rr: 2.18, ci: 1.28-3.72) values. similarly, temperature exhibited a u-shaped relationship with reference to the median and a significant relative risk at 16-17c (rr: 1.17-1.23; ci: 1.03-2.24) and at the maximum observed temperatures (23c; rr: 1.75, ci: 1.13-2.44). solar values exhibited an inverted u-shaped relationship with a higher relative risk from 5200 -6300 (watts/m 2 ) (figure 3 ).albany, ga. temperature and solar radiation were not significant predictors of covid-19 cases. with reference to the median humidity, significant relative risk is observed from 6 to 9 g/kg (rr: 1.23-1.47, ci: 1.06-1.94). due to a lower qaic value and more robust results, unlike other cities, a dlnm-only model was applied to the humidity and the covid-19 relationship for albany, ga (figure 4) . incidence that revealed a protective effect from 9 to 10c (rr: 0.60-0.69, ci:0.39-0.95), whereas no relationship was observed between humidity and solar radiation and covid-19 cases in nyc ( figure 6) .seattle, wa. the temperature was significant from 3 to 5c (rr: 1.59-1.95, ci: 1.22-2.65). however, the humidity was significant at the lowest values with an increased risk of transmission occurring at less than 3 g/kg (rr: 1.44, ci: 1.16-1.80). lower risk of transmission was observed for the lowest values of solar radiation (i.e., less than 3200 watts/m 2 , rr: 0.93, ci: 0.89-0.97) (figure 7) .the excess burden of new covid-19 cases due to weather. overall, the attributable burden of excess covid-19 cases associated with exposure to humidity and temperature was low for each city (table 3 ). the excess fraction was the highest for j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f new orleans, with 3.7 to 4.5% of new cases occurring within the humidity range of 5g/kg to 16g/kg and 6.8 to 9.1% occurring within the temperature range of 16(c) to 23(c).in this study, we examined whether daily meteorological patterns in humidity, temperature, and solar radiation were associated with the transmission of covid-19 in u.s. cities that emerged as early hot spots for infection. we applied the dlnm to a case-crossover design to assess the nonlinear and delayed effects of meteorological parameters on covid-19 incident cases. to our knowledge, this study is the first to assess the effects of meteorological variables on covid-19 morbidity using a robust distributed lag nonlinear model and case-crossover design. we observed a weak but statistically significant relationship between covid and meteorological parameters for (sajadi et al., 2020) .humidity was observed as the best predictor for the coronavirus outbreak followed by temperature and solar radiation. the majority of cities included in this study demonstrated a nonlinear dose-response relationship between a range of specific humidity conditions and sustained covid-19 transmission. more specifically, 3 of the 4 cities were characterized by a significant relationship between covid-19 transmission and humidity (e.g., albany, ga, new orleans, la, and chicago, il). humidity in the range of 6 to 9 g/kg (analogous to an absolute humidity range of 7.56-11.37 g/m 3 ) was a significant predictor of covid-19 cases and resulted in an up to two-fold increased temperature and solar radiation did not exhibit a strong association with covid19 incidence in our study locations. our results for new york city, ny support and extend previous research on covid19 and meteorological parameters in new york city that found a significant association with temperature using simple correlation coefficients (bashir 2020). bashir et al. observed a direct association with higher temperatures predicting higher covid-19 cases (2020). conversely, our research found a protective effect at higher temperatures and is corroborated by earlier studies (qi et al., 2020, unlike previous studies examining the influence of meteorological factors on covid19 transmission, one strength of our study is the adjustment for social distancing measures (sajadi et al 2020) . most environmental health research includes either a variable for relative humidity (rh) and/or absolute humidity (ah). specific humidity is more conservative and less susceptible to changes in pressure and temperature compared to ah. further, in addition to the confounding influence of humidity and temperature, rh is typically not useful as a stand-alone humidity variable in environmental health or epidemiological research. our results are only comparable to a few recent studies examining the association between covid-19 and specific humidity (e.g., ma et al., 2020 , sajadi et al., 2020 .recent research has demonstrated the linkage between poor air quality and covid-19 mortality (wu et al. 2020) , and in our study, we did not adjust for background air quality measures as a potential confounding factor. while our modeling strategy did adjust for social distancing measures, our estimates do not account for underreporting of case counts (lachmann 2020) , demographic data on cases, changes in testing capacity, or the date of onset of covid19 symptoms. this study did not include information on the dentro de la patologa evaluada en urgencias, una de las ms prevalentes y de mayor morbimortalidad es la respiratoria. aunque las enfermedades respiratorias que pueden manifestarse de forma aguda son muy diversas, desde el punto de vista asistencial, las ms importantes son las infecciones respiratorias y las agudizaciones de enfermedades crnicas muy prevalentes como la enfermedad pulmonar obstructiva crnica (epoc).en los servicios de urgencias (su), las infecciones respiratorias suponen alrededor del 3% del total de las consultas y el 30% de las infecciones 1 ; existe un claro predominio estacional, logrando alcanzar cifras de prevalencia de hasta el 6% en los meses de invierno 2 . la principal afectacin ocurre en varones de edad avanzada y con comorbilidades tales como cardiopata, diabetes o broncopatas 1 .las infecciones respiratorias de las vas altas son motivo de consulta frecuente en atencin primaria 3 , sin embargo, en el su predominan las infecciones respiratorias de las vas bajas. en este artculo se abordarn las infecciones respiratorias ms prevalentes en el su: bronquitis aguda, exacerbacin de epoc y bronquiectasias y neumonas.se describe como la inflamacin de la mucosa de las vas respiratorias centrales, generalmente de carcter autolimitado (duracin entre 7-14 das), en ausencia de patologa obstructiva crnica. presenta una elevada incidencia, afectando al ao al 5% de la poblacin general, siendo ms habitual en los meses de invierno 4, 5 . es ms frecuente en nios y en fumadores, y el principal desencadenante es un agente infeccioso.es la causa de ms del 90% de los casos, si bien estos solo se identifican entre un 16 y un 30% de los casos [4] [5] [6] [7] . entre ellos el virus influenza es el agente ms habitual, con gran morbilidad asociada debido a la facilidad de contagio, seguido por el virus parainfluenza, causantes del crup en la infancia y bronquitis de repeticin en el adulto, el virus respiratorio sincitial (vrs), que afecta principalmente a nios, ancianos o personas con patologa crnica de base. agentes como el coronavirus, adenovirus y rinovirus se encuentran habitualmente asociados a infeccin de la va area superior. en casos aislados, es secundaria a los virus del sarampin, rubeola y metaneumovirus humano.causantes del 6% de los casos de bronquitis aguda [4] [5] [6] [7] . las ms asociadas a este proceso incluyen mycoplasma pneumoniae, chlamydia pneumoniae, bordetella pertussis y parapertussis, sobre todo en sujetos sanos, si bien se han descrito epidemias comunitarias como coinfeccin con virus respiratorios. streptococcus pneumoniae, moraxella catarrhalis y haemophilus influenzae se encuentran en pacientes con enfermedades preexistentes, como la epoc.el sntoma cardinal y la principal causa de consulta en el su es la tos. suele iniciarse a las 48 horas del inicio de la infeccin en el 85% de los pacientes. la duracin media es de menos de dos semanas, si bien en un 26% contina durante mayor tiempo, con un mnimo porcentaje de pacientes en los que persiste ms de 6-8 semanas, y en cuyo caso la probabilidad de etiologa por b. pertussis es significativamente mayor [4] [5] [6] [7] .otros sntomas incluyen expectoracin, disnea, dolor torcico, febrcula, escalofros y aumento de los ruidos respira-torios. cada uno de estos sntomas puede presentarse en distinto grado o estar ausentes.es principalmente clnico. no se dispone de datos exploratorios patognomnicos o pruebas complementarias definitivas 8 . por tanto, los esfuerzos diagnsticos deben basarse en descartar otras patologas clnicamente semejantes.1. analtico. aporta escasa informacin. en la gripe puede aparecer leucopenia con linfopenia y en la infeccin por b. pertussis leucocitosis con linfocitosis.2. radiolgico. la radiografa (rx) de trax suele ser normal. no est indicada de forma habitual, salvo si existiesen hallazgos semiolgicos llamativos, sospecha de neumona, situaciones de inmunodepresin o en ancianos.3. funcional. los estudios de funcin respiratoria solo estn indicados en pacientes con sospecha de patologa obstructiva o en bronquitis agudas de repeticin.4. microbiolgico. en el su se dispone de pruebas de diagnstico rpido, las cuales deben reservarse para casos especficos sobre la base de la sospecha clnica atpica, y en pacientes con riesgo de complicaciones, pacientes hospitalizados y trabajadores del mbito sanitario en los casos de sospecha de gripe durante epidemias, si bien debe comenzarse el tratamiento en el momento de la sospecha clnica.se realizar principalmente con:1. neumona. de gran importancia por su mortalidad. presenta un cuadro clnico similar (no olvidar manifestaciones atpicas en ancianos), de ah la importancia de la rx de trax.2. asma. suele venir acompaada de sibilancias, taquipnea, hipoxemia.3. bronquiectasias. sospechar ante tos crnica e infecciones de repeticin.el tratamiento es fundamentalmente sintomtico 4-7 . en casos de hiperreactividad bronquial, el uso de agonistas beta 2 podra ser beneficioso. no existen evidencias sobre el papel de los anticolinrgicos, corticoides inhalados y mucolticos en la bronquitis aguda. los antitusgenos se pueden emplear en casos de tos persistente irritativa durante un corto lapso de tiempo. la antibioterapia debera reservarse para casos aislados (b. pertussis), ya que la principal causa de bronquitis aguda son los virus. asimismo, el tratamiento antivrico no se debe administrar de forma rutinaria, nicamente en aquellos casos de riesgo de complicaciones graves y durante la epidemia de gripe. zanamivir y oseltamivir son eficaces, si se administran precozmente, en la prevencin y tratamiento de las infecciones por influenza a y b.se define como un evento agudo en el desarrollo natural de la enfermedad, caracterizado por un cambio en los sntomas (disnea, tos y/o expectoracin) basales del paciente, ms all de la variabilidad diaria, suficiente como para justificar un cambio de tratamiento.se estima que los pacientes con epoc sufren, en promedio, entre 1 y 4 exacerbaciones anuales, si bien existe una gran variabilidad interindividual 9 .la causa ms frecuente de exacerbacin de la epoc son las infecciones respiratorias, que representan el 75% de todas las causas 10, 11 . entre los agentes etiolgicos se encuentran:1. bacterias: supone la causa ms frecuente de exacerbacin infecciosa. las bacterias identificadas con mayor frecuencia son haemophilus influenzae, streptococcus pneumoniae y moraxella catarrhalis; las enterobacterias y pseudomonas aeruginosa son, sin embargo, ms comunes en agudizaciones graves. la presencia de esputo purulento es un criterio fiable para establecer la etiologa bacteriana de la exacerbacin.2. virus: rinovirus, parainfluenza, coronavirus, adenovirus, vrs.3. organismos atpicos (chlamydophila pneumoniae, mycoplasma pneumoniae). 4 . coinfeccin bacterias-virus.en primer lugar, para una adecuada valoracin clnica se deben seguir los siguientes pasos.confirmar el diagnstico de exacerbacin de la enfermedad pulmonar obstructiva crnica el diagnstico previo de epoc ha de estar establecido mediante espirometra. la agudizacin viene marcada por un empeoramiento mantenido de los sntomas respiratorios, teniendo en cuenta la situacin basal del paciente. del mismo modo, el paciente no debe haber recibido tratamiento en las ltimas 4 semanas por otra agudizacin, en ese caso, se tratara de recada o fracaso teraputico de la previa. todo paciente que acuda al su con esta sospecha debiera, por tanto, disponer de una historia clnica adecuada y una exploracin fsica completa, as como una analtica de sangre que incluya hemograma, bioqumica y gasometra arterial, rx de trax y electrocardiograma para descartar otros procesos o complicaciones aadidas.en la tabla 1 se reflejan los criterios de gravedad segn la gua espaola de la enfermedad pulmonar obstructiva crnica (gesepoc) 11el anlisis microbiolgico (tincin de gram, cultivo, pruebas moleculares) no se recomienda de manera general, salvo en pacientes con riesgo de infeccin por pseudomonas, fracaso de tratamiento antibitico emprico o aquellos pacientes con fallo respiratorio agudo que precisen soporte ventilatorio 10, 11 .broncodilatadores de accin corta. son la base del tratamiento de la agudizacin de la epoc. son de eleccin los betaagonistas de accin corta, si bien pueden combinarse con anticolinrgicos de accin corta, aunque no existe evidencia de que la administracin combinada produzca beneficio durante la exacerbacin. la va de administracin (dispositivos presurizados o nebulizados) depender de la colaboracin del paciente y la necesidad de supervisin.broncodilatadores de accin larga. no existe evidencia sobre su eficacia en la agudizacin de la epoc, si bien se recomienda no interrumpirlos si el paciente ya los usaba previamente 12 . las metilxantinas se desaconsejan por su elevado riesgo de efectos adversos.corticoides. se recomiendan los corticoides sistmicos en el caso de agudizaciones moderadas, graves y muy graves. una dosis de 40 mg al da de prednisona (u otros corticoides, como metilprednisolona, en dosis equivalente) durante 5 das equivale, con menos efectos adversos, a pautas ms prolongadas, por lo que se recomienda esta pauta como norma general 13 . se puede emplear budesonida inhalada en dosis elevadas (2 mg, 3-4 veces/da), en pacientes sin exacerbacin muy grave.antibioterapia. la purulencia del esputo es el signo ms importante para decidir si un paciente precisa antibioterapia en una exacerbacin, tanto en exacerbaciones leves como en las moderadas. en agudizaciones muy graves con necesidad de soporte ventilatorio, la cobertura antibitica es obligada, ya que ha demostrado reducir la incidencia de neumona secundaria y disminuir la mortalidad de forma significativa. el algoritmo teraputico queda reflejado en la tabla 2 11 .constar de: 1. profilaxis de enfermedad tromboemblica venosa, en agudizaciones que requieran ingreso.2. oxigenoterapia necesaria para mantener una saturacin de oxgeno (sao 2 ) entre 88-92% y ventilacin no invasiva en casos de fracaso ventilatorio grave que curse con acidosis respiratoria, disnea intensa o alteracin del nivel de consciencia.3. asegurar un adecuado balance hdrico y soporte nutricional.son los siguientes: parada respiratoria; inestabilidad hemodinmica; alteracin persistente del nivel de conciencia; acidosis respiratoria grave (ph menor de 7,25 o que no mejora pese a ventilacin no invasiva; disnea grave refractaria a tratamiento inicial; hipoxemia grave (po 2 menor de 40 mm hg) pese a oxigenoterapia y necesidad de intubacin orotraquealson los siguientes:1. no es preciso administrar broncodilatadores de accin corta con una frecuencia inferior a 4 horas.2. la disnea del paciente le permite comer y dormir sin despertares recurrentes.3. estabilidad clnica-gasomtrica-oximtrica durante 12-24 horas.4. buen uso de la medicacin y del resto de las medidas teraputicas.5. garanta de la continuidad asistencial.las agudizaciones de los pacientes con bronquiectasias se definen como un deterioro clnico agudo y mantenido con respecto a su situacin basal, caracterizado por un aumento de la tos habitual y cambios en la purulencia o un incremento del volumen/viscosidad del esputo. se puede acompaar de fiebre, anorexia, aumento de disnea, astenia, dolor torcico pleurtico, hemoptisis, cambios en la exploracin respiratoria, cambios en el tratamiento habitual del paciente o cada significativa de la funcin pulmonar 14, 15 .entre los patgenos aislados ms frecuentemente encontramos: de forma inicial, se debe confirmar el diagnstico previo de bronquiectasias, y descartar otras enfermedades con sintomatologa similar (por ejemplo, agudizacin de la epoc, tabla 2 antibioterapia en la agudizacin de la enfermedad pulmonar obstructiva crnica neumona, bronquitis aguda), si bien en algunos casos pueden coexistir. el diagnstico de agudizacin de bronquiectasias es principalmente clnico, no es preciso ningn parmetro analtico sobreaadido para su confirmacin 14 .es de vital importancia distinguir las exacerbaciones leves o moderadas que pueden controlarse con antibioterapia va oral, de las exacerbaciones graves que precisan de antibioterapia intravenosa u hospitalizacin, y que cursan con, al menos, uno de los siguientes criterios: insuficiencia respiratoria aguda o crnica agudizada, deterioro significativo de la saturacin de oxgeno, fiebre elevada u otros criterios de sepsis, hemoptisis franca o deterioro significativo de la funcin pulmonar 14 . los casos muy graves cursan con inestabilidad hemodinmica, alteracin del nivel de conciencia y requerirn de manejo en la uci.el tratamiento de eleccin es la antibioterapia precoz. previo a esto se debe recoger una muestra de esputo para su estudio microbiolgico. para la eleccin del tratamiento antibitico nos basaremos en la existencia de cultivos y antibiograma previos 15 .en caso de infeccin bronquial previa por microorganismos potencialmente patgenos (mpp), se realizar un tratamiento dirigido en funcin del antibiograma, con modificacin posterior segn los resultados microbiolgicos del esputo o ausencia de respuesta.en ausencia de documentacin de infeccin bronquial previa por mpp, en pacientes con riesgo elevado por p. aeruginosa (hospitalizaciones frecuentes, estancia reciente en una unidad de cuidados intensivos -uci-), ciclos repetidos de antibioterapia previa, enfermedad de base grave, aislamiento anterior de p. aeruginosa) se iniciar antibioterapia con frmacos antipseudomnicos. en caso contrario, se recomienda antibioterapia emprica que cubra los patgenos ms habituales (tabla 3). si no existe mejora clnica, se modificar el tratamiento en funcin del cultivo de esputo.adems del tratamiento antibitico, es fundamental el manejo de los sntomas asociados, como el broncoespasmo mediante el empleo de broncodilatadores y la corticoterapia sistmica, as como la administracin de una correcta oxigenacin y soporte nutricional.la neumona es uno de los motivos de consulta ms frecuentes en el su, generando una morbimortalidad significativa 16 . se pueden clasificar en:1. neumona adquirida en la comunidad (nac). se trata de una infeccin aguda del parnquima pulmonar adquirida fuera de un entorno de atencin mdica.2. neumona nosocomial. es una infeccin aguda del parnquima pulmonar adquirida en entornos hospitalarios y abarca tanto la neumona adquirida en el hospital (nah) como la neumona asociada a ventilacin mecnica. distin-tabla 3 guimos entre: a) nah que se presenta a partir de las 48 horas del ingreso hospitalario y b) neumona asociada a ventilacin mecnica, referida a la neumona adquirida 48 horas o ms despus de la intubacin endotraqueal.se define como una infeccin pulmonar aguda que involucra los alvolos en un paciente sin exposicin a la atencin mdica reciente, clnicamente va desde una neumona ambulatoria leve hasta el shock sptico. es la primera causa de sepsis y muerte por infeccin en estados unidos 16 hongos. presentes generalmente en pacientes inmunodeprimidos o con patologa pulmonar crnica, especialmente se aslan aspergillus spp. y pneumocystis jirovecii.parsitos. nematodos como ascaris lumbricoides o strongyloides stercoralis pueden provocar infiltrados alveolares eosinoflicos; sin embargo, son una causa extremadamente infrecuente de nac.el diagnstico de nac requiere la demostracin de una opacidad aguda en las pruebas de imagen, en un paciente con clnica compatible con neumona (presencia de fiebre, disnea, tos y expectoracin).entre las pruebas complementarias a realizar en el su se encuentran las enumeradas a continuacin.la presencia de consolidaciones lobares, infiltrados intersticiales y/o cavitaciones es sugerente de proceso neumnico. la afectacin bilateral, bilobar o multilobar y la existencia de derrame pleural son indicadores de gravedad.tomografa computadorizada. en pacientes seleccionados (inmunocomprometidos, exposiciones conocidas a patgenos epidmicos) con alta sospecha de nac y una rx de trax normal, se puede solicitar tomografa computadorizada de trax 21 .ecografa torcica. la ecografa torcica es un mtodo diagnstico alternativo, se ha mostrado que posee una alta sensibilidad y especificidad; como ventajas destaca que puede usarse durante el embarazo y para monitorizar complicaciones como el derrame pleural, y como inconvenientes la necesidad de experiencia y la variabilidad segn observador 22 .pruebas de laboratorio. hemograma, bioqumica elemental y hemostasia. la determinacin de protena c reactiva y procalcitonina analizan la respuesta inflamatoria. estos resultados informan sobre el estado del paciente y contribuyen a calcular la puntuacin de diferentes escalas pronsticas y la clasificacin de gravedad.algunos resultados analticos se han relacionado con diferentes etiologas, como la hiponatremia, la hipofosfatemia y la hematuria tambin se han relacionado con etiologa por legionella.diagnstico microbiolgico. en el su se dispone de procedimientos de diagnstico habituales en funcin del tipo de muestra: tincin de gram y cultivo de muestra respiratoria (esputo, lquido pleural), antigenurias de s. pneumoniae y legionella, hemocultivos, serologas, tcnicas de amplificacin de cidos nucleicos (aspirado nasofarngeo).existe una gran variedad de escalas pronsticas de gravedad para estratificar a los pacientes en grupos de riesgo en funcin de la probabilidad de muerte a los 30 das o probabilidad de necesitar un tratamiento ms agresivo. esta estratificacin permite decidir el sitio ms adecuado para su manejo (ambulatorio, planta de hospitalizacin, unidades de cuidados intermedios o uci). las dos escalas pronsticas ms comnmente utilizadas y recomendadas por las guas clnicas para el manejo de la nac son el pneumonia severity index (psi) y el curb-65 (tablas 4 y 5).se estratifica a los pacientes en 5 categoras o clases (i-v) en funcin del riesgo de mortalidad a los 30 das desde el diagnstico. las clases i-iii suponen una baja probabilidad de muerte (0,1-2,8%); la clase iv implica un riesgo intermedio (8,2-9,3%), mientras que la clase v engloba a los pacientes que tienen una alta probabilidad de muerte (27-31%) . se recomienda el tratamiento ambulatorio en las clases i-ii; la observacin en unidades de corta estancia para la clase iii (siempre y cuando los pacientes no presenten hipoxemia) e ingreso hospitalario en las clases iv-v 23 .se estratifica a los pacientes en tres grupos o clases de riesgo (0-1 = bajo riesgo, mortalidad 1,5%; 2 = riesgo intermedio, mortalidad 9,2%; 3-5 = alto riesgo, mortalidad 22%). se aconseja el ingreso hospitalario cuando la puntuacin es mayor de 1, sobre todo si existen otros factores de gravedad como hipoxemia o afectacin multilobar en la rx de trax 24 .la presencia de uno o ms criterios mayores o 3 o ms criterios menores es criterio de ingreso a la uci 21 .los criterios mayores son: hipotensin con necesidad de administracin agresiva de fluidos, necesidad de ventilacin mecnica invasiva, shock con necesidad de vasopresores.los criterios menores son: frecuencia respiratoria mayor de 30/minutos, ndice presin parcial de oxgeno en la sangre/fraccin de oxgeno inspirado (pao 2 /fio 2 ) igual o menor a 250, infiltrados multilobares, confusin/desorientacin, uremia (bun igual o superior a 20 mg/dl), leucopenia (recuento leucocitario menor de 4.000/mm 3 ), trombocitopenia (recuento de plaquetas menor de 100.000/mm 3 ), hipotermia (temperatura central menor de 36c).neumona adquirida en la comunidad no grave. el tratamiento domiciliario consistir en 25 neumona adquirida en la comunidad muy grave. ingreso en la uci 25 . el tratamiento es el siguiente:1. cefotaxima 2 g cada 6-8 horas por va intravenosa o ceftriaxona 2 g cada 24 horas por va intravenosa o amoxicilina-clavulnico 1-2 g cada 8 horas por va intravenosa ms macrlido (azitromicina 500 mg cada 24 horas por va oral o claritromicina 500 mg cada 12 horas por va intravenosa).2. cefotaxima 2 g cada 6-8 horas por va intravenosa o ceftriaxona 2 g cada 24 horas por va intravenosa o amoxicilina-clavulnico 1-2 g cada 8 horas por va intravenosa ms quinolona (moxifloxacino 400 mg cada 24 horas por va intravenosa o levofloxacino 500 mg cada 12 horas por va intravenosa).3. aztreonam 2 g cada 8 horas por va intravenosa ms quinolona (moxifloxacino 400 mg cada 24 horas por va intravenosa o levofloxacino 500 mg cada 12 horas por va intravenosa) (si alergia a beta lactmicos).ver tabla 6 25 . la nah se define como la aparicin de un nuevo infiltrado pulmonar posterior a las 48 primeras horas de ingreso hospitalario, con clnica compatible con etiologa infecciosa (fiebre, esputo purulento, leucocitosis, deterioro del intercambio gaseoso). es la segunda infeccin nosocomial ms comn y la principal causa de muerte por infeccin nosocomial en pacientes crticos. su incidencia vara de 5 a ms de 20 casos por 1.000 hospitales, generalmente en pacientes inmunocomprometidos, quirrgicos y ancianos. entre las neumonas nosocomiales, la neumona asociada a ventilador (nav) se desarrolla en pacientes que han sido ventilados mecnicamente de forma invasiva durante al menos 48 horas.existe otro trmino, denominado neumona asociada a la atencin sanitaria, esta neumona se define como aquella que se desarrolla en pacientes no hospitalizados con mltiples riesgos de colonizacin por patgenos nosocomiales multirresistentes tales como institucionalizacin, terapia de infusin en el hogar, dilisis crnica, atencin de heridas en el hogar y contacto con sujetos previamente colonizados por patgenos multirresistentes. estudios en los estados unidos muestran que la neumona asociada a la atencin sanitaria es causada por microorganismos multirresistentes; sin embargo, estudios europeos sugieren que es causado por microorganismos similares a los de la nac y que son pacientes en su mayora no crticamente enfermos, por lo que ltimamente este trmino ha quedado en desuso, ya que podra ser consecuencia de una elevada sensibilidad, suponiendo un aumento del uso de antibiticos de amplio espectro inadecuadamente 24 .bacterias. en la nah, los patgenos ms prevalentes son s. aureus, p. aeruginosa, klebsiella spp., e. coli, acinetobacter spp. y enterobacter spp. (y quizs enterococcus faecium). estos mpp son los responsables de un 80% de los casos, con una menor prevalencia de serratia spp., proteus mirabilis, stenotrophomonas maltophilia y tambin de patgenos asociados a nac como s. pneumoniae y h. influenzae que causan el 3,7 y el 7,3% de los casos, respectivamente.la nav de inicio precoz (primeros 4 das de ventilacin mecnica) suele estar producida por patgenos respiratorios habituales, como s. pneumoniae, h. influenzae, s. aureus sensible a meticilina (sasm) y bacilos gram negativos entricos. la nav de comienzo tardo se asocia ms a menudo a flora hospitalaria, como p. aeruginosa, acinetobacter spp. y s. aureus resistente a meticilina (sarm).hongos. principalmente aspergillus spp., por inhalacin de esporas del medioambiente (polvo, muebles y plantas). la colonizacin por candida tambin es frecuente 26 .virus. el papel de los virus como agentes etiolgicos en la nah es desconocido.para el diagnstico de nah es necesaria la presencia de un nuevo infiltrado pulmonar (o progresin de uno previo), acompaado al menos de 2 de los siguientes signos sistmicos: fiebre mayor de 38,3c, leucocitosis superior a 10.000/ mm 3 o leucopenia menor de 4.000/mcl y esputo purulento.existen otros criterios microbiolgicos diagnsticos de nah: hemocultivo positivo no relacionado con otra fuente de infeccin, cultivo positivo de lquido pleural, cultivos positivos en el lavado bronquioalveolar 27 .la nueva normativa de la european respiratory society (ers) considera que debera realizarse una evaluacin clnica rutinaria en pacientes que reciben tratamiento antibitico por nah o nav. esta evaluacin clnica incluye temperatura, volumen de secreciones traqueobronquiales, evaluacin de la resolucin de la rx de trax, recuento leucocitario, pao 2 /fio 2 y el clculo de las escalas como la escala odin (organ disfunction and infection system), sofa (sequential organ failure assessment), saps ii (simplified acute physiological score ii), y apache ii (acute physiology and chronic health evaluation) 24 .en la tabla 7 se recogen las recomendaciones de tratamiento emprico inicial para la nah, segn la american thoracic society (ats)/infectious diseases society of america (idsa) de 2016.los virus influenza a y b son los ms frecuentes e importantes en trminos de morbimortalidad 28 . puede presentarse como neumona vrica o predisponer a la sobreinfeccin bacteriana. la presentacin clsica de superinfeccin ocurre en dos fases, en un primer momento predomina el cuadro febril y respiratorio vrico y, posteriormente, se produce un em- tratamiento. generalmente no se tratan los virus diferentes a la influenza detectados en pacientes inmunocompetentes; sin embargo, hay que tener en cuenta la gravedad de la neumona y los factores de riesgo 27 . en pacientes inmunocompetentes con virus influenza positivo se puede administrar un inhibidor de la neuraminidasa: oseltamivir: 75 mg cada 12 horas durante 5 das. se ha recomendado 150 mg cada 12 horas para la gripe aviar h5n2.zanamivir: 2 inhalaciones de 5 mg cada 12 horas, con especial cuidado por el riesgo de broncoespasmo en pacientes asmticos.peramivir: 600 mg por va intravenosa en dosis nica (por la alta y sostenida afinidad por el virus).la neumona por aspiracin ocurre en pacientes debilitados o en aquellos que aspiran contenidos gstricos mientras estn inconscientes o durante vmitos repetidos. la neumona resultante es en parte qumica, debido a los efectos extremadamente irritantes del cido gstrico, y bacteriana. en el cultivo se aslan diversos microorganismos, siendo los aerobios ms comunes que los anaerobios. la neumona por aspiracin a menudo se presenta con necrosis pulmonar, tiene un curso clnico fulminante y es una causa frecuente de muerte en individuos predispuestos a la aspiracin. como complicacin frecuente destaca la formacin de abscesos. los fenmenos de microaspiracin son ms frecuentes en individuos con reflujo gastroesofgico y pueden exacerbar adems otras enfermedades pulmonares 7 .etiologa. los microorganismos mayormente aislados en este tipo de pacientes son los bacilos gram negativos (49%) seguidos de anaerobios (16%) como son peptostreptococcus, fusobacterium nucleatum, fusobacterium necrophorum, prevotella, bacteroides melaninogenicus y s. aureus (12 %).tratamiento. en caso de neumona aspirativa adquirida en la comunidad se administrar ampicilina-sulbactam (1,5 a 3 g por va intravenosa cada 6 horas) o amoxicilina-clavulnico (875 mg por va oral cada 8 horas o 2 g cada 8 horas por va intravenosa) en pacientes que toleren la va oral y no estn gravemente enfermos.en caso de neumona aspirativa adquirida en el hospital, el tratamiento se realizar con: imipenem, meropenem o piperacilina-tazobactam. en pacientes con riesgo de colonizacin por sarm: vancomicina o linezolid 30 .la varicela es una enfermedad benigna de la infancia. sin embargo, cuando afecta a adultos, puede ocasionar un cuadro grave por sus complicaciones, entre las que destaca la neumona. afecta aproximadamente a un 15% de la poblacin adulta, con una incidencia mxima entre la segunda y la quinta dcada de la vida 31 . en la mayora de los casos, las lesiones cutneas preceden la aparicin de sntomas respiratorios, entre los que predominan la disnea y la tos no productiva 32 . a nivel radiolgico, destaca un patrn intersticial, micronodular, de distribucin bilateral, con predominio en bases y regin perihiliar, aunque puede progresar a reas de condensacin 31, 32 . existe una disociacin clnico-radiolgica, con expresin radiolgica mayor a la esperada por la clnica 31, 32 . la evolucin clnica es muy variable, desde hallazgos radiolgicos asintomticos, hasta la presencia de neumonitis fulminante, distrs respiratorio, hipoxemia refractaria e incluso muerte 31 . es recomendable iniciar tratamiento en pacientes inmunodeprimidos, embarazadas, y en pacientes inmunocompetentes sintomticos y/o con hipoxemia. el tratamiento de eleccin es aciclovir (dosis de 5-10 mg/ kg/8 horas durante 7-10 das) 31 ; su administracin de manera precoz se asocia a mejora en las primeras 48 horas 31 .proteccin de personas y animales. los autores declaran que para esta investigacin no se han realizado experimentos en seres humanos ni en animales. tabla 7 recomendacin de tratamiento emprico inicial para la neumona adquirida en el hospital (no asociada a ventilacin mecnica) ats/idsa 2016 confidencialidad de los datos. los autores declaran que en este artculo no aparecen datos de pacientes.derecho a la privacidad y consentimiento informado. los autores declaran que en este artculo no aparecen datos de pacientes.los autores declaran no tener ningn conflicto de intereses. importante  muy importante  metaanlisis  artculo de revisin  ensayo clnico controlado  gua de prctica clnica  epidemiologathe global sars-cov-2/covid-19 pandemic has required a reduction in non-emergency treatment for a variety of disorders. this report summarizes conclusions of an international multidisciplinary consensus group assembled to address evaluation and treatment of patients with thoracic outlet syndrome (tos), a group of conditions characterized by extrinsic compression of the neurovascular structures serving the upper extremity. the following recommendations were developed in relation to the 3 defined types of tos (neurogenic, venous, and arterial) and 3 phases of pandemic response (preparatory, urgent with limited resources, and emergency with complete diversion of resources): (1) in-person evaluation and treatment for neurogenic tos (interventional or surgical) is generally postponed during all pandemic phases, with telephone/telemedicine visits and at-home physical therapy exercises recommended when feasible. (2) venous tos presenting with acute upper extremity deep vein thrombosis (paget-schroetter syndrome) is managed primarily with anticoagulation, with percutaneous interventions for venous tos (thrombolysis) considered in early phases (i and ii) and surgical treatment delayed until pandemic conditions resolve. catheter-based interventions may also be considered for selected patients with central subclavian vein obstruction and threatened hemodialysis access in all pandemic phases, with definitive surgical treatment postponed. (3) evaluation and surgical treatment for arterial tos should be reserved for limb-threatening situations, such as acute upper extremity ischemia or acute digital embolization, in all phases of pandemic response. in late pandemic phases surgery should be restricted to thrombolysis or brachial artery thromboembolectomy, with more definitive treatment delayed until pandemic conditions resolve.special communication: evaluation and treatment of thoracic outlet syndrome during the global pandemic due to sars-cov-2 and covid-19several clusters of patients with pneumonia of unknown cause were reported in late december 2019 in wuhan, the capital city of hubei province, china. it was later identified to be caused by a new coronavirus (severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2, or sars-cov-2) (zhu et al., 2020) and the disease is named by the world health organization (who) as coronavirus disease 2019 (covid-19) 1 . since mid january 2020, it has rapidly spread throughout china and other countries.the first confirmed case outside wuhan in china was reported on january 19 (shenzhen) . similar to sars-cov and mers-cov, the covid-19 can be transmitted from person to person. as of january 30, a total of 9976 cases had been reported in at least 21 countries 2 . early detection of covid-19 importation and prevention of onward transmission are crucial to all areas at risk of importation from areas with active transmissions (gilbert et al., 2020) . to contain the virus, wuhan was placed under lockdown with residents not allowed to leave the city on january 23. on the same or the next day, most public transportation stopped in wuhan and other cities in hubei province. in addition, most cities in hubei province had adopted blockade measures for class a infectious diseases by january 28 3 . residents in those areas are highly encouraged to stay at home and not to attend any gathering activity. besides, at least 207 cities in china have adopted similar though softer measures by february 12. people are frequently reminded by media and community workers to maintain safe social distance. furthermore, many cities require that recent visitors to high covid-19 risk areas quarantine themselves at home or in designated facilities for 14 days. residents who have symptoms of fever or dry cough are required to report the situation to community, and are quarantined and treated in special medical facilities. governments also trace and isolate contacts of those patients.as multiple nations have implemented mandatary quarantine or even massive lockdown, such as south korea, italy and china, and more countries are expected to join as the coronavirus outbreak becomes a global pandemic, examining the influencing factors of the transmission of covid-19 and the effectiveness of the large-scale quarantine measures in china not only adds to our understanding of the containment of covid-19 but also provides insights into future prevention work against similar infectious diseases. in this paper, we estimate how the number of confirmed covid-19 cases in a city is influenced by the number of new covid-19 cases in the same city, other cities, and wuhan in the preceding first and second weeks, respectively. china's large scale quarantine policy takes effect in late january. we also test whether this policy succeeds in delaying the spread of covid-19 using a 14-day rolling window analysis between january 19 and february 15.for infectious diseases, the number of infected people usually increases first before reaching a peak and then drops. this pattern implies that for a linear equation of new cases on the number of cases in the past, the unobserved determinants of new infections are serially correlated. the unobserved determinants of new cases may be serially correlated, also because they measure persistent factors, such as people's habit and government policy. serial correlations in errors give rise to correlations between the lagged number of cases and the error term, and ordinary least square (ols) estimator may be biased. combining insights in adda (2016) and the existing knowledge of the incubation period of covid-19, we construct instrumental variables for the number of new covid-19 cases in the preceding two weeks. weather characteristics in the previous third and fourth weeks do not directly affect today's number of new covid-19 cases after controlling for the number of new covid-19 cases and weather conditions in the preceding first and second weeks. therefore, our estimated impacts have causal interpretations. we use the lasso method to select instrumental variables among eleven weather characteristics that have the highest predictive power for the average number of new confirmed cases during each of the past two weeks. furthermore, we examine the moderator effects of socioeconomic factors on the transmission of covid-19 in china, which include population flow out of wuhan, the distance between cities, gdp per capita, number of doctors, and contemporaneous weather characteristics. we focus on the effect of population flows from the origin of the covid-19 outbreak, because data on real time travel between cities have recently become available and we examine whether it can explain the disease spread, and that wuhan is a major city and a transportation hub with significant population movements.we find that the stringent quarantine and public health measures imposed in late january significantly decreased the transmission rate of covid-19. by early february, the spread of the virus had been contained in china. while many socioeconomic factors moderate the spread of the virus, the actual population flow from the source poses a higher risk to the destination than other factors such as geographic proximity and similarity in economic conditions. our analysis contributes to the existing literature in two aspects. first, our analysis is connected to the economics and epidemiologic literature on the influencing factors of and ways of preventing the spread of infectious diseases. existing studies find that reductions in interpersonal contact from holiday school closings (adda, 2016) , reactive school closure (litvinova et al., 2019) , public transportation strikes (godzinski and suarez castillo, 2019) , strategic targeting of travelers from high-incidence locations (milusheva, 2017) , and paid sick leave to keep contagious workers at home (barmby and larguem, 2009, pichler and ziebarth, 2017) can reduce the prevalence of influenza.additionally, literature find that epidemics spread faster during economic booms (adda, 2016) , increases in employment are associated with increased incidence of influenza (markowitz et al., 2010) , and growth in trade can significantly increase the spread of influenza (adda, 2016) andhiv (oster, 2012) . vaccination (maurer, 2009 , white, 2019 and sunlight exposure (slusky and zeckhauser, 2018) are also found effective in reducing the spread of influenza. in the case of covid-19, the quarantine policy takes effect throughout china within few days in late january.thus, we directly compare the transmission effects in the pre and post february 1 subsamples to examine its effectiveness in preventing the transmission of covid-19. interestingly, within one week, population flow from wuhan significantly increased the spread of virus in the early subsample, but decreased its transmission rate in the later subsample, suggesting that people have 3 . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. (which was not certified by peer review)the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted march 17, 2020 . . https://doi.org/10.1101 /2020 been taking more cautious measures from high covid-19 risk areas. besides, following the previous literature on the moderator effect of economic development and environmental characteristics on virus transmission, our analysis further reveal that covid-19 transmission is positively moderated by gdp per capita and negatively moderated by the number of doctors, while the effects of the environmental factors and population density are mixed.second, our paper complements the epidemiologic studies on the basic reproduction number of covid-19. using data on the first 425 covid-19 patients by january 22, li et al. (2020) estimate a basic reproduction number of 2.2. based on time-series data on the number of covid-19 cases in mainland china from january 10 to january 24, zhao et al. (2020) estimate that the mean reproduction number ranges from 2.24 to 3.58. given the short time since the beginning of the covid-19 outbreak, more research in this area is required to assess the dynamics of transmission and its implications on how the covid-19 outbreak will evolve mcgoogan, 2020, wu et al., 2020b) . several recent studies have examined the effect of population movement on the spread of covid-19 (zhan et al., 2020 . our analysis relies on spatially disaggregated data in a longer period, and the instrumental variable approach we use imposes fewer restrictions on the relationship between the unobserved determinants of new cases and the number of cases in the past. using exogenous temperature, wind speed and precipitation in the preceding third and fourth weeks as the instruments, we find that in the january 19 -february 1 subsample, one new infection leads to 1.465 more cases within one week and the effect on the second week is not definitive.while this causal estimate is slightly lower than the above epidemiologic studies, the rolling window analysis shows that the infection rate increases first in late january, then stabilizes and drops. our paper also adds to the epidemiologic studies on effective ways of containing covid-19. using a stochastic transmission model that is parameterized to the covid-19 outbreak, hellewell et al.(2020) find that highly effective contact tracing and case isolation is enough to control a new outbreak of covid-19 within three months in most scenarios. our empirical estimation based on real numbers of newly confirmed covid-19 cases suggests that one new infection case can decrease the number of new cases by 0.097 (0.438) in the following first (second) week in the february 2-15 subsample, corroborating the effectiveness of china's large-scale quarantine policy. this paper is organized as follows. section 2 introduces the empirical model. section 3 discusses our data and the construction of key variables. the results are presented in section 4. section 5 concludes.our analysis sample includes 303 prefecture-level cities in china. we exclude wuhan from our analysis because the epidemic patterns in wuhan are significantly different from those in other cities. some confirmed cases in wuhan contracted the virus through exposure to huanan seafood wholesale market, which is the most probable origin of the virus 4 . in other cities, infections arise 4 li et al. (2020) document the exposure history of the first 425 cases. it is suspected that the initial cases were linked to the huanan seafood wholesale market in wuhan. from human to human transmissions. the health care system in wuhan faced the challenge of previously unknown virus infections in early january and became overwhelmed as the number of new cases increased exponentially from mid-january. these factors may cause severe delay and measurement error issues in the number of cases reported in wuhan. we alleviate the measurement error problem using variations in the infections caused by exogenous changes in weather conditions which is discussed in detail in section 3.2.to model the spread of the virus, we consider simultaneously within city spread and between city transmissions, as in adda (2016) . the baseline model iswhere c is a city other than wuhan, y ct is the number of new confirmed cases of covid-19in city c and date t.  denotes the preceding first or second week. d cr is the distance between cities c and r in log, and r =c d 1 cr  rt is the inverse distance weighted average of new infections in other cities. we include lagged y ct up to 14 days based on the estimates of the durations of the infectious period and the incubation period in the literature 5 . we take average of lagged y ct by week, as  ct = 1 7 7 s=1 y ct7( 1)s andz  t = 1 7 7 s=1 z t7( 1)s . in addition, a notable feature of the covid-19 epidemic is that it was originated in one city (wuhan) and most of the early cases outside wuhan can be traced to previous contacts with persons in wuhan. to model how the virus spreads to other cities from its source, we include the number of new confirmed cases in wuhan in the model (z  t ). x ct includes weather controls, city, and day fixed effects 6 . ct is the error term. standard errors are clustered within provinces. in a simplified model, we consider only within city transmissions,there are several reasons that  ct ,  rt andz  t may be correlated with the error term ct . the unobserved determinants of new infections such as local residents' and government's preparedness are likely correlated over time, which causes correlations between the error term and the lagged dependent variables. therefore, the coefficients are estimated by two-stage least squares in order to obtain consistent estimates. for the y ct equation (2), the instrumental variables include average temperature, maximum wind speed and precipitation for city c for the past three and four weeks.the selection of weather variables as instruments is discussed in detail in section 3.2. the timeline of key variables are displayed in appendix figure a. 1. the primary assumption on the instrumental 5 the 2019-ncov epidemic is still ongoing and the estimates are revised from time to time in the literature as new data become available. the current estimates include the following. the incubation period is estimated to be between 2 and 10 days (world health organization, 2020b), 5.2 days ), or 3 days (median, guan et al. (2020) ). the average infectious period is estimated to be 1.4 days (wu et al., 2020a) . 6 on february 12, cities in hubei province include clinically diagnosed cases in the confirmed cases, in addition to cases that are confirmed by nucleic acid tests, which results in a sharp increase in the number of confirmed cases for cities in hubei on february 12. the common effect on other cities is controlled for by the day fixed effect.. cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted march 17, 2020 . . https://doi.org/10.1101 /2020 variables is that weather conditions before two weeks do not affect the likelihood that a person susceptible to the virus contracts the disease, conditional on weather conditions within two weeks.on the other hand, they affect the number of other persons who have become infectious within the two-week window, because they may have contracted the virus earlier than two weeks. these weather variables are exogenous to the error term and affect the spread of the virus, and have been used by adda (2016) to instrument flu infections 7 .a main objective of this paper is to quantify the effect of various social and economic factors in mediating the transmission rates of the virus, which may help identify potential behavioral and socioeconomic risk factors for infections. for within city transmissions, we consider the mediating effect of population density, degree of economic development, number of doctors, and environmental factors such as temperature, wind and rain. to measure the spread of the virus from wuhan, we include an estimate of the number of people traveling from wuhan. the empirical model including these mediating variables is as follows,whereh k ct ,m k crt andm k c,wuhan,t are the mediating factor for within city transmissions, between city transmissions and imported cases from wuhan.january 19, 2020 is the first day that covid-19 cases were reported outside of wuhan, so we collect the daily number of new cases of covid-19 for 303 cities from january 19 to february 15.all these data are reported by 32 provincial health commissions in china 8 . figure 1 shows the time patterns of daily confirmed new cases in wuhan, in hubei province outside wuhan, and in mainland china but outside hubei province.for the explanatory variables, we calculate the number of new cases of covid-19 in the preceding first and second weeks for each city on each day. to estimate the impacts of new covid-19 cases in other cities on a city's own covid-19 new case, we first calculate the geographic distance between a city and all other cities using the latitudes and longitudes of the centroids of each city, and then calculate the weighted sum of the number of covid-19 new cases in all other cities using the inverse of log distance between a city and each of the other cities as the weight.7 flu viruses are easier to survive in cold weather. adverse weather conditions also limit outdoor activities which can decrease the chance of contracting the virus. for details, see adda (2016) and section 3.2.8 hong kong and macao are excluded from our analysis due to the lack of some socioeconomic variables.6 . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted march 17, 2020. .since the covid-19 outbreak starts from wuhan, we also calculate the weighted number of covid-19 new cases in wuhan using the inverse of log distance as the weight. furthermore, to explore the mediating impact of population flow from wuhan, we collect the daily population flow index from baidu that proxies for the total intensity of migration from wuhan to other cities 9 . table 1 presents the summary statistics of these variables.we rely on meteorological data to construct instrumental variables for the endogenous variables.the national oceanic and atmospheric administration (noaa) provides average, maximum and minimum temperatures, air pressure, average and maximum wind speeds, precipitation, snowfall amount, and dew point for 362 weather stations at the daily level in china. to merge the meteorological variables with the number of new cases of covid-19, we first calculate daily weather variables for each city on each day from 2019 december to 2020 february from station-level weather records following the inverse-distance weighting method. specifically, for each city, we draw a circle of 100 km from the city's centroid and calculate the weighted average daily weather variables using 9 baidu migration, qianxi.baidu.com.. cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted march 17, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.03.13.20035238 doi: medrxiv preprint cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted march 17, 2020. . 9 . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted march 17, 2020. . https://doi.org/10. 1101 /2020 stations within the 100 km circle 10 . we use the inverse of the distance between the city's centroid and each station as the weight. second, we match the daily weather variables to the number of new cases of covid-19 based on city name and date.the transmission rate of covid-19 may be affected by many environmental factors. humanto-human transmission of covid-19 is mostly through droplets and contacts (national health commission of the prc, 2020). weather conditions such as rainfall, wind speed, and temperatures may play a key role in shaping infections via influencing social activities and virus transmissions.for instance, more precipitation increases humidity that may weaken virus transmissions (lowen and steel, 2014) . both more rainfall and lower temperature may reduce social activities. lower temperatures may also enhance the infectiousness of the virus in the environment . higher wind speed and therefore ventilated air may disturb virus transmissions. current new cases arise from contracting the virus in the past, and for the case of covid-19, typically within two weeks. the extent of human-to-human transmission is determined by the number of people who already contracted the virus and the environmental conditions within two weeks. conditional on the number of confirmed cases and environmental conditions within two weeks, it is plausible that weather conditions further in the past should not affect current new cases.there are many potentially relevant weather characteristics, including daily average, maximum and minimum temperature, average and maximum wind speed, precipitation, air pressure, visibility, dew point, snow depth, and the presence of extreme weather. we use lasso method to select environmental variables that have the highest predictive power for the average number of daily new confirmed cases during each of the past two weeks, with provincial and day fixed effects already included.the penalty parameters are given by the plugin method of belloni et al. (2014) . there are four variables selected, including average maximum wind speed and average precipitation during the past third and fourth weeks.we also include average temperature during the past third and fourth weeks because temperature is known to affect the transmissions of flu virus and is conjectured to affect covid-19 as well . we then regress the endogenous variables on the one to four week lags of the instrumental variables, city, and date fixed effects. table 2 shows that f-tests on the coefficients of the three and four week lags of the instrumental variables all strongly reject joint insignificance, which confirms that the selected instrumental variables are not weak.the coefficients of the first stage regressions are reported in table b .1 in the appendix.10 the 100km circle is consistent with the existing literature. most studies on the socioeconomic impacts of climate change have found that estimation results are insensitive to the choice of the cutoff distance (zhang et al., 2017) . we also used other cutoff distances (e.g., 150km) for robustness checks, and the main results remain unchanged. these results are available upon request.. cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted march 17, 2020. . our sample starts from january 19, when the first covid-19 case was reported outside wuhan.the sample spans four weeks in total and ends on february 15. we also estimate the model separately for each half sample (january 19 to february 1, and february 2 to february 15). the first two weeks witnessed the virus infections quickly spread throughout the country with every province reporting at least one confirmed case, and the number of cases also increased at increasing speed ( figure 1 ). during these two weeks, the government response has become more robust. on january 20, covid-19 was classified as a class b statutory infectious disease and treated as a class . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted march 17, 2020. . 12 . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted march 17, 2020 . . https://doi.org/10.1101 /2020 authorities and residents taking more protective measures in response to a higher perceived risk of contracting the disease. releasing official information on newly confirmed cases at the daily level as well as exchanging information via social media throughout china may promote more timely actions to slowdown virus transmissions. comparing containment effects over time, in the first half sample, one new infection leads to 1.966 more cases within a week, implying a fast growth in the number of cases. however, in the second half sample, the effect decreases to 0.490, suggesting that public health measures imposed in late january are effective in limiting a further spread of the virus.besides wuhan, a large number of cases are also reported in other cities in hubei province, where 6 of them reported over 1000 cumulative cases by february 15 11 . their overstretched health care system exacerbates the concern over delayed reporting of confirmed cases in these cities. to mitigate such potential measurement errors in our estimates, we exclude all cities in hubei province from the regression. the bottom panel of table 3 reports the estimates. comparing the iv estimates in columns (4) and (6), we observe that in the first two weeks, on average, one new case leads to 1.345 more cases in the following week, while the chain of infections is broken in the second half sample. in wuhan and other cities. to alleviate this concern, we use a measure of the size of population flow from wuhan to a destination city, which is constructed by multiplying the daily migration index on the population flow out of wuhan (figure 2 ) with the share of the flow that a destination city receives provided by baidu (figure 3 ). during days before january 25, we use the average destination shares between january 10 and january 24. for days on or after january 24, the average destination shares between january 25 and february 23 are used 12 . table 4 reports the estimates from iv regressions of eq.(1), and table 5 reports the results where we exclude cities in hubei province from the analysis. column (4) of table 4 indicates that in the first half sample, one new case leads to 1.465 more cases within one week, and the effect is not statistically significant between one and two weeks. in the second half sample, one new case actually decreases future number of new cases, which indicates that the responses by the 11 these cities are xiaogan, huanggang, jingzhou, suizhou, ezhou, and xiangyang. 12 the shares of top 100 destinations are available. the starting and ending dates of the average shares released by baidu do not precisely match the period of the analysis sample.. cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted march 17, 2020. . 14 . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted march 17, 2020. . . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted march 17, 2020 . . https://doi.org/10.1101 /2020 . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted march 17, 2020 . . https://doi.org/10.1101 /2020 government and the public effectively contain the risk of additional infections. the time varying patterns in local transmissions are evident using the rolling window analysis (figure 4) . the top left panel shows the estimated local transmission coefficients for various 14-day samples with the starting date indicated on the horizontal axis. after an initial increase in the local transmission rate, one case leads to fewer and fewer additional cases from late january onwards. comparing table 4 with table 3 , we observe that the results are not sensitive to the inclusion of terms on between-city transmissions.as a robustness test, table 5 reports the estimation results if the analysis sample does not include cities in hubei province. column (4) of table 5 indicates that in the first half sample, one new case leads to 1.517 more cases within a week, and this becomes small and statistically not significant in the second half sample. besides, in the second half sample, one new case decreases new infections by 0.724 between 1 and 2 weeks, which is larger than the estimate (0.438) with cities in hubei province included. overall, the spread of the virus has been effectively contained between for the between-city transmission from wuhan, we observe that the population flow better explains the contagion effect than geographic proximity (table 4 ). in the first half sample, one new case in wuhan leads to more cases in other cities which receive more population flows from wuhan within one week. in the second half sample, more arrivals from wuhan one week earlier can still be a risk. a back of the envelope calculation indicates that one new case in wuhan leads to 0.067 (0.120) more cases in the destination city per 10,000 travelers from wuhan within one (two) week between january 19 and february 1 (february 2 and february 15) 13 . note that while the effect is statistically significant, it should be interpreted in context. it was estimated that 15, 000, 000 people would travel out of wuhan during the lunar new year holiday 14 . if all had gone to one city, this would have directly generated about 280.5 cases within two weeks. the risk of infection is likely very low for most travelers except for few who have previous contacts with sources of 13 it is estimated that 14,925,000 people traveled out of wuhan in 2019 during the lunar new year holiday (http: //www.whtv.com.cn/p/17571.html). the sum of baidu's migration index for population flow out of wuhan during the 40 days around the 2019 lunar new year is 203.3, which means one index unit represents 0.000013621 travelers. the destination share is in percentage. with one more case in wuhan, the effect on a city receiving 10,000 travelers from wuhan is 0.00490  0.000013621  100  10000 = 0.067. 14 http://www.whtv.com.cn/p/17571.html 17 . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted march 17, 2020. . infection, and person-specific history of past contacts may be an essential predictor for infection risk, in addition to the total number of population flows 15 .besides spillovers from wuhan, a city may also be affected by infections nearby. we observe that in the second half sample, one new case in a neighboring city that is 100km away generates 0.099 more cases after between one and two weeks 16 . this indicates that by february, while within city transmissions are effectively contained, new infections caused by between-city transmissions can still be a risk. for cities outside hubei province, the results are similar (table 5 ), except that the transmission from wuhan is not significant in the first half sample.we investigate the impacts of many social, economic and environmental variables in mediating the transmission rates (eq. (3)). for own city transmissions, we consider the mediating effects of population density, per capita gdp, number of doctors, contemporaneous temperature, wind speed and precipitation. for between-city transmissions, we consider the mediating effects of distance, density difference and per capita gdp difference. we also include a measure of population flows from wuhan. table 6 reports the estimation results of the iv regressions using the first half sample, and table 7 reports the estimates for the second half sample.our main conclusions still hold with these mediating factors included. the effects of past infections are much smaller in the second half sample, suggesting that the virus outbreak has been contained. for the between-city transmissions, population flow from wuhan poses a risk for new infections in other cities, with one week lag in the first half sample, and with two week lag in the second half sample. the effects are robust with the inclusion of other measures of proximity, such as those based on geography and economic similarity. table 8 shows variables that affect transmissions within cities and whose coefficients are statistically significant at 0.1. in order to help compare across variables, we compute the changes in the variables needed in order for the coefficient of past infections on current cases to be reduced by 1. the effects of the environmental factors and population density are mixed. we also observe that the transmission rate is lower in cities with more doctors. cities with higher per capita gdp have higher transmission rates, which may be due to more social interactions as a result of more economic activity 17 . however, until clearer mechanisms are identified and tested, this should be interpreted with caution.15 from mid february, individual specific health codes such as alipay health code and wechat health code are being used in many cities to aid quarantine efforts. 16 0.099 = 0.456  1 log 100 . 17 fogli and veldkamp (2019) show that income is positively correlated with more closely connected social network, and a dense network spreads diseases faster.. cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted march 17, 2020. . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted march 17, 2020 . . https://doi.org/10.1101 /2020 cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted march 17, 2020 . . https://doi.org/10.1101 /2020 cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted march 17, 2020 . . https://doi.org/10.1101 /2020 . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted march 17, 2020 . . https://doi.org/10.1101 /2020 at the time of writing, covid-19 represents a very high risk at the global level, according to the who risk assessment (world health organization, 2020a) . countries other than china are reporting new confirmed cases, and increasingly many cases arise through community transmissions rather than being imported. based on case data in china between january 19 and february 15, we show that public health measures adopted can effectively contain the virus outbreak, and newly available data on real-time population flows can be a valuable tool for risk assessment by public health authorities and the general public.a key limitation of the paper is that we are not able to disentangle the effects from each of the stringent measures taken, as even within this four-week sampling period china enforced such a large number of densely timed policies to contain the virus spreading, often simultaneously in many cities. a second limitation is that these policies fall within each of the two sub-samples.by the starting date of the official data release for confirmed infected cases throughout china, i.e. january 2020, a number of stringent measures were already taken, which prevent researchers to ideally examine and compare a sub-sample period during which no strict policies was enforced. key knowledge gaps remain in the understanding of the epidemiological characteristics of covid-19, such as individual risk factors for contracting the virus and infections from asymptotic cases. data on the demographics and exposure history for those who have shown symptoms as well as those who have not will help facilitate these research.. cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. (which was not certified by peer review)the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted march 17, 2020 . . https://doi.org/10.1101 /2020 a data figure a .1 illustrates the dependent variable, the instrumental variables, and the exclusion restriction that weather conditions earlier than two weeks from date t affect the number of people who are infectious within past two weeks, but do not directly affect the number of confirmed new cases at date t. (1) and (2), the dependent variables are the numbers of newly confirmed covid-19 cases in the own city in the preceding first and second weeks, respectively. in columns (3) and (4) weather conditions affect disease transmissions either directly if the virus can more easily survive and spread in certain environment, or indirectly by changing human behavior. in our sample period, higher wind speeds or more precipitation decrease the number of infections in the future. higher temperatures increase local infections, but decrease infections in other cities.. cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. (which was not certified by peer review)the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted march 17, 2020 . . https://doi.org/10.1101 /2020 . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. (which was not certified by peer review)the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted march 17, 2020 . . https://doi.org/10.1101 /2020 several clusters of patients with pneumonia of unknown cause were reported in late december 2019 in wuhan, the capital city of hubei province, china. it was later identified to be caused by a new coronavirus (severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2, or sars-cov-2) (zhu et al., 2020) and the disease is named by the world health organization (who) as coronavirus disease 2019 (covid-19) 1 . since mid january 2020, it has rapidly spread throughout china and other countries.the first confirmed case outside wuhan in china was reported on january 19 (shenzhen) . similar to sars-cov and mers-cov, the covid-19 can be transmitted from person to person. as of january 30, a total of 9976 cases had been reported in at least 21 countries 2 . early detection of covid-19 importation and prevention of onward transmission are crucial to all areas at risk of importation from areas with active transmissions (gilbert et al., 2020) . to contain the virus, wuhan was placed under lockdown with residents not allowed to leave the city on january 23. on the same or the next day, most public transportation stopped in wuhan and other cities in hubei province. in addition, most cities in hubei province had adopted blockade measures for class a infectious diseases by january 28 3 . residents in those areas are highly encouraged to stay at home and not to attend any gathering activity. besides, at least 207 cities in china have adopted similar though softer measures by february 12. people are frequently reminded by media and community workers to maintain safe social distance. furthermore, many cities require that recent visitors to high covid-19 risk areas quarantine themselves at home or in designated facilities for 14 days. residents who have symptoms of fever or dry cough are required to report the situation to community, and are quarantined and treated in special medical facilities. governments also trace and isolate contacts of those patients.as multiple nations have implemented mandatary quarantine or even massive lockdown, such as south korea, italy and china, and more countries are expected to join as the coronavirus outbreak becomes a global pandemic, examining the influencing factors of the transmission of covid-19 and the effectiveness of the large-scale quarantine measures in china not only adds to our understanding of the containment of covid-19 but also provides insights into future prevention work against similar infectious diseases. in this paper, we estimate how the number of confirmed covid-19 cases in a city is influenced by the number of new covid-19 cases in the same city, other cities, and wuhan in the preceding first and second weeks, respectively. china's large scale quarantine policy takes effect in late january. we also test whether this policy succeeds in delaying the spread of covid-19 using a 14-day rolling window analysis between january 19 and february 15.for infectious diseases, the number of infected people usually increases first before reaching a peak and then drops. this pattern implies that for a linear equation of new cases on the number of cases in the past, the unobserved determinants of new infections are serially correlated. the unobserved determinants of new cases may be serially correlated, also because they measure persistent factors, such as people's habit and government policy. serial correlations in errors give rise to correlations between the lagged number of cases and the error term, and ordinary least square (ols) estimator may be biased. combining insights in adda (2016) and the existing knowledge of the incubation period of covid-19, we construct instrumental variables for the number of new covid-19 cases in the preceding two weeks. weather characteristics in the previous third and fourth weeks do not directly affect today's number of new covid-19 cases after controlling for the number of new covid-19 cases and weather conditions in the preceding first and second weeks. therefore, our estimated impacts have causal interpretations. we use the lasso method to select instrumental variables among eleven weather characteristics that have the highest predictive power for the average number of new confirmed cases during each of the past two weeks. furthermore, we examine the moderator effects of socioeconomic factors on the transmission of covid-19 in china, which include population flow out of wuhan, the distance between cities, gdp per capita, number of doctors, and contemporaneous weather characteristics. we focus on the effect of population flows from the origin of the covid-19 outbreak, because data on real time travel between cities have recently become available and we examine whether it can explain the disease spread, and that wuhan is a major city and a transportation hub with significant population movements.we find that the stringent quarantine and public health measures imposed in late january significantly decreased the transmission rate of covid-19. by early february, the spread of the virus had been contained in china. while many socioeconomic factors moderate the spread of the virus, the actual population flow from the source poses a higher risk to the destination than other factors such as geographic proximity and similarity in economic conditions. our analysis contributes to the existing literature in two aspects. first, our analysis is connected to the economics and epidemiologic literature on the influencing factors of and ways of preventing the spread of infectious diseases. existing studies find that reductions in interpersonal contact from holiday school closings (adda, 2016) , reactive school closure (litvinova et al., 2019) , public transportation strikes (godzinski and suarez castillo, 2019) , strategic targeting of travelers from high-incidence locations (milusheva, 2017) , and paid sick leave to keep contagious workers at home (barmby and larguem, 2009, pichler and ziebarth, 2017) can reduce the prevalence of influenza.additionally, literature find that epidemics spread faster during economic booms (adda, 2016) , increases in employment are associated with increased incidence of influenza (markowitz et al., 2010) , and growth in trade can significantly increase the spread of influenza (adda, 2016) andhiv (oster, 2012) . vaccination (maurer, 2009 , white, 2019 and sunlight exposure (slusky and zeckhauser, 2018) are also found effective in reducing the spread of influenza. in the case of covid-19, the quarantine policy takes effect throughout china within few days in late january.thus, we directly compare the transmission effects in the pre and post february 1 subsamples to examine its effectiveness in preventing the transmission of covid-19. interestingly, within one week, population flow from wuhan significantly increased the spread of virus in the early subsample, but decreased its transmission rate in the later subsample, suggesting that people have 3 . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. (which was not certified by peer review)the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted march 17, 2020 . . https://doi.org/10.1101 /2020 been taking more cautious measures from high covid-19 risk areas. besides, following the previous literature on the moderator effect of economic development and environmental characteristics on virus transmission, our analysis further reveal that covid-19 transmission is positively moderated by gdp per capita and negatively moderated by the number of doctors, while the effects of the environmental factors and population density are mixed.second, our paper complements the epidemiologic studies on the basic reproduction number of covid-19. using data on the first 425 covid-19 patients by january 22, li et al. (2020) estimate a basic reproduction number of 2.2. based on time-series data on the number of covid-19 cases in mainland china from january 10 to january 24, zhao et al. (2020) estimate that the mean reproduction number ranges from 2.24 to 3.58. given the short time since the beginning of the covid-19 outbreak, more research in this area is required to assess the dynamics of transmission and its implications on how the covid-19 outbreak will evolve mcgoogan, 2020, wu et al., 2020b) . several recent studies have examined the effect of population movement on the spread of covid-19 (zhan et al., 2020 . our analysis relies on spatially disaggregated data in a longer period, and the instrumental variable approach we use imposes fewer restrictions on the relationship between the unobserved determinants of new cases and the number of cases in the past. using exogenous temperature, wind speed and precipitation in the preceding third and fourth weeks as the instruments, we find that in the january 19 -february 1 subsample, one new infection leads to 1.465 more cases within one week and the effect on the second week is not definitive.while this causal estimate is slightly lower than the above epidemiologic studies, the rolling window analysis shows that the infection rate increases first in late january, then stabilizes and drops. our paper also adds to the epidemiologic studies on effective ways of containing covid-19. using a stochastic transmission model that is parameterized to the covid-19 outbreak, hellewell et al.(2020) find that highly effective contact tracing and case isolation is enough to control a new outbreak of covid-19 within three months in most scenarios. our empirical estimation based on real numbers of newly confirmed covid-19 cases suggests that one new infection case can decrease the number of new cases by 0.097 (0.438) in the following first (second) week in the february 2-15 subsample, corroborating the effectiveness of china's large-scale quarantine policy. this paper is organized as follows. section 2 introduces the empirical model. section 3 discusses our data and the construction of key variables. the results are presented in section 4. section 5 concludes.our analysis sample includes 303 prefecture-level cities in china. we exclude wuhan from our analysis because the epidemic patterns in wuhan are significantly different from those in other cities. some confirmed cases in wuhan contracted the virus through exposure to huanan seafood wholesale market, which is the most probable origin of the virus 4 . in other cities, infections arise 4 li et al. (2020) document the exposure history of the first 425 cases. it is suspected that the initial cases were linked to the huanan seafood wholesale market in wuhan. from human to human transmissions. the health care system in wuhan faced the challenge of previously unknown virus infections in early january and became overwhelmed as the number of new cases increased exponentially from mid-january. these factors may cause severe delay and measurement error issues in the number of cases reported in wuhan. we alleviate the measurement error problem using variations in the infections caused by exogenous changes in weather conditions which is discussed in detail in section 3.2.to model the spread of the virus, we consider simultaneously within city spread and between city transmissions, as in adda (2016) . the baseline model iswhere c is a city other than wuhan, y ct is the number of new confirmed cases of covid-19in city c and date t.  denotes the preceding first or second week. d cr is the distance between cities c and r in log, and r =c d 1 cr  rt is the inverse distance weighted average of new infections in other cities. we include lagged y ct up to 14 days based on the estimates of the durations of the infectious period and the incubation period in the literature 5 . we take average of lagged y ct by week, as  ct = 1 7 7 s=1 y ct7( 1)s andz  t = 1 7 7 s=1 z t7( 1)s . in addition, a notable feature of the covid-19 epidemic is that it was originated in one city (wuhan) and most of the early cases outside wuhan can be traced to previous contacts with persons in wuhan. to model how the virus spreads to other cities from its source, we include the number of new confirmed cases in wuhan in the model (z  t ). x ct includes weather controls, city, and day fixed effects 6 . ct is the error term. standard errors are clustered within provinces. in a simplified model, we consider only within city transmissions,there are several reasons that  ct ,  rt andz  t may be correlated with the error term ct . the unobserved determinants of new infections such as local residents' and government's preparedness are likely correlated over time, which causes correlations between the error term and the lagged dependent variables. therefore, the coefficients are estimated by two-stage least squares in order to obtain consistent estimates. for the y ct equation (2), the instrumental variables include average temperature, maximum wind speed and precipitation for city c for the past three and four weeks.the selection of weather variables as instruments is discussed in detail in section 3.2. the timeline of key variables are displayed in appendix figure a. 1. the primary assumption on the instrumental 5 the 2019-ncov epidemic is still ongoing and the estimates are revised from time to time in the literature as new data become available. the current estimates include the following. the incubation period is estimated to be between 2 and 10 days (world health organization, 2020b), 5.2 days ), or 3 days (median, guan et al. (2020) ). the average infectious period is estimated to be 1.4 days (wu et al., 2020a) . 6 on february 12, cities in hubei province include clinically diagnosed cases in the confirmed cases, in addition to cases that are confirmed by nucleic acid tests, which results in a sharp increase in the number of confirmed cases for cities in hubei on february 12. the common effect on other cities is controlled for by the day fixed effect.. cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted march 17, 2020 . . https://doi.org/10.1101 /2020 variables is that weather conditions before two weeks do not affect the likelihood that a person susceptible to the virus contracts the disease, conditional on weather conditions within two weeks.on the other hand, they affect the number of other persons who have become infectious within the two-week window, because they may have contracted the virus earlier than two weeks. these weather variables are exogenous to the error term and affect the spread of the virus, and have been used by adda (2016) to instrument flu infections 7 .a main objective of this paper is to quantify the effect of various social and economic factors in mediating the transmission rates of the virus, which may help identify potential behavioral and socioeconomic risk factors for infections. for within city transmissions, we consider the mediating effect of population density, degree of economic development, number of doctors, and environmental factors such as temperature, wind and rain. to measure the spread of the virus from wuhan, we include an estimate of the number of people traveling from wuhan. the empirical model including these mediating variables is as follows,whereh k ct ,m k crt andm k c,wuhan,t are the mediating factor for within city transmissions, between city transmissions and imported cases from wuhan.january 19, 2020 is the first day that covid-19 cases were reported outside of wuhan, so we collect the daily number of new cases of covid-19 for 303 cities from january 19 to february 15.all these data are reported by 32 provincial health commissions in china 8 . figure 1 shows the time patterns of daily confirmed new cases in wuhan, in hubei province outside wuhan, and in mainland china but outside hubei province.for the explanatory variables, we calculate the number of new cases of covid-19 in the preceding first and second weeks for each city on each day. to estimate the impacts of new covid-19 cases in other cities on a city's own covid-19 new case, we first calculate the geographic distance between a city and all other cities using the latitudes and longitudes of the centroids of each city, and then calculate the weighted sum of the number of covid-19 new cases in all other cities using the inverse of log distance between a city and each of the other cities as the weight.7 flu viruses are easier to survive in cold weather. adverse weather conditions also limit outdoor activities which can decrease the chance of contracting the virus. for details, see adda (2016) and section 3.2.8 hong kong and macao are excluded from our analysis due to the lack of some socioeconomic variables.6 . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted march 17, 2020. .since the covid-19 outbreak starts from wuhan, we also calculate the weighted number of covid-19 new cases in wuhan using the inverse of log distance as the weight. furthermore, to explore the mediating impact of population flow from wuhan, we collect the daily population flow index from baidu that proxies for the total intensity of migration from wuhan to other cities 9 . table 1 presents the summary statistics of these variables.we rely on meteorological data to construct instrumental variables for the endogenous variables.the national oceanic and atmospheric administration (noaa) provides average, maximum and minimum temperatures, air pressure, average and maximum wind speeds, precipitation, snowfall amount, and dew point for 362 weather stations at the daily level in china. to merge the meteorological variables with the number of new cases of covid-19, we first calculate daily weather variables for each city on each day from 2019 december to 2020 february from station-level weather records following the inverse-distance weighting method. specifically, for each city, we draw a circle of 100 km from the city's centroid and calculate the weighted average daily weather variables using 9 baidu migration, qianxi.baidu.com.. cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted march 17, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.03.13.20035238 doi: medrxiv preprint cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted march 17, 2020. . 9 . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted march 17, 2020. . https://doi.org/10. 1101 /2020 stations within the 100 km circle 10 . we use the inverse of the distance between the city's centroid and each station as the weight. second, we match the daily weather variables to the number of new cases of covid-19 based on city name and date.the transmission rate of covid-19 may be affected by many environmental factors. humanto-human transmission of covid-19 is mostly through droplets and contacts (national health commission of the prc, 2020). weather conditions such as rainfall, wind speed, and temperatures may play a key role in shaping infections via influencing social activities and virus transmissions.for instance, more precipitation increases humidity that may weaken virus transmissions (lowen and steel, 2014) . both more rainfall and lower temperature may reduce social activities. lower temperatures may also enhance the infectiousness of the virus in the environment . higher wind speed and therefore ventilated air may disturb virus transmissions. current new cases arise from contracting the virus in the past, and for the case of covid-19, typically within two weeks. the extent of human-to-human transmission is determined by the number of people who already contracted the virus and the environmental conditions within two weeks. conditional on the number of confirmed cases and environmental conditions within two weeks, it is plausible that weather conditions further in the past should not affect current new cases.there are many potentially relevant weather characteristics, including daily average, maximum and minimum temperature, average and maximum wind speed, precipitation, air pressure, visibility, dew point, snow depth, and the presence of extreme weather. we use lasso method to select environmental variables that have the highest predictive power for the average number of daily new confirmed cases during each of the past two weeks, with provincial and day fixed effects already included.the penalty parameters are given by the plugin method of belloni et al. (2014) . there are four variables selected, including average maximum wind speed and average precipitation during the past third and fourth weeks.we also include average temperature during the past third and fourth weeks because temperature is known to affect the transmissions of flu virus and is conjectured to affect covid-19 as well . we then regress the endogenous variables on the one to four week lags of the instrumental variables, city, and date fixed effects. table 2 shows that f-tests on the coefficients of the three and four week lags of the instrumental variables all strongly reject joint insignificance, which confirms that the selected instrumental variables are not weak.the coefficients of the first stage regressions are reported in table b .1 in the appendix.10 the 100km circle is consistent with the existing literature. most studies on the socioeconomic impacts of climate change have found that estimation results are insensitive to the choice of the cutoff distance (zhang et al., 2017) . we also used other cutoff distances (e.g., 150km) for robustness checks, and the main results remain unchanged. these results are available upon request.. cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted march 17, 2020. . our sample starts from january 19, when the first covid-19 case was reported outside wuhan.the sample spans four weeks in total and ends on february 15. we also estimate the model separately for each half sample (january 19 to february 1, and february 2 to february 15). the first two weeks witnessed the virus infections quickly spread throughout the country with every province reporting at least one confirmed case, and the number of cases also increased at increasing speed ( figure 1 ). during these two weeks, the government response has become more robust. on january 20, covid-19 was classified as a class b statutory infectious disease and treated as a class . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted march 17, 2020. . 12 . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted march 17, 2020 . . https://doi.org/10.1101 /2020 authorities and residents taking more protective measures in response to a higher perceived risk of contracting the disease. releasing official information on newly confirmed cases at the daily level as well as exchanging information via social media throughout china may promote more timely actions to slowdown virus transmissions. comparing containment effects over time, in the first half sample, one new infection leads to 1.966 more cases within a week, implying a fast growth in the number of cases. however, in the second half sample, the effect decreases to 0.490, suggesting that public health measures imposed in late january are effective in limiting a further spread of the virus.besides wuhan, a large number of cases are also reported in other cities in hubei province, where 6 of them reported over 1000 cumulative cases by february 15 11 . their overstretched health care system exacerbates the concern over delayed reporting of confirmed cases in these cities. to mitigate such potential measurement errors in our estimates, we exclude all cities in hubei province from the regression. the bottom panel of table 3 reports the estimates. comparing the iv estimates in columns (4) and (6), we observe that in the first two weeks, on average, one new case leads to 1.345 more cases in the following week, while the chain of infections is broken in the second half sample. in wuhan and other cities. to alleviate this concern, we use a measure of the size of population flow from wuhan to a destination city, which is constructed by multiplying the daily migration index on the population flow out of wuhan (figure 2 ) with the share of the flow that a destination city receives provided by baidu (figure 3 ). during days before january 25, we use the average destination shares between january 10 and january 24. for days on or after january 24, the average destination shares between january 25 and february 23 are used 12 . table 4 reports the estimates from iv regressions of eq.(1), and table 5 reports the results where we exclude cities in hubei province from the analysis. column (4) of table 4 indicates that in the first half sample, one new case leads to 1.465 more cases within one week, and the effect is not statistically significant between one and two weeks. in the second half sample, one new case actually decreases future number of new cases, which indicates that the responses by the 11 these cities are xiaogan, huanggang, jingzhou, suizhou, ezhou, and xiangyang. 12 the shares of top 100 destinations are available. the starting and ending dates of the average shares released by baidu do not precisely match the period of the analysis sample.. cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted march 17, 2020. . 14 . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted march 17, 2020. . . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted march 17, 2020 . . https://doi.org/10.1101 /2020 . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted march 17, 2020 . . https://doi.org/10.1101 /2020 government and the public effectively contain the risk of additional infections. the time varying patterns in local transmissions are evident using the rolling window analysis (figure 4) . the top left panel shows the estimated local transmission coefficients for various 14-day samples with the starting date indicated on the horizontal axis. after an initial increase in the local transmission rate, one case leads to fewer and fewer additional cases from late january onwards. comparing table 4 with table 3 , we observe that the results are not sensitive to the inclusion of terms on between-city transmissions.as a robustness test, table 5 reports the estimation results if the analysis sample does not include cities in hubei province. column (4) of table 5 indicates that in the first half sample, one new case leads to 1.517 more cases within a week, and this becomes small and statistically not significant in the second half sample. besides, in the second half sample, one new case decreases new infections by 0.724 between 1 and 2 weeks, which is larger than the estimate (0.438) with cities in hubei province included. overall, the spread of the virus has been effectively contained between for the between-city transmission from wuhan, we observe that the population flow better explains the contagion effect than geographic proximity (table 4 ). in the first half sample, one new case in wuhan leads to more cases in other cities which receive more population flows from wuhan within one week. in the second half sample, more arrivals from wuhan one week earlier can still be a risk. a back of the envelope calculation indicates that one new case in wuhan leads to 0.067 (0.120) more cases in the destination city per 10,000 travelers from wuhan within one (two) week between january 19 and february 1 (february 2 and february 15) 13 . note that while the effect is statistically significant, it should be interpreted in context. it was estimated that 15, 000, 000 people would travel out of wuhan during the lunar new year holiday 14 . if all had gone to one city, this would have directly generated about 280.5 cases within two weeks. the risk of infection is likely very low for most travelers except for few who have previous contacts with sources of 13 it is estimated that 14,925,000 people traveled out of wuhan in 2019 during the lunar new year holiday (http: //www.whtv.com.cn/p/17571.html). the sum of baidu's migration index for population flow out of wuhan during the 40 days around the 2019 lunar new year is 203.3, which means one index unit represents 0.000013621 travelers. the destination share is in percentage. with one more case in wuhan, the effect on a city receiving 10,000 travelers from wuhan is 0.00490  0.000013621  100  10000 = 0.067. 14 http://www.whtv.com.cn/p/17571.html 17 . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted march 17, 2020. . infection, and person-specific history of past contacts may be an essential predictor for infection risk, in addition to the total number of population flows 15 .besides spillovers from wuhan, a city may also be affected by infections nearby. we observe that in the second half sample, one new case in a neighboring city that is 100km away generates 0.099 more cases after between one and two weeks 16 . this indicates that by february, while within city transmissions are effectively contained, new infections caused by between-city transmissions can still be a risk. for cities outside hubei province, the results are similar (table 5 ), except that the transmission from wuhan is not significant in the first half sample.we investigate the impacts of many social, economic and environmental variables in mediating the transmission rates (eq. (3)). for own city transmissions, we consider the mediating effects of population density, per capita gdp, number of doctors, contemporaneous temperature, wind speed and precipitation. for between-city transmissions, we consider the mediating effects of distance, density difference and per capita gdp difference. we also include a measure of population flows from wuhan. table 6 reports the estimation results of the iv regressions using the first half sample, and table 7 reports the estimates for the second half sample.our main conclusions still hold with these mediating factors included. the effects of past infections are much smaller in the second half sample, suggesting that the virus outbreak has been contained. for the between-city transmissions, population flow from wuhan poses a risk for new infections in other cities, with one week lag in the first half sample, and with two week lag in the second half sample. the effects are robust with the inclusion of other measures of proximity, such as those based on geography and economic similarity. table 8 shows variables that affect transmissions within cities and whose coefficients are statistically significant at 0.1. in order to help compare across variables, we compute the changes in the variables needed in order for the coefficient of past infections on current cases to be reduced by 1. the effects of the environmental factors and population density are mixed. we also observe that the transmission rate is lower in cities with more doctors. cities with higher per capita gdp have higher transmission rates, which may be due to more social interactions as a result of more economic activity 17 . however, until clearer mechanisms are identified and tested, this should be interpreted with caution.15 from mid february, individual specific health codes such as alipay health code and wechat health code are being used in many cities to aid quarantine efforts. 16 0.099 = 0.456  1 log 100 . 17 fogli and veldkamp (2019) show that income is positively correlated with more closely connected social network, and a dense network spreads diseases faster.. cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted march 17, 2020. . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted march 17, 2020 . . https://doi.org/10.1101 /2020 cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted march 17, 2020 . . https://doi.org/10.1101 /2020 cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted march 17, 2020 . . https://doi.org/10.1101 /2020 . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted march 17, 2020 . . https://doi.org/10.1101 /2020 at the time of writing, covid-19 represents a very high risk at the global level, according to the who risk assessment (world health organization, 2020a) . countries other than china are reporting new confirmed cases, and increasingly many cases arise through community transmissions rather than being imported. based on case data in china between january 19 and february 15, we show that public health measures adopted can effectively contain the virus outbreak, and newly available data on real-time population flows can be a valuable tool for risk assessment by public health authorities and the general public.a key limitation of the paper is that we are not able to disentangle the effects from each of the stringent measures taken, as even within this four-week sampling period china enforced such a large number of densely timed policies to contain the virus spreading, often simultaneously in many cities. a second limitation is that these policies fall within each of the two sub-samples.by the starting date of the official data release for confirmed infected cases throughout china, i.e. january 2020, a number of stringent measures were already taken, which prevent researchers to ideally examine and compare a sub-sample period during which no strict policies was enforced. key knowledge gaps remain in the understanding of the epidemiological characteristics of covid-19, such as individual risk factors for contracting the virus and infections from asymptotic cases. data on the demographics and exposure history for those who have shown symptoms as well as those who have not will help facilitate these research.. cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. (which was not certified by peer review)the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted march 17, 2020 . . https://doi.org/10.1101 /2020 a data figure a .1 illustrates the dependent variable, the instrumental variables, and the exclusion restriction that weather conditions earlier than two weeks from date t affect the number of people who are infectious within past two weeks, but do not directly affect the number of confirmed new cases at date t. (1) and (2), the dependent variables are the numbers of newly confirmed covid-19 cases in the own city in the preceding first and second weeks, respectively. in columns (3) and (4) weather conditions affect disease transmissions either directly if the virus can more easily survive and spread in certain environment, or indirectly by changing human behavior. in our sample period, higher wind speeds or more precipitation decrease the number of infections in the future. higher temperatures increase local infections, but decrease infections in other cities.. cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. (which was not certified by peer review)the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted march 17, 2020 . . https://doi.org/10.1101 /2020 . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. (which was not certified by peer review)the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted march 17, 2020 . . https://doi.org/10.1101 /2020 el sndrome de down (sd) debe su nombre al mdico john langdon down, que fue el primero que lo describi 1 ; es la causa ms frecuente de retraso mental leve-moderado, as como de otros problemas mdicos. se presenta en uno de cada 800 nacidos, en todas las razas y niveles socioeconmicos. se debe a una alteracin cromosmica causada por un error en la divisin celular que resulta en la presencia de un tercer cromosoma, constituyendo una trisoma o el cromosoma 21.la nac se define como la infeccin de los alveolos, de las vas areas distales y del intersticio pulmonar que se da fuera del hospital. se caracteriza clnicamente por fiebre, escalofros, tos, dolor torcico pleurtico, espectoracin y mnima opacidad pulmonar en la radiografa de trax. la nac se manifiesta bajo cinco patrones: neumona lobar (abarca un lbulo pulmonar), bronconeumona (focos de consolidacin dispersos por varios lbulos), neumona intersticial (con inflamacin en el intersticio, incluyendo la pared alveolar y el tejido conectivo que rodea el rbol broncovascular) y neumona miliar (numerosas pequeas lesiones procedentes de diseminacin hematgena) 2 .los sntomas ms frecuentes de la nac incluyen tos, fiebre, escalofros, fatiga, disnea y dolor torcico pleurtico. dependiendo del patgeno causal, el paciente puede presentar tos persistente, seca o con expectoracin. otras presentaciones incluyen cefalea y mialgias. ciertos agentes etiolgicos, como legionella, producen sntomas gastrointestinales.en el examen fsico puede apreciarse matidez a la percusin del trax y estertores crepitantes a la auscultacin, broncofona, egofona y frmito. el paciente tambin puede estar taquipneico 3 .no se ha demostrado que existan patrones radiolgicos caractersticos que permitan predecir la etiologa de la neumona. sin embargo, algunos estudios sugieren que se pueden establecer algunas diferencias; por ejemplo, las neumonas con imagen de consolidacin homognea son menos frecuentes en infecciones por mycoplasma pneumoniae, chlamydia pneumoniae y virus respiratorios. por otra parte, la neumona multilobar y la presencia de derrame pleural son ms frecuentes en la infeccin neumoccica bacterimica 4 . community-acquired pneumonia in adults with down syndrome. three clinical cases and a review of the literature abstract john langdon down first described this genetic disorder known today as down syndrome (ds), due to a trisomy of chromosome 21. the frequent appearance of respiratory infections in ds is attributed to structural and functional anomalies of the respiratory system, the presence of congenital heart malformations and igg deficits. we present three clinical cases of adult ds patients with community-acquired pneumonia, and a review of the literature regarding: epidemiology, prevalence, symptomatology, laboratory and radiographic findings, morbidity, mortality, clinical evolution and the importance of prevention of pneumonia in ds patients. these patients presented symptoms of acute infection of the lower respiratory tract: high fever, scanty productive cough with or without sputum, pleuritic chest pain, dyspnea, fatigue, myalgia, and other atypical symptoms. chest radiography showed focal inflammatory condensation in the affected lung and bilateral alveolo-interstitial infiltrate. laboratory tests showed increased values of leukocytes and c-reactive protein, deficiency of igg and low lymphocyte cd4+. patients with ds are highly susceptible to lower and higher respiratory tract infection. community physicians should take exceptional precautions on detecting respiratory symptoms in these patients, since they may result in pneumonia and bronchopneumonia. presentation may be atypical and the complications may even lead to mortality.  2010 fundaci catalana sndrome de down. published by elsevier espaa, s.l. all rights reserved. me de insuficiencia respiratoria aguda, y microorganismos no virales: hongos (pneumocystis), agentes adquiridos por bioterrorismo (ntrax), fiebre q, tularemia, plagas, etc. 5 .como factores etiopatognicos de las nac destacan las micro y macro aspiraciones de secreciones orofarngeas colonizadas por microorganismos patgenos (s. pneumoniae, h. influenzae), sobre todo en enfermos con afecciones del sistema nervioso central, alteraciones de la conciencia (alcoholismo, adictos a drogas por va parenteral), intubacin orotraqueal anestsica, la virulencia del germen (los organismos encapsulados: dentro de los que tenemos el s. pneumoniae, h. influenzae, neisseria meningitidis), la condicin del husped: inmunosupresin, mieloma mltiple, sndrome nefrtico, destacando que la nac por neumococo es particularmente comn entre los pacientes vih positivos 2 .los pacientes con sd presentan una predisposicin a padecer infecciones del tracto respiratorio, especialmente durante los primeros aos de vida, aunque tambin pueden padecer dichas infecciones en edades ms avanzadas. dentro de los factores determinantes se encuentran, entre otros, el dficit inmunitario que presentan 6 .la presentacin de nuestros tres casos clnicos quiere sensibilizar a los diferentes profesionales sanitarios que tratan pacientes con sd sobre la importancia de estar alerta ante la presencia de cuadros infecciosos respiratorios en ellos, dado el alto riesgo de padecer neumonas que pudieran presentar una alta morbimortalidad.varn de 44 aos con sd y epilepsia. acude al servicio de urgencias con dificultad respiratoria, fiebre, tos y dolor en hemitrax derecho de 5 das de evolucin. en el examen fsico se observa un paciente ansioso, con sequedad de piel y de mucosas; auscultacin cardaca: ruidos cardacos taquicrdicos, soplo sistlico de grado ii/iv ms audible en el foco mitral; auscultacin respiratoria: disminucin del murmullo vesicular en la base del pulmn derecho, con crepitantes en esta zona, sin cianosis ni polipnea. constantes: presin arterial (pa), 110/60 mmhg; frecuencia cardaca (fc), 112/min, saturacin de o 2 , 95%; temperatura, 38,2 c; gasto cardaco (gc): 109 mg/dl. en la radiografa de trax en proyeccin anteroposterior y lateral se observa una imagen de condensacin en el lbulo inferior del pulmn derecho compatible con neumona basal derecha ( fig.  1 ). se remite al hospital, donde es ingresado. la analtica sangunea muestra leucocitosis de 13,7 10^3/l, con 78% de neutrfilos polimorfonucleares, 13% de linfocitos, 6% de monocitos, 1% de eosinfilos; hemoglobina, 14,1 g/dl; plaquetas, 359 10^3/l; velocidad de sedimentacin globular (vsg), 44 mm; protena c reactiva (pcr), 1,2 mg/dl; prueba de tuberculina, negativa; cultivo de esputo para bacterias, bacilo cido-alcohol resistente (baar) y hongos, negativos; inmunoglobulinas: igg, 632,0 mg/dl, siendo la iga e igm normales; recuento de linfocitos cd4+ normal, serologa negativa para mycoplasma pneumoniae, chlamydia psittaci, chlamydia pneumoniae y coxiella burnetti. tras 12 das de ingreso hospitalario y tratamiento con antibiticos de amplio espectro, es dado de alta y remitido a su mdico cabecera.varn de 47 aos con sd, hipotiroidismo, esteatosis heptica, hipercolesterolemia, episodios de agitacin psicomotriz frecuentes, con historia anterior de bronquitis y neumonas. acude al servicio de urgencias por tos con expectoracin amarillenta, fiebre alta y disnea, tras haber llevado tratamiento ambulatorio durante 10 das con azitromicina 500 mg/24 h/4 das, moxifloxacino 400 mg/24 h/6, acetilcistena 600 mg/24 h, broncodilatadores y corticoides inhalados por infeccin respiratoria, sin mejora. el examen fsico muestra un paciente polipneico, sin cianosis, con piel y mucosas algo secas, abdomen blando, no doloroso a la palpacin, sin visceromegalias, sin tumoraciones y sin signos de irritacin peritoneal; auscultacin cardaca: ruidos cardacos taquicrdicos; auscultacin respiratoria: estertores subcrepitantes y roncos diseminados. constantes: pa, 80/42 mmhg; fc, 109/ min; frecuencia respiratoria (fr), 28/min; temperatura, 39,5 c; sato 2 , 91%; gc, 114 mg/dl. en la radiografa de trax anteroposterior y lateral: infiltrado bilateral alveolo-intersticial, ms pronunciado en el pulmn derecho, con lesiones inflamatorias en los lbulos inferior y medio ( fig. 2) el paciente fue diagnosticado de nac, insuficiencia respiratoria e hiponatremia. se le prescribi tratamiento antibitico de amplio espectro y antifngico, evolucion favorablemente y se le dio el alta a los 10 das del ingreso.varn de 45 aos de edad con sd e hipercolesterolemia. acude al servicio de urgencias por presentar malestar general, artralgias, mialgias, cefalea, tos productiva, fiebre alta y escalofros. la exploracin fsica muestra buena coloracin de piel y mucosas, hidratado, faringe hipermica, abdomen blando, no doloroso, sin visceromegalias ni reaccin peritoneal. auscultacin respiratoria: murmullo vesicular ligeramente disminuido en ambos campos pulmonares, sin estertores; auscultacin cardaca: ruidos cardacos taquicrdicos. constantes: pa, 100/60; fc, 115 latidos/min; sato 2 , 94%; gc, 104 mg/dl; temperatura, 39 c. radiografa de trax anteroposterior y lateral: condensacin en la periferia del lbulo medio del pulmn izquierdo ( fig. 3 ). se remite al hospital, donde le realizan analtica de sangre: leucocitos: 12,3 10^3/ l; vsg, 36 mm; pcr, 1,8; coagulograma y dimero-d, normales; na, 137 mmol/l; gasometra en sangre arterial: fio 2 , 0,4; ph, 7,32; pco 2 , 31; po 2 , 65; co 3 h, 24; sato 2 , 93%; analtica de orina, normal; prueba de tuberculina negativa; cultivo de esputo para bacterias, baar y hongos: negativos. hemocultivos seriados negativos. evaluacin de immunoglobulinas (igm, igg e iga) normal. lifocitos cd4+ normales. serologa negativa para mycoplasma pneumoniae, chlamydia psittaci, chlamydia pneumoniae y coxiella burnetti. el paciente fue diagnosticado de nac. despus de tratamiento con antibioterapia de amplio espectro, presenta una evolucin clnica favorable, es dado de alta y remitido a su mdico de cabecera.pirez et al 7 , tras estudiar a 697 nios hospitalizados por nac, observaron que el sd fue una de las condiciones asociadas (12 nios, 1,72%), superado por las enfermedades neurolgicas con repercusin en la funcin respiratoria (29 nios, 4,16%) y las malformaciones congnitas cardacas (22 nios, 3,15%).en otro estudio realizado con 109 pacientes con sd se detect que las infecciones respiratorias afectaban a 61 pacientes (55,96%), las infecciones del tracto respiratorio superior afectaban con ms frecuencia a nios menores de 1 ao, y en 34 pacientes (31,42%) se asociaron a malformaciones congnitas cardacas; 19 pacientes (31,15%) sufrieron bronconeumonas, 6 (9,83%) bronquitis y 2 (3,30%) neumonas 8 .en la poblacin general se sugiere que un paciente que consulta por fiebre (>37,8 c), tos, expectoracin, taquipnea (>25 respiraciones/min), mialgias y sudoracin nocturna, en ausencia de odinofagia y rinorrea, tendra con mucha probabilidad una nac 2 . este modelo predictor clnico tiene una sensibilidad de 91% y una especificidad de 40%, y si analizase el cuadro clnico de presentacin de los pacientes comentados se podra tener en cuenta en la poblacin con sd 9 .sobre la utilidad del hemocultivo para el diagnstico de neumona, es representativo un estudio realizado en 19 hospitales canadienses durante un perodo de 6 meses: el porcentaje de hemocultivos positivos fue slo del 6,2%, y los autores tambin detectaron que la gravedad de la nac no influye en ello. en otro estudio prospectivo, los hemocultivos fueron positivos en el 10,5% de pacientes con nac. despus de analizar figura 2 caso 2. radiografa anteroposterior de trax: infiltrado bilateral alveolo-intersticial, ms pronunciado en el pulmn derecho, con lesiones inflamatorias en los lbulos inferior y medio. diversos resultados, las diferentes guas clnicas recomiendan, en los pacientes hospitalizados por nac, la realizacin de hemocultivos, pero no la recomiendan en los pacientes tratados ambulatoriamente: lo aqu comentados, fueron negativos, de aqu que su valor ha sido cuestionado 10 .la nac por mycoplasma pneumoniae se asocia a una alta morbilidad y mortalidad en los pacientes con sd, como se observa en los casos comunicados por orlicek et al 11 . estos autores describen las caractersticas clnicas y radiolgicas de la nac en tres nios afectos de sd y que desarrollaron fiebre alta, tos productiva, escalofros, irritabilidad y taquipnea. en la radiografa de trax presentaron infiltrados bilaterales, desarrollaron distrs respiratorio, requiriendo hospitalizacin. los estudios de laboratorio mostraron infeccin por mycoplasma pneumoniae. en estos nios las infeciones por micoplasma pueden ser graves, ya que los pacientes con sd presentan trastornos inmunitarios. ante un nio con sd que presente neumona hay que tener en cuenta este microorganismo como posible agente etiolgico. otros autores, como corretger et al 6 , publicaron un caso de un paciente con sd que desarroll neumona grave; el agente etiolgico fue mycoplasma pneumoniae.en la literatura tambin se describen casos de neumonas provocadas por bordetella bronchiseptica en pacientes con sd; este germen es responsable de traqueobronquitis y bronconeumona, rinitis y otitis media en los animales: coloniza el trato respiratorio superior y la orofaringe en los animales y es raro que infecte al ser humano, aunque puede causar manifestaciones de endocarditis subaguda y tos ferina leve en nios. tambin se ha descrito en pacientes inmunocomprometidos como causa de sepsis, peritonitis, bronquitis y neumona 12 .los pacientes con sd con deficiencias inmunolgicas muestran tendencia a desarrollar neumona por microorganismos inusuales 6,7,12 , incluyendo agentes virales. en un estudio se describe un caso de neumona causada por coronavirus humano (hcovs)-oc43 en un nio con sd y leucemia que present fiebre y leucopenia. no slo los recientemente descubiertos hcovs nl63 o hku1, sino tambin prototipos extraos hcov-oc43 y hcov-229e, son considerados como patgenos respiratorios en pacientes peditricos inmunocomprometidos con cncer 13 .estos pacientes tambin pueden desarrollar neumonas fngicas, como refleja la publicacin de un caso con neumona y derrame pleural provocada por aspergillus en un nio japons de 2 aos de edad y sd 14 .ribeiro et al 15 , al estudiar a pacientes con sd que padecan infecciones respiratorias recurentes, evaluaron los aspectos epidemiolgicos, clnicos y de laboratorio, as como su estado inmunitario. observaron la distribucin por sexos (1,6 masculinos:1 femeninos) y la distribucin por edades (de 1 a 12 aos y 10 meses). las cardiopatas congnitas estaban presentes en el 62,2% de los pacientes, y stos fueron los que desarrollaron neumonas de repeticin. la evaluacin inmunolgica mostr 2 casos con dficits de igg2, 2 casos con deficiencia de linfocitos cd4+, y 5 casos presentaron reduccin de la funcin de las clulas nk; 22 de 36 casos analizados (61,1%) fueron positivos para citomegalovirus. los autores concluyen que en los pacientes con sd hay que tener presente la deficiencia de la respuesta inmunitaria, lo que los hara ms vulnerables a padecer estas infecciones en comparacin con la poblacin general.otros autores encuentran dficits de las inmunoglobulinas sricas, concretamente la igg 16 .anomalas estructurales y funcionales del aparato respiratorio la frecuente aparicin de infecciones respiratorias se debe a la presencia de anomalas estructurales y funcionales del aparato respiratorio, caractersticas de los nios con sd. entre estas figuran: reduccin del dimetro antero posterior de la nasofaringe, lo que impide un adecuado drenaje 17 , un deficiente desarrollo de los senos y la mucosa nasal; disminucin de la actividad ciliar para mantener la mucosa nasal limpia, as como la presencia de chm, lo que predispone a presentar congestin vascular pulmonar con la subsecuente congestin bronquial 17 .las cardiopatas congnitas son consideradas un factor de riesgo para el desarrollo de infecciones respiratorias en los pacientes con sd 7, 8 . se presentan aproximadamente en el 40% de recin nacidos. durante la adolescencia y los primeros aos de la vida adulta, pueden aparecer los defectos valvulares, el ms frecuente de los cuales es el prolapso de la vlvula mitral 18 , como ocurri en uno de nuestros pacientes (caso 2).weir et al 19 afirman que las neumonas se asocian de forma significativa con el asma bronquial, el reflujo gastroesofgico, el sd, la historia de infecciones respiratorias bajas, la tos productiva y la oxigenoterapia suplementaria. en este estudio se concluye que el impacto de las aspiraciones orofarngeas en el desarrollo de neumona debe ser considerado un factor de riesgo.se ha publicado un caso de un paciente varn de 39 aos de edad con sd que ingres en el hospital por neumona del lbulo inferior izquierdo, resistente al tratamiento antibitico de amplio espectro y de 2 meses de evolucin. estudiado con tomografa computarizada (tc), broncoscopia y biopsia, por sospecha de carcinoma bronquial, se lleg al diagnstico de cuerpo extrao en la porcin distal del bronquio principal izquierdo 20 .unido a los factores mencionados anteriormente, el retraso mental y el dismorfismo craneofacial que presentan estas personas aumentan la susceptibilidad a padecer infecciones respiratorias 21 .dyce gordon et al 8 , en su estudio sobre infecciones respiratorias en nios con sd (n = 93) describen 16 muertes (14,67%), que mayormente ocurren durante los primeros aos de vida y son provocadas por bronconeumonas asociadas a cardiopatas congnitas. no se encuentran series publicadas de neumonas en pacientes adultos con sd.los pacientes con sd son inmunodeficientes y comnmente padecen infecciones respiratorias. dos nios fueron evaluados por padecer neumonas recurrentes con infiltrado radiogrfico persistente, y en ambos casos las anormalidades radiolgicas se debieron a hernias de morgagni; por tanto, cuando un nio con sd presenta imgenes de un infiltrado radiogrfico persistente hay que tener en cuenta la posibilidad de defectos diafragmticos 22 .los nios son sd sanos deben recibir las vacunas sistemticas de modo idntico al de los restantes nios, si bien las caractersticas inmunolgicas y morfolgicas de los nios trismicos, la gravedad y la recurrencia de estas infecciones justifican la recomendacin de ciertas inmunizaciones selectivas, entre las que se encuentra la vacunacin antineumoccica. el evidente papel causal del neumococo en estos procesos recomienda una particular atencin a su prevencin y por tanto en el inters de la administracin, ya en los lactantes, de una vacuna antineumoccica conjugada.tambin hay que tener presente la vacunacin antigripal. se han documentado anomalas de la respuesta inmune de los nios con sd al virus de la gripe. est asimismo bien demostrado su papel favorecedor de otitis media y sobreinfecciones broncopulmonares bacterianas. el valor preventivo de la vacunacin antigripal sobre estas infectopatas adquiere una especial trascendencia en los pacientes trismicos, en los que su inmunogenicidad est atestiguada.el alcance de estas recomendaciones es universal, aunque puedan estar influidas por variaciones locales del calendario vacunal. del mismo modo que no hay un calendario vacunal nico del estado espaol, tampoco existe una versin uniforme para la poblacin down. la armonizacin de las pautas para ambas situaciones es un deseable objetivo a cumplir [23] [24] [25] .la academia americana de pediatra a travs de su comit sobre enfermedades infecciosas, la asociacin espaola de pediatra y el comit de estndares de la sociedad espaola de neonatologa han propuesto recomendaciones para la prevencin de las infecciones respiratorias debidas al virus respiratorio sincitial (vrs), cada vez ms frecuentes. debido a que parte de la poblacin infantil con sd entra dentro de la poblacin de riesgo definida por estas sociedades, hay que tener en cuenta el establecimiento de medidas preventivas para evitar esta infeccin: tanto medidas higinicas como la inmunoprofilaxis con palivizumab, que han conseguido que el nmero de pacientes infectados por vrs haya decrecido 26 .in december 2019, a novel coronavirus disease (covid-19) broke out in wuhan, china, which caused by severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2) [1, 2] . the covid-19 had been affirmed to have human-to-human transmissibility [3] and has now spread worldwide, which raised high attention not only within china but internationally. the world health organization (who) reported that there are 118, 326 confirmed cases and 4292 deaths in globally until march 11, 2020 [4] , and evaluated as global pandemic on the same day [5] .in retrospect studies, the outbreak of severe acute respiratory syndrome (sars) in guangdong in 2003 gradually faded with the warming weather coming, and was basically ended until july [6] . it has been documented that the temperature and its variations might have affected the sars outbreak [7] . a study in korea found that the risk of influenza incidence was significantly increased with low daily temperature and low/high relative humidity, a positive significant association was observed for diurnal temperature range (dtr) [8] . moreover, temperature [9] and dtr [10] have been linked to the death from respiratory diseases. a study demonstrated that absolute humidity had significant correlations with influenza viral survival and transmission rates [11] . couple of studies reported that the covid-19 was related to the meteorological factors, which decreased with the temperature increasing [12, 13] , but their effects on the mortality had not been reported. therefore, we assume that the weather conditions might also contributed to the mortality of covid-19.as the capital of hubei province and one of the largest city in central china, wuhan is located in the middle of the yangtze river delta, which has a typical subtropical, humid, monsoon climate with cold winters and warm summers [14] . the average annual temperature and rainfall are 15.8 c-17.5 c and 1050 mm-2000 mm, respectively [15] . besides, wuhan owns an area of 8494 km 2 and a population over 11 million (as of 2018) [16] . so far, this covid-19 has caused 5393 deaths globally, . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.is the (which was not peer-reviewed) the copyright holder for this preprint . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.03. 15.20036426 doi: medrxiv preprint and caused 2456 deaths in wuhan. although the deaths may be affected by many factors, the present is to explore the effect from meteorological angel with generalized additive model (gam).data from 20 january to 29 absolute humidity was calculated according to the previous study and was measured by vapor pressure (vp) [17] . the density of water vapor, or absolute humidity [ v (g/m 3 )], is the mass of moisture per total volume of air. it is associated to vp via the ideal gas law for the moist portion of the air:where e is vapor pressure (vp), r v is the gas constant for water vapor [461.53 j/(kg k)], and t is the daily ambient temperature (k). vp is a commonly used indicator of absolute humidity and is calculated from ambient temperature and relative humidity using the clausius-clapeyron relation [18] . briefly, we first calculated the saturation vapor pressure [e s (t) (mb)] from daily ambient temperature using the following equation:where e s (t 0 ) denotes saturation vapor pressure at a reference temperature t 0 (273.15 k) which equals to 6.11 mb. l denotes the latent heat of evaporation for water (2257 kj/kg). r v is the gas constant for water vapor [461.53 j/(kg k)]. t denotes daily ambient temperature (k). then, vp (pa) was calculated by combining the e s (t) calculated using eq. (2) with relative humidity (rh):a descriptive analysis was performed. we used a generalized additive model (gam) to analyze the associations between meteorological factors (temperature, dtr, relative humidity and absolute humidity) and the daily mortality of covid-19. the core analysis was a gam with a quasi-poisson link function based on the previous studies [19, 20] . we first built the basic models for mortality . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.is the (which was not peer-reviewed) the copyright holder for this preprint . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.03. 15.20036426 doi: medrxiv preprint outcomes without including air pollution or weather variables. we incorporated smoothed spline functions of time, which accommodate nonlinear and nonmonotonic patterns between mortality and time, thus offering a flexible modeling tool. then, we introduced the weather variables and analyzed their effects on mortality. akaike's information criterion was used as a measure of how well the model fitted the data. consistent with several recent time-series studies [21, 22] , the penalized smoothing spline function was applied to control the effects of confounding factors, such as time trends, day-of-week and air pollution. the core gam equation is:where t is the day of the observation; e(y t ) is the expected number of daily mortality for covid-19 on day t;  is the intercept; is the regression coefficient; x t is the daily level of weather variables on day t; s() denotes the smoother based on the penalized smoothing spline. based on quasi akaike information criterion (qaic), the 2 degrees of freedom (df) was used for time trends and 3 df for air pollutants, temperature and relative humidity; dow is a categorical variable indicating the date of the week.after establishing the core model, we also considered the lag effects of weather conditions on death of covid-19, and examined the potentially lagged effects, i.e., single day lag (from lag 0 to lag 5) and multiple-day average lag (from lag 01 to lag 05) [23] . the exposure and response correlation curves between weather variables and covid-19 mortality were plotted using a spline function in the gam. we also performed a sensitivity analysis by changing the df of the penalized smoothing spline function from 2 to 9 for calendar time and from 3 to 8 for temperature and humidity.all of the statistical analyses were two-sided, and at a 5% level of significance. all analyses were conducted using r software (version 3.5.3) with the gam fitted by the "mgcv" package (version 1.8-27). the effect estimates were expressed as the percentage changes and their 95% confidence intervals (cis) in daily mortality of covid-19 associated with per 1 unit increase in weather variables. the correlation results between mortality counts of covid-19, meteorological measures and air pollutant concentrations were presented in table 2 . the mortality counts of covid-19 was negatively associated with relative humidity (r = 0.32), pm 2.5 (r = 0.53) and pm 10 (r = 0.45). a positive . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.is the (which was not peer-reviewed) the copyright holder for this preprint . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.03. 15.20036426 doi: medrxiv preprint association with covid-19 mortality was observed for dtr (r = 0.44), and so 2 (r = 0.31). and covid-19 mortality at current day. generally, the curves tended to be not associated with covid-19 mortality for dtr but were strongly positive for temperature. in addition, the curves associated with relative humidity and absolute humidity presented similar linear trends, which indicated that the higher level of humidity might cause decrease in the covid-19 mortality. the study was conducted in wuhan during 20 january, 2020 to 29 february, 2020, in order to investigate the association between weather variables and daily death number of covid-19.significant positive effect of dtr on the daily mortality counts of covid-19 was first identified through our study. it is also found that a significant negative association with covid-19 mortality is observed for temperature and absolute humidity. the results indicate that the effects of dtr should also be paid attention on the mortality of covid-19.our study demonstrated a negative association between covid-19 case fatality and temperature, while a positive association for dtr. the results are consistent with the following investigations.respiratory diseases mortality increased with decreasing temperature [24], and was strongly associated with low temperature [25-27]. while another study found that both cold and heat effects may have adverse impact on respiratory mortality [28] . otherwise, the study conducted in 30 east asian cities showed that increased dtr was associated with increased risk of mortality for respiratory and cardiovascular diseases [29] . in the cold season, the cumulative relative risk of non-accidental, respiratory and cardiovascular death increased at high dtr values in tabriz [30] . a time-series study done in shanghai on the effect of dtr and daily chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (copd) mortality showing that each 1c elevation in the 4-day moving average for dtr accounted for 1.25% of increased risk of copd mortality [31] . a review for cold exposure and immune function reported that lower temperature may repress the immune function [32] , particularly, our previous finding suggested that the phagocytic function of pulmonary alveolar macrophages declined under cold stress in vitro experiment [33] . breathing cold air can lead to bronchial constriction, which may promote susceptibility to pulmonary infection [34] . additionally, since sars-cov-2 is sensitive to heat, and high temperature makes it difficult to survive, not to mention the beneficial factors for virus transmission like indoor crowding and poor ventilation in cold days [35] . also, cold temperature has been discovered to be associated with the reduction of lung function and increases in exacerbations for people with copd [36] . in addition, dtr represents a stable measure of temperature, which is an indicator of temperature variability to evaluate effects on human health, including mortality and . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.is the (which was not peer-reviewed) the copyright holder for this preprint . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.03. 15.20036426 doi: medrxiv preprint morbidity [37] . besides, abrupt temperature changes may add the burden of cardiac and respiratory system causing cardiopulmonary events and high dtr levels may be a source of environmental stress [30] . our findings highlight a need to strengthen the awareness of the effects of temperature and dtr on covid-19 mortality.researchers confirmed that respiratory infection was enhanced during unusually cold and low humidity conditions [38] , indicating low humidity may be also an important risk factor for respiratory diseases. worse, a study with data of more than 25 years found that humidity was an important determinant of mortality and low-humidity levels may cause a large increase in mortality rates, potentially by influenza-related mechanisms [39] , similar to a study carried out in the united states [40] . consistent to these finding, our results also indicated that the risk of dying from covid-19 decreased only with absolute humidity increasing. breathing dry air could cause epithelial damage and/or reduction of mucociliary clearance, and then lead to render the host more susceptible to respiratory virus infection; the formation of droplet nuclei is essential to transmission, but exhaled respiratory droplets settle very rapidly at high humidity so that it is hard to contribute to influenza virus spread [41] . moreover, the transmission of pandemic influenza virus is the most efficient under cold, dry conditions [42] , and influenza virus survival rate increased markedly in accordance with decreasing of absolute humidity [43] , which may be similar to coronavirus. therefore, the increase of covid-19 mortality may also be related to the lower humidity in winter.however, many limitations should not be ignored. firstly, there are some other factors may affect the covid-19 mortality, such as population migration, government intervention and so on. secondly, ecologic time-series study design was adopted in the study, which might exist ecologic fallacy.furthermore, it is difficult to obtain the meteorological and air pollution data at the individual level.nevertheless, this study showed that dtr might be associated with the death risk of covid-19 in wuhan, which deserves further investigation.this is the first study to investigate the effects of temperature, dtr and humidity on daily mortality of covid-19 in chinese population by utilizing publicly accessible data on covid-19 statistics and weather variables. our finding shows that daily mortality of covid-19 is positively association with dtr but negatively with relative humidity. in summary, this study suggests the temperature variation and humidity may be important factors affecting the covid-19 mortality. gam: generalized additive model; ci: confidence interval; rr: relative risk.not applicable.not applicable.. cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.is the (which was not peer-reviewed) the copyright holder for this preprint . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.03. 15.20036426 doi: medrxiv preprintthe datasets used and/or analyzed during the current study are available from the websites.the authors declare that they have no conflict of interest.this work was supported by the novel coronavirus disease science and technology major project in gansu province. cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.is the (which was not peer-reviewed) the copyright holder for this preprint . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.03. 15.20036426 doi: medrxiv preprint . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.is the (which was not peer-reviewed) the copyright holder for this preprint . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.03. 15.20036426 doi: medrxiv preprint . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.is the (which was not peer-reviewed) the copyright holder for this preprint . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.03. 15.20036426 doi: medrxiv preprint fig. 2 the exposure-response curves of meteorological factors and covid-19 daily mortality counts in wuhan, china, from 20 january to 29 february 2020. the x-axis is the concurrent day meteorological data, y-axis is the predicted log relative risk (rr), is shown by the solid line, and the dotted lines represent the 95% confidence interval (ci). covid-19, coronavirus disease; dtr, diurnal temperature range.. cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.is the (which was not peer-reviewed) the copyright holder for this preprint . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.03. 15.20036426 doi: medrxiv preprint . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.is the (which was not peer-reviewed) the copyright holder for this preprint . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.03. 15.20036426 doi: medrxiv preprint the severe acute respiratory coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2) (gorbalenya, 2020) is an infectious disease, initially found in whan, china (li et al., 2020) . health organization (who) has declared it pandemic worldwide on 11 th march, 2020, after spreading to several countries (cucinotta et al., 2020) . covid-19 infected patients have some typical symptoms including fever, myalgia, dry cough, pneumonia and throat sore (ahin, 2020 (ahin, . huang et al., 2020 . as of 16 th may, 2020, a total 4,425,485 confirmed cases with 302,059 death has been registered so far (https://covid19.who.int/). where united states of america (usa) is leading with 1.47 million conformed cases followed by russia, united kingdom, spain and italy. in india total active cases 53035 with 2752 death and 30,152 recovery reported till date of 16 th may 2020 (https://www.mohfw.gov.in/). these official data shows that recovery rate 35% and fatality stand at 3.2% in india. being a densely populated area, india has alluring ground to be affected faster than other countries. but timely management and strict lockdown measures were able to reduce its predicted growth rate as per world level (gupta et al., 2020) .in addition to human contact, there are many research works seeks to find the relationship of weather factors (tosepu et al., 2020 , zhu et al., 2020 and shi et al., 2020 , air pollutants (martelletti et al., 2020 , ogen, 2020 and conticini et al., 2020 , geographical factors (gupta et al., 2020) and socio-economic factors (qiu et al., 2019) with daily conform covid-19 active cases as well as death due to this disease. weather parameters like temperature, relative humidity, solar radiation, rainfall, wind speed (chaudhuri et al., 2020 and zhu et al., 2020) may enhance the transmission of corona positive cases. in addition to this ambient air pollutants like pm2.5, pm10, so2, no2 and co (bashir et al., 2020 and yongjian et al.,) also could be associated with enhancing the process of covid-19 cases. however recent study focuses on single or two factor based study like temperature, relative humidity, solar radiation, so2 and particulate matter etc. pollutants and weather parameters both have combine effect on cardiovascular and respiratory disease (delamater et al., 2012 and vanos et al., 2014) . since sever acute respiratory coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2) causing chronic damage and injury to the cardiovascular system (zheng et al., 2020) it may have positive association with high concentration of particulate matter (pm) (yongjian et al., 2020) . again meteorological condition significantly influenced the concentration of pm (zhao et al., 2014) . therefore we assume that combine effect of weather parameters and pollutants will be a holistic way to find associative factors. the major objectives is to explore the relationship of weather parameters and air pollutants with covid-19 cases. unlike other study, we consider a state level rather than one city. considering 14 days of moving average for temperature and relative humidity, each parameters were divided into three timeframe i.e. 1 to 10 days, 1 to 25 days and 1 to 44 days. this way of study will provide a holistic insight to study relationship of weather air pollutants with daily corona positive cases. appeal for micro level experiment and because of unavailability of meteorological station data lead to make it study on state level.daily lab tested report of covid 19 of 18 states has been collected from the ministry of health and family welfare (mohfw) since seven days prior to first lock down day on 18 th march to 30 april, 2020. meteorological and air pollutants data like daily mean temperature, relative humidity, solar radiation, rainfall, wind speed and pollution data like mean daily concentration of particulate matter less than 2.5 micrometre (pm2.5), particulate matter less than 10 micrometre (pm10), sulphur dioxide (so2), nitrogen dioxide (no2) and carbon monoxide (co) have been collected from central pollution control board (cpcb) website. a common issue is cpcb weather stations are not equally distributed all over india therefore mean values of all stations was calculated within a state is considered for final value of that state. some of the states have fewer inactive stations that would again simulated by nearest station in neighbour state in respect to same physioclimatic condition. . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. (which was not certified by peer review)the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted june 9, 2020. . https: //doi.org/10.1101 //doi.org/10. /2020 a . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted june 9, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.08.20125401 doi: medrxiv preprint it is better choice to use 1-14 days of moving average in temperature and relative humidity because of the incubation period of covid-19 range for 0 to 14 days (zhu et al., 2020 , duan et al., 2019 . additionally smoothing spine functions of time (ma et al., 2020 , zeng et al., 2016 and cheng et al., 2012 has been incorporated to coincide monotonic and non-monotonic pattern among covid-19 cases with weather and pollution parameter cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted june 9, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.08.20125401 doi: medrxiv preprint offers a more flexible model. aic (akaike's information criteria) was use as a measure for selecting those variables having some kind of association exist in between covid-19 case and the parameters are used in this study to encounter model overfitting (yen et al, 1998) .where n is the number of observation, rss is the residual sum of square, k is the number of parameters to fit plus 1 (k = +1).aic selects the optimum number of variables on the basis of changes in r-squared in a multivariate regression. smaller aic value is needed to select the best model (posada et al., 2001) . we apply a step wise regression by considering both forward and backward direction method in r studio environment to identify variables with significant correlation with covid cases. after selecting variables we further feed them into gam model, defined as:where log ( we also executed three way of sensitive analysis by dividing our total data set into 3 part (0-10 days, 0-25 days and 0-44days of lockdown). another way of sensitive analysis is performed by changing degree of freedom (2 -9 df for time and other variable) in model execution time (ma et al., 2020) . and most importantly repeat the model by excluding maharashtra state as it has large number of case concentrate in last couple of days (zhu et al., 2020).since the model considers a relationship of weather parameters and pollutants with covid ca ses, effect plots having visual interpretation of log transform daily case with other variables w ere produced. significance level of 95% was adopted for all statistical analysis. whole analysi s were performed in r software (version 4.0.0) with the help of "mgcv" package (version 1.8-. cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted june 9, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.08.20125401 doi: medrxiv preprint 31). for mapping purpose we have used arcgis software (version 10.4.1). spearman's correla tion has calculated to see the significance correlation among the variables of meteorological, p ollutant and covid-19 cases.3.1 description of daily positive case, meteorological parameters and pollutants: table 1 . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted june 9, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.08.20125401 doi: medrxiv preprint to moderate negative relationship with 95% confidence level, except temperature whereas wind speed and carbon monoxide (co) are not significant. . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted june 9, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.08.20125401 doi: medrxiv preprint (fig. 6 ).there is no significant relationship of relative humidity has been found with covid-19 case in a 10 days span. it may be due to insufficient number of cases were included in some states.but in 25 days of study it was showing negative trend between 30 -45%, a positive linear trend between 45 -60% and again negative trend in >60%. 44 days of data set represent a negative trend between 0 -45% and a positive correlation >45%. but after sensitive analysis it denoted a sharp negative trend all over the curve. the exposer-response curve in fig. 5c wind speed showed a significant nonlinear positive relationship whereas in spearman's correlation it was not significant. wind speed between 1 to 2 m/s shows no relationship curve and >5m/s displayed a positive relation which is contrary of many research work (ahmadi et al., 2020).in that case when we repeat the model by excluding maharashtra, it has shown wind speed insignificant. solar radiation in short period it could have effect on covid-19 cases but in 44 days of study we have found insignificant relationship. tough rainfall occurs in very limited areas with maximum 5.53mm with a mean of 0.096mm (table 1) . even though in 44 days of study it showed a negative relationship. after sensitive analysis rainfall became insignificant, solar radiation became significant and found a negative linear relation. wind speed maintained a flat trend with the cases in most of the states having mean wind speed in between 0 -2.5 m/s (fig. 6) .. cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted june 9, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.08.20125401 doi: medrxiv preprintin fig. 5 we have not found any significant relation of pm2.5, pm10, no2, so2 and co with covid-19 cases in 10 days study. but in 25 days there was only so2 with decrease trend with slight positive after concentration of 35 g/m 3 . a significant negative relationship of so2 with covid-19 cases has been recorded. it showed 0-10 mg/m 2 have flat and followed by a step decreased trend in concentration between 10-45 g/m 3 . no2 has a significant positive correlation in between 0-35 g/m 3 and followed by a decrease trend after > 40 g/m 3 (fig.   5c ).again it displayed a fresh negative correlation during sensitive analysis. in case of pm2.5 and pm10 it shows significant correlation with 6 degree of freedom therefore because of overfitting we eliminate it (zhu et al., 2020 and wang et al., 2018) . after sensitive analysis there is huge change appeared in association of pollutants in gam model. pm2.5, and co have become significant (fig 6) . there was a positive relationship with pm2.5 showed through exposer-response curve, in most of the states, up to the concentration of 100 g/m 3 . same pattern followed by carbon monoxide (co). . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted june 9, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.08.20125401 doi: medrxiv preprintgam result on 44 days data including maharashtra state displayed temperature, relative humidity, no2, so2, wind speed and rainfall (estimate 42.07, sd 2.66 and p<2e-16) as significant. for sensitive analysis, first we excluded maharashtra state having a large number of case concentrate in last couple of days (fig. 4) than other state for robust result (zhu et al., 2020) . fig. 6 present a robust study output (estimate 30.75, sd 1.468 and p<2e-16) where pm2.5 , solar radiation and co along with temperature, relative humidity, no2 so2 and wind speed have shown a significant association with covid-19. with the help of this scenario it can be stated that pollutants like no2, pm2.5, pm10 and co are more sensitive variables than so2 in this study. weather variables like relative humidity and solar radiation and rainfall are more sensitive than temperature and wind speed.pandemic covid-19 became burden and its prolonged impact in every sphere of human life could be sensed even after successive decades. our effort is to find out the association meteorological factors and pollutants with daily positive case of covid-19. gam model with 14 days moving average of temperature and showed a significant positive relationship with temperature, relative humidity, and wind speed whereas relative humidity, no2, so2, and rainfall and solar radiation showed a negative relation with daily case in 44 days of study. with the help of previous research work (kumar, 2020 and ahmadi et al., 2020) shows a positive and negative relation with temperature and relative humidity respectively. similar to chan et al., 2010, our study also shows high temperature leads to minimise the reported case. but it will need more experiment to establish a strong relationship with temperature. in the case of relative humidity two type of scenario has been seen. firstly, landlocked states like rajasthan, madhya pradesh, uttar pradesh bihar, punjab, and himachal pradesh (rh <57%) have shown a negative association with daily positive case. secondly, coastal states like maharashtra, kerala, tamil nadu and andhra pradesh with high relative humidity (>57%) having a positive association with cases. after excluding maharashtra it seems a negative correlation in between 0 -90%, which is again validated by previous study (kumar, 2020 , qi et al., 2020 and ma et al., 2020 . again relative humidity may be statistically significant till it need more research to establish as a fact. in a study in asyary et al., 2020 claim that sunlight correlated significantly to recovery patient of covid-19 because vitamin d from sunlight can triggered body immune system. in our study we have seen a negative relation between infected cases with sunlight . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted june 9, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.08.20125401 doi: medrxiv preprint exposer. there are states like maharashtra, kerala, rajasthan haryana, delhi and punjab enjoy solar radiation more as reported cases are also more. therefore solar radiation will not be a establish factors can reduce covid-19 transmission (gupta et al., 2020) . wind speed again pointed out a positive correlation can be validate with previous study in india (gupta et al., 2020) . many study found (xie et al., 2019 , tecer et al., and 2008 this study has many limitations like not inclusion of socio-cultural factors, gender, population density, movement of people and elevation etc. there is several factors can help to transmit this disease. further laboratory and analytical studies are needed on these shortcomings.our findings are there is a significant relationship between daily positive covid-19 case with weather and pollution factors. temperature and wind speed is positively associated with daily covid-19 case count. solar radiation has negative correlation. positive association has been found pm2.5 and co with covid-19 confirmed cases and negative association with so2 and no2. besides environmental factors, socio-economic factors, health infrustcture, literacy, number of person came from abroad, number of suspects in a states and their travel history can also enhance the accuracy of understanding actual influential factors in future study.we have no conflict of interest of this paper.. cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted june 9, 2020. . https: //doi.org/10.1101 //doi.org/10. /2020 ogen, y., 2020. assessing nitrogen dioxide (no2) levels as a contributing factor to the coronavirus (covid-19) fatality rate. science of the total environment, p.138605. park, j.e., son, w.s., ryu, y., choi, s.b., kwon, o. and ahn, i., 2020 tan, j., mu, l., huang, j., yu, s., chen, b. and yin, j., 2005 . an initial investigation of the association between the sars outbreak and weather: with the view of the environmental . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted june 9, 2020. . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted june 9, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.08.20125401 doi: medrxiv preprint yongjian, z., jingu, x., fengming, h. and liqing, c., 2020. association between short-term exposure to air pollution and covid-19 infection: evidence from china. science of the total environment, p.138704.zeng, q., li, g., cui, y., jiang, g. and pan, x., 2016. estimating temperature-mortality exposure-response relationships and optimum ambient temperature at the multi-city level of . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. (which was not certified by peer review)the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted june 9, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.08.20125401 doi: medrxiv preprint las infecciones agudas de las vas respiratorias altas son uno de los motivos ms frecuentes de consulta al mdico de atencin primaria, tanto en los nios como en los adultos. se entiende como va area superior el rea anatmica que se extiende desde las fosas nasales anteriores hasta la laringe y que incluye, como principales regiones, la nariz, los senos paranasales, el odo medio, la faringe, la laringe y las estructuras amigdalares. en muchas ocasiones las infecciones respiratorias altas se deben a agentes virales, por lo que suelen ser benignas y cursar de forma autolimitada. sin embargo, en determinadas localizaciones la causa puede ser bacteriana, y en tal caso un tratamiento antibitico correcto y precoz puede conseguir una adecuada y rpida respuesta clnica. en su conjunto, las infecciones respiratorias altas ocasionan un gran consumo de frmacos. tambin determinan, con cierta frecuencia, un inadecuado uso de los antibiticos, lo que contribuye a la rpida aparicin de resistencias frente a microorganismos previamente sensibles, como ha ocurrido con el neumococo. el seguimiento de las normas de tratamiento acordadas en las guas de prctica clnica, la mayor disponibilidad de pruebas para el diagnstico rpido y la ms correcta informacin sanitaria de la poblacin sobre el empleo de los antibiticos puede contribuir a que, en un futuro inmediato, aumente la eficiencia de la prctica mdica.la mayor parte de las infecciones agudas de la va area superior se deben a virus. se estima que slo un 25% de los casos tiene su causa en una infeccin bacteriana, aunque siempre es difcil diferenciar clnicamente cundo se trata de uno u otro origen. esto hace que el consumo emprico de antibiticos en estas enfermedades sea enorme y muchas veces poco justificado. el descubrimiento de nuevas vacunas, como la recientemente aparecida frente a haemophilus influenzae, ha reducido de forma notable la incidencia de procesos como la epiglotitis. sin embargo, el constante aumento de individuos inmunodeprimidos en la poblacin general ha hecho que crezca la importancia de los agentes patgenos menos comunes y de las formas de presentacin clnica menos habituales. a veces tambin pu ede ocurrir una infeccin dual, es decir, la debida a dos microorganismos simultneamente. al respecto, la descrita con mayor frecuencia es la causada por picornavirus y por parainfluenzavirus a. sea como fuere, en todos los casos se hace necesario investigar el origen de la infeccin, tanto ante la sospecha de que exista una causa bacteriana como ante la aparicin de una mala respuesta al tratamiento antibitico emprico, cuando se considera que ste debiera ser el adecuado.el catarro o resfriado comn, la sinusitis, la faringitis, la laringotraquetis y la epiglotitis son las principales enfermedades infecciosas que afectan a la va area superior. sus principales caractersticas se describen a continuacin.los principales agentes etiolgicos son los virus. algunos estudios han establecido que los ms frecuentes son rhinovirus y coronavirus. debido a que estos virus tienen muy diversos serotipos, las reinfecciones son muy comunes, lo que explica por qu una misma persona puede tener varios episodios al ao. en los nios puede llegarse hasta siete u ocho catarros en un mismo ao. otros virus posibles son influenzavirus, parainfluenzavirus, pneumovirus (virus respiratorio sincitial) y adenovirus. estos ltimos producen los mismos sntomas, pero adems suelen causar infecciones de las vas bajas o cursar con una mayor afectacin sistmica (tabla 34-1 ).el contacto con las secreciones respiratorias infectadas es el mecanismo que utiliza el virus para su transmisn. esta va puede establecerse merced a la inhalacin de las partculas virales que se encuentran suspendidas en las gotas de secrecin respiratoria que se eliminan con la tos o el estornudo o por la inoculacin directa del virus en la mucosa nasal o conjuntival. asimismo, es posible que el contagio se produzca a travs de las pequeas partculas de aerosol que quedan en suspensin en el aire, o por el contacto directo con fomites infectados (p. ej., la contaminacin de las manos y la posterior autoinoculacin en las fosas nasales). el perodo de incubacin se establece en 2 o 3 das y los sntomas duran de 1 a 2 semanas. la proliferacin del virus tiene lugar en la mucosa, en la que origina una marcada inflamacin local, con aumento de la permeabilidad vascular y desprendimiento de las clulas ciliadas. esto ocasiona la rinorrea acuosa que se observa en los primeros das del catarro comn. la inflamacin determina, posteriormente, un incremento de los neutrfilos en la mucosa respiratoria. asimismo, parece producirse una respuesta neurolgica colinrgica, con aumento de la secrecin glandular en la nariz. las alteraciones descritas, as como la anmala funcin ciliar, suelen mantenerse unas 2 semanas tras el contagio, aunque puede llegarse a las 10 en algunos casos.los sntomas se deben a la respuesta inflamatoria que provoca la infeccin viral. la vasodilatacin y el incremento de la permeabilidad vascular son la causa de la congestin nasal que caracteriza a la enfermedad. en la mayora de los casos el cuadro comienza con molestias farngeas, que suelen resolverse pronto. a los 2 o 3 das empiezan a notarse sntomas nasales, como rinorrea acuosa, irritacin mucosa y estornudos. pueden aparecer algunos sntomas generales variables, como malestar general y mialgias en los primeros das. la fiebre, si se presenta, es de pequea entidad. pasados 2 o 3 das la rinorrea se hace purulenta y se asocia a la sensacin de obstruccin nasal. la tos se produce hasta en un 30% de los casos y suele intensificarse hacia el tercer o cuarto da. los sntomas catarrales duran 1 semana, aunque en algunos pacientes pueden prolongarse hasta 2 semanas. las manifestaciones clnicas son ms agudas y molestas en las personas fumadoras.en general el cuadro clnico es benigno y autolimitado. hasta en un 2% de los enfermos aparece alguna complicacin, fundamentalmente infecciones bacterianas secundarias del tipo de la rinosinusitis, la otitis media o la neumona. esto es particularmente ms importante en las poblaciones de alto riesgo, como los lactantes, los ancianos o los enfermos crnicos. las infecciones bacterianas secundarias suelen tener una evolucin prolongada y cursan con sntomas que dependen del rgano afectado.en general, la utilizacin de antibiticos no est indicada, ya que la mayora de los casos se resuelve espontneamente. al no existir un tratamiento etiolgico, los frmacos slo deben emplearse con el objetivo de aliviar la intensidad de los sntomas y de acortar la duracin de las manifestaciones clnicas. se recomiendan las medidas higinico-dietticas, como la ingesta de lquidos, la humidificacin del ambiente y el reposo, cuya aplicacin debe estar en funcin de la intensidad del cuadro clnico. debe abandonarse el consumo de tabaco y han de evitarse los ambientes con agentes irritantes para las vas areas.los analgsicos y los antipirticos alivian la sensacin de malestar, las mialgias y la febrcula que suelen acompaar al catarro comn. se recomienda el paracetamol, en dosis de 500 mg o 1 g, utilizado a demanda en atencin a la importancia de los sntomas. otras alternativas son el cido acetilsaliclico, el ibuprofeno y algunos otros antiinflamatorios no esteroideos, ajustando siempre las dosis a la intensidad y la duracin de las manifestaciones clnicas.la congestin nasal puede mejorarse con agentes simpaticomimticos, sobre todo con los agonistas  1-adrenrgicos, que pueden administrarse por va tpica (nafazolina, oximetazolina, propihexedrina) o por va oral (fenilefrina, pseudoefedrina, metoxamina). la primera proporciona un efecto ms directo y eficaz, pero no debe usarse durante ms de 3 o 4 das consecutivos, por el riesgo de producir una rinitis medicamentosa. por su parte, los antihistamnicos no tienen una indicacin bien establecida. su mecanismo de accin ms probable se relaciona ms que con la inhibicin de la liberacin de histamina con las propiedades anticolinrgicas de estas sustancias. la clorfeniramina y la clemastina no actan sobre la congestin nasal, pero s sobre la rinorrea y los estornudos. por otro lado, el bromuro de ipratropio aplicado por va nasal mejora la hidrorrea de forma efectiva hasta en un 30% de los enfermos. su efecto secundario principal es la sequedad nasal, sobre todo cuando se hace necesario el usar dosis continuadas. todos los frmacos mencionados poseen una actividad moderada, por lo que en todos los casos debe valorarse cuidadosamente, antes de prescribirlos, sus riesgos y sus beneficios.para el tratamiento de la tos puede indicarse el dextrometorfano. la persistencia de este sntoma puede sugerir la existencia de una hiperreactividad bronquial, lo que justificara el empleo de broncodilatadores y de corticoesteroides inhalados. los corticoesteroides intranasales no deben usarse prcticamente nunca, pues no consiguen modificar el cuadro clnico descrito. son posibles otros tratamientos, aunque su utilidad es dudosa. en algunos trabajos se ha sealado que echinacea purpurea pudiera tener un efecto beneficioso, aunque no existen evidencias suficientes por el momento como para recomendarla. el gluconato de cinc, tomado en pastillas disueltas en la boca cada 2 horas, se indicaba hasta hace an pocos aos, a raz del descubrimiento, en 1984, de la accin antivrica del zinc. sin embargo, su mal sabor, los posibles vmitos que ocasiona y la falta de estudios que avalen su eficacia han hecho que en la actualidad haya dejado de recomendarse.la vitamina c a altas dosis (1 g/da), preconizada hace 30 o 40 aos, an mantiene su indicacin clnica. actualmente, tras las publicaciones aparecidas en 1999, ha podido constatarse que su efecto puede ser incluso mayor si se administra en dosis ms altas (2 g/da). es ms, es posible que su empleo pueda ser no slo profilctico, sino tambin teraputico, sobre todo si se prescribe en los momentos iniciales del catarro comn. en tal caso parece capaz de reducir la duracin de las manifestaciones clnicas de la enfermedad.los antibiticos se usan ampliamente en la prctica clnica, pero lo cierto es que sin que exista indicacin para ello. no acortan los sntomas ni disminuyen su intensidad, adems de que pueden ocasionar efectos secundarios muy diversos. acarrean, asimismo, un importante e intil gasto sanitario.conocido el mecanismo de transmisin de los virus, toma valor la prevencin para disminuir el riesgo de contagio. al respecto es importante, sobre todo, el evitar la contaminacin de las manos. para conseguirlo se han utilizado diferentes productos para lavarse las manos, todos comercializados, a los que deben recurrir sistemticamente las personas que tienen relacin con el desarrollo y la propagacin de la enfermedad.en otro sentido, tambin se han empleado anticuerpos monoclonales frente a los receptores de los virus, aunque sin que se hayan logrado resultados significativos. tampoco se han mostrado efectivos los agentes antivirales, como el pirodavir, ni las llamadas vacunas anticatarrales. el interfern  ha demostrado su efectividad en la prevencin de la viriasis, pero no en la infeccin establecida. su coste y sus efectos secundarios hacen que su prescripcin no sea aconsejable.los senos paranasales estn recubiertos de una mucosa respiratoria que produce una secrecin que se elimina a travs del orificio sinusal (antro), por la accin de los cilios vibrtiles, a la cavidad nasal. por tanto, en circunstancias normales no se acumula moco en el interior de los senos, que habitualmente son estriles a pesar de la cercana de las fosas nasales, en las que abundan las bacterias. cuando se obstruyen los orificios de salida de los senos y se altera el mecanismo de limpieza ejercido por los cilios, las secreciones pueden acumularse y dar origen a los sntomas y signos que caracterizan a las sinusitis. las secreciones retenidas pueden infectarse por diversos agentes patgenos, esencialmente virus, bacterias y hongos.las sinusitis se encuentran entre las infecciones ms frecuentemente tratadas en el mbito ambulatorio. actualmente se sabe que el 0,5% de las infecciones respiratorias de los adultos y el 5% a 10% de las de los nios se complican con una sinusitis. por otra parte, es un trastorno que cada vez se tiene ms en cuenta en los enfermos sometidos a una intubacin endotraqueal, as como en los individuos inmunodeprimidos (receptores de un trasplante de mdula sea, enfermos neutropnicos, sujetos infectados por el virus de la inmunodeficiencia humana, individuos que padecen una inmunodeficiencia primaria, etc.).las circunstancias que favorecen la aparicin de una sinusitis son mltiples. entre los ms importantes estn las infecciones vricas de las vas altas, la rinitis alrgica, los traumatismos faciales, las enfermedades dentarias, el uso de vasoconstrictores nasales, los cuerpos extraos intranasales, los trastornos de la motilidad ciliar y las inmunodeficiencias. los microorganismos ms frecuentemente implicados en el origen de una sinusitis son streptococcus pneumoniae y haemophilus influenzae, que en conjunto explican el 70% de los casos. menos habituales son streptococcus pyogenes, staphylococcus aureus y moraxella catarrhalis. en las sinusitis crnicas haemophilus influenzae es el germen responsable en un 60% de las ocasiones. otros agentes tambin posibles son staphylococcus aureus y pseudomonas aeruginosa, que se encuentran especialmente en los pacientes que padecen una poliposis nasal o una fibrosis qustica. la sinusitis fngica es muy infrecuente y slo aparece acompaando a determinadas enfermedades, como la diabetes mellitus, la insuficiencia renal crnica o las neutropenias, o como efecto adverso de algunos tratamientos crnicos, sobre todo los que se realizan con corticoesteroides o inmunodepresores. la causa de las sinusitis a menudo es polimicrobiana y en ella participan microorganismos muy resistentes a distintos antibiticos. algunas bacterias, como chlamydia pneumoniae y mycoplasma pneumoniae, nunca se han relacionado con el origen de una sinusitis aguda (tabla 34-2 ).se distinguen varias formas de sinusitis. las formas agudas duran menos de 3 semanas y suelen estar precedidas en la semana anterior por un cuadro catarral de vas altas. las formas subagudas tienen una duracin que oscila entre las tres semanas y los 4 meses. finalmente, las formas crnicas persisten ms de 3 meses. a veces la sinusitis se asocia con una rinitis y, en tal caso, conviene descartar la existencia de factores que pueden contribuir al mantenimiento del proceso. los sntomas principales de una sinusitis aguda son el dolor local, la tumefaccin facial, la fiebre no elevada y la rinorrea purulenta. a estos sntomas cardinales suelen asociarse otros, como la rinitis, la congestin nasal y la insuficiencia ventilatoria nasal. no es infrecuente el dolor de cabeza. en la sinusitis etmoidea el dolor puede reflejarse en el globo ocular y en la esfenoidal puede ser retrobulbar. las complicaciones, aunque poco frecuentes, se producen por la extensin de la infeccin a las reas vecinas y deben identificarse precozmente por su potencial gravedad. son diferentes segn cul sea el seno afectado. las principales son las siguientes: a) intracraneales, como la meningitis, el absceso cerebral, el empiema subdural o la trombosis del seno cavernoso; b) orbitarias, como la celulitis orbitaria, el absceso subperistico o el absceso orbitario, y c) pulmonares, como la exacerbacin asmtica o la agudizacin de la bronquitis crnica.en todas las sinusitis agudas suelen reconocerse bien los signos spticos que denotan la afectacin del estado general, as como los sntomas y signos que son propios de la localizacin anatmica. ante la sospecha diagnstica es conveniente iniciar el estudio hospitalario, que requiere la realizacin de una radiografa simple y, a veces, de una tomografa computarizada de los senos paranasales; tambin la puesta en marcha de un tratamiento antibitico emprico, pero enrgico, que cubra la posibilidad de staphylococcus aureus y de los diversos estreptococos. mientras tanto hay que efectuar los hemocultivos correspondientes y valorar la necesidad de un drenaje quirrgico. no obstante, en la mayora de las ocasiones la sinusitis no alcanza semejante gravedad.con los datos de la anamnesis, la exploracin local y el estudio radiolgico es fcil establecer el diagnstico la mayora de las veces. se considera que una sinusitis aguda bacteriana no es muy posible en los enfermos cuyos sntomas duran menos de 7 das. los cultivos del pus nasal no se correlacionan bien con los de los aspirados intrasinusales, probablemente por la contaminacin de la flora propia de las fosas nasales. pueden obtenerse buenas muestras a travs de una endoscopia, pero el diagnstico de seguridad se basa en la puncin directa de los senos, a la que debe acudirse ante la falta de respuesta al tratamiento instaurado. en estos casos, el hallazgo de un microorganismo en concentracin superior a 105 unidades formadoras de colonias (ufc)/mm3 indica infeccin, mientras que si la cifra es inferior a 103 ufc/mm3 indica contaminacin. existe una buena relacin entre la existencia de un nivel hidroareo en el seno y la positividad del cultivo del aspirado sinusal.debe recordarse que la participacin inflamatoria de la mucosa es comn tanto en los procesos bacterianos como en los vricos, por lo que la identificacin de un simple engrosamiento mucoso en el estudio radiolgico de los senos (proyeccin de waters para los senos maxilares y frontales) no significa que exista una sinusitis bacteriana aguda. los hallazgos radiolgicos ms caractersticos son la opacificacin sinusal sin destruccin sea y el nivel hidroareo que se moviliza con el decbito lateral (figuras 34-1 y 34-2 ). la tomografa computarizada de los senos permite una mejor definicin de las imgenes, a la vez que puede demostrar anomalas anatmicas no conocidas que favorecen la infeccin (figura 34-3 ). su principal indicacin se encuentra en la sinusitis crnica, especialmente cuando se plantea la necesidad de un tratamiento quirrgico.la sinusitis frontal avanzada tiene como manifestacin inicial un cuadro clnico caracterstico que ha recibido el nombre de tumor turgente de pott. se reconoce con cierta facilidad, ya que cursa con hinchazn de las partes blandas locales y un edema blando localizado sobre el hueso frontal, que proviene de la comunicacin con el absceso subperistico que se ha constituido en la zona. las complicaciones ms graves de esta forma clnica son la meningitis aguda, el absceso epidural y el absceso cerebral, que pueden llegar a ser mortales.en la mayora de los pacientes adultos la sinusitis que cursa con sntomas leves o moderados, que duran menos de 7 das, mejora sin necesidad de antibiticos. las medidas que facilitan el drenaje de los senos, como los descongestionantes orales y tpicos, los lavados de las vas nasales con solucin salina y, en ocasiones, los corticoesteroides tpicos, si hay antecedentes alrgicos, pueden ser tratamiento suficiente. los antibiticos deben indicarse en los enfermos que no mejoran en un plazo de 7 das y en los que tienen sntomas muy intensos desde el comienzo del cuadro clnico. el frmaco elegido debe cubrir con seguridad streptococcus pneumoniae y haemophilus influenzae. buenas alternativas son la amoxicilina con cido clavulnico (500875 mg/125 mg cada 8 horas) y las nuevas quinolonas, como el levofloxacino y el moxifloxacino, en dosis de 500 y 400 mg/12 horas, respectivamente, que deben mantenerse durante 7 das. los macrlidos, como la claritromicina y la acitromicina, tienen un porcentaje de resistencias frente al streptococcus pneumoniae del 43%, lo que hace que sean frmacos de segunda eleccin. en todo caso, dada la limitada capacidad de los antibiticos para difundirse por el interior de los senos, se recomienda emplearlos en dosis altas, ya que su eficacia, frente a no usarlos y esperar a la recuperacin espontnea, est fuera de toda duda.adems del tratamiento antibitico, se aconseja recurrir a los glucocorticoesteroides inhalados con el fin de tratar la rinitis subyacente y mejorar as el drenaje y la ventilacin de los senos paranasales. los lavados nasales con suero salino contribuyen en el mismo sentido, al fluidificar las secreciones y el contenido de los senos. la utilidad de otros frmacos (antihistamnicos, vasoconstrictores, etc.) no est suficientemente demostrada. la administracin profilctica de antibiticos en la sinusitis aguda bacteriana recurrente, para evitar las recidivas, actualmente no se recomienda.la intervencin quirrgica y los antibiticos intravenosos deben reservarse para los procesos graves o que ocasionan complicaciones. en las sinusitis fngicas suele ser necesario un desbridamiento quirrgico extenso y la administracin intravenosa de los antimicticos correspondientes. el tratamiento de la sinusitis crnica bacteriana puede ser complicado y se basa en la prescripcin de ciclos de antibiticos, con una duracin de 3 a 4 semanas por ciclo, cuya eleccin debe guiarse por los cultivos que repetidamente deben realizarse. si el tratamiento no se muestra eficaz puede acudirse al drenaje quirrgico, con el que se obtiene un alivio intenso, aunque breve, de las manifestaciones clnicas. en todos estos casos se justifica el estudio de los senos mediante una tomografa computarizada, que a veces sirve para mostrar la causa que dificulta el drenaje sinusal.la complicacin ms peligrosa de las sinusitis es la extensin de la infeccin al tejido seo circundante o al sistema nervioso central (meningitis, empiema epidural, empiema subdural, etc.). en la tabla 34-3 se resean algunos de los motivos que pueden explicar el porqu de un fracaso en el tratamiento de una sinusitis.en los nios pequeos, hasta los 2 aos, los virus son los principales agentes etiolgicos implicados. entre los 2 y los 10 aos los estreptococos -hemolticos del tipo a son la causa fundamental. en los adultos inmunocompetentes el estreptococo ocasiona el 10% de las faringitis. otras causas menos frecuentes son bacterias como arcanobacterium haemolyticum y ocasionalmente, en los individuos sexualmente activos, algunos microorganismos normalmente relacionados con las enfermedades de transmisin sexual. agentes como mycoplasma pneumoniae o chlamydia spp, que son causa habitual de infecciones en el tracto respiratorio inferior, no son importantes como agentes etiolgicos en las faringitis (tabla 34-4 ).el cuadro clnico suele tener un inicio brusco caracterizado por dolor farngeo, dificultad para la deglucin y fiebre alta. en la exploracin fsica, la vula muestra un aspecto edematoso, y la faringe, sobre todo en la zona amigdalar, puede estar recubierta de un exudado amarillento. son comunes las lesiones sobreelevadas en el paladar blando, cuyo aspecto rojizo y con una zona central amarillenta sugiere el origen estreptoccico. la identificacin de este origen es importante por las implicaciones teraputicas que conlleva. as, la fiebre, los exudados amigdalares, las adenopatas cervicales dolorosas y la ausencia de tos deben hacer pensar en este microorganismo como responsable de la enfermedad.las faringitis agudas causadas por rhinovirus o por coronavirus no suelen ser graves y por lo general se acompaan de las manifestaciones clnicas propias del catarro comn o de sntomas y signos inespecficos. la fiebre es ocasional, no se observa exudado farngeo alguno y no existen adenopatas. cuando la causa de la faringitis es el virus de la gripe (influenzavirus) la fiebre puede ser ms alta y aparecen mialgias, cefalea y tos. cuando el responsable es un adenovirus, en un 33% a 50% de los casos a las manifestaciones clnicas descritas se asocian las propias de una conjuntivitis. otras faringitis vricas clnicamente menos importantes, aunque relevantes desde un punto de vista patognico y epidemiolgico, son las debidas a pneumovirus (virus respiratorio sincitial), herpesvirus (simple y varicela-zster), cytomegalovirus, virus de epstein-barr, parainfluenzavirus, paramyxovirus (como el de la parotiditis infecciosa o el del sarampin), rubivirus (como el de la rubola), hepadnavirus y enterovirus (echovirus y coxsackievirus). precisamente la herpangina, mucho ms frecuente en los nios y tan caracterstica por las lesiones eritematovesiculosas con un halo blanquecino que aparecen en la mucosa faringoamigdalar, es una enfermedad producida por el virus coxsackie a (rara vez por el coxsackie b).el objetivo principal del diagnstico es diferenciar las faringitis estreptoccicas de las ocasionadas por virus, con el fin de prescribir el tratamiento antibitico con la mayor eficacia posible. el cultivo del exudado farngeo no es capaz de distinguir bien entre una infeccin y una colonizacin y, adems, se precisan entre 24 y 48 horas para obtener sus resultados. el test de deteccin del antgeno estreptoccico en las secreciones farngeas es una tcnica rpida y con una buena especificidad (90%), aunque con una menor sensibilidad (60%90%). es ms, la sensibilidad que se consigue en la prctica diaria suele ser an menor, por lo que sigue recomendndose, al objeto de disminuir el contagio y las complicaciones de la enfermedad, el cultivo del exudado farngeo si los mtodos de deteccin rpida de antgenos arrojan resultados negativos.en general, el tratamiento de las faringitis es sintomtico, con analgsicos y con medidas tendentes a disminuir las molestias farngeas, la fiebre y las manifestaciones generales. en ocasiones se utilizan los antispticos tpicos, pero su indicacin es controvertida pues se estima que pueden seleccionar a bacterias resistentes. los objetivos del tratamiento antibitico deben cifrarse en la disminucin de las complicaciones supurativas focales y sistmicas (fiebre reumtica y glomerulonefritis aguda) y en la prevencin del contagio a otras personas. si la deteccin rpida del antgeno o el cultivo farngeo permiten confirmar la presencia de streptococcus pyogenes se recomienda comenzar cuanto antes con la antibioticoterapia. la penicilina v (fenoximetilpenicilina), la amoxicilina y la cefuroxima estn indicadas. en caso de alergia a la penicilina deben usarse los macrlidos. algunos antibiticos nuevos, como la telitromicina, son activos frente a los estreptococos -hemolticos del grupo a y son una alternativa vlida. no es necesario realizar prueba alguna para confirmar la erradicacin bacteriana, ya que su positividad puede ser slo la expresin de una colonizacin crnica asintomtica.el tratamiento de las faringitis vrica es sintomtico, excepto cuando se deben al virus de la influenza o al del herpes simple. en el primer caso los nuevos antivirales, como el oseltamivir y el zanamivir, administrados precozmente, acortan de forma significativa la duracin de la enfermedad. la infeccin bucofarngea del herpes simple a veces mejora con antivricos como el aciclovir, si bien estos frmacos suelen reservarse para los individuos inmunocomprometidos.el agente etiolgico ms importante es el parainfluenzavirus tipo 1. por su parte, el virus respiratorio sincitial (pneumovirus) slo es causa de pseudocrup en los nios menores de 5 aos de edad, mientras que los influenzavirus y el mycoplasma pneumoniae pueden ser los responsables por encima de esa edad. la enfermedad es mucho ms frecuente en otoo y en invierno, coincidiendo con el pico de patogenicidad de los parainfluenzavirus. el edema y la hipercrinia subglticas son las dos alteraciones que explican la gran repercusin clnica de la infeccin, al incidir en una va area de muy pequeo calibre y especialmente lbil en el nio.tras un corto perodo de incubacin, la laringotraquetis tiene una fase prodrmica breve, que suele pasar desapercibida y que se sigue de la aparicin brusca de sntomas en general intensos y a veces agobiantes (tos, disnea, estridor y ronquera). si el cuadro clnico progresa, puede establecerse un tiraje intercostal y supraclavicular. el episodio dura de 3 a 4 das, en los cuales las manifestaciones clnicas son ms importantes durante la noche. en los nios ms afectados el estridor llega a ser tanto inspiratorio como espiratorio. los sntomas son tan caractersticos que permiten hacer el diagnstico directo en la mayora de las ocasiones. la radiografa simple de trax puede poner de manifiesto un estrechamiento de la luz traqueal en el rea subgltica. en los casos ms graves puede aparecer, aunque no es lo habitual, cierto grado de fatiga muscular y, en consecuencia, de insuficiencia respiratoria.la respiracin de aire hmedo y fro es probablemente la medida teraputica ms eficaz. tambin se ha utilizado la adrenalina racmica, por su accin vasoconstrictora, por va inhalatoria. la administracin de corticoesteroides sistmicos a altas dosis consigue, en los enfermos ms graves, que disminuya la necesidad de realizar una intubacin traqueal. algunos trabajos recientes han referido, asimismo, buenos resultados con los esteroides inhalados. haemophilus influenzae es la causa de la enfermedad en la mayora de los casos, sobre todo en la infancia. por ello, desde que se ha generalizado el uso de la vacunacin frente a esta bacteria, ha disminuido de forma apreciable la frecuencia de la epiglotitis. en algunos pases se ha conseguido, incluso, que su incidencia anual haya cado en los nios ms de un 90%, si bien es cierto que con pocas modificaciones en la tasa encontrada en los adultos. otros agentes etiolgicos implicados alguna vez son streptococcus pyogenes del grupo a, streptococcus pneumoniae, haemophilus parainfluenzae y staphylococcus aureus. hasta la fecha no se ha demostrado que los virus puedan ser responsables en caso alguno.el cuadro clnico es ms agudo en los nios que en los adultos. el inicio se caracteriza por fiebre, dolor farngeo, disfagia y dificultad respiratoria. puede existir estridor, pero a diferencia de lo que se observa en el pseudocrup no hay tos espasmdica. debe vigilarse la posible aparicin de una obstruccin de la va area, que puede instaurarse muy rpidamente.en los adultos las manifestaciones clnicas son menos intensas y se establecen, tras 2 o 3 das de odinofagia, como disnea, sialorrea y estridor. en la exploracin bucofarngea se advierte una hiperemia mucosa, quiz menos intensa de lo esperado en atencin a los sntomas existentes, ya que la obstruccin se establece ms all de las amgdalas farngeas. la endoscopia evidencia una epiglotis carnosa, dura y de color rojo cereza, que permite la obtencin de muestras para su estudio bacteriolgico. esta exploracin debe ser muy cuidadosa por la posibilidad de que desencadene un laringoespasmo fulminante, con obstruccin completa de la va area. esta situacin requiere, cuando surge, de una intubacin inmediata. el mayor calibre del rbol respiratorio en los adultos hace que la enfermedad se tolere mejor, por lo que rara vez es necesaria la intubacin.las radiografas laterales del cuello pueden mostrar una dilatacin de la hipofaringe y un agrandamiento de la epiglotis, que aparece edematosa, con normalidad de las estructuras subglticas (signo de la huella digital). el estudio analtico evidencia una leucocitosis leve o moderada, con predominio de los neutrfilos. los hemocultivos son positivos para haemophilus influenzae en una proporcin importante de casos.una vez garantizada la permeabilidad de la va area y tras obtener las muestras de sangre y de secrecin epigltica necesarias para el cultivo, debe iniciarse un tratamiento antibitico intravenoso, que ha de cubrir, sin excepciones, al haemophilus influenzae. este tratamiento requiere la hospitalizacin del enfermo. se recomienda la combinacin de un antibitico -lactmico con un inhibidor de las -lactamasas o una cefalosporina de segunda o de tercera generacin. la clindamicina y el trimetropimsulfametoxazol debe reservarse para los individuos alrgicos a los agentes -lactmicos. el tratamiento ha de mantenerse entre 7 y 10 das y debe adaptarse al resultado de los cultivos que se obtengan. si entre los contactos familiares del paciente hay nios no vacunados menores de 4 aos es necesaria la administracin profilctica de rifampicina, durante 4 das, a todos los miembros de la unidad familiar, incluido el enfermo, al objeto de erradicar el estado de portador de la bacteria.en ocasiones, ante el compromiso ventilatorio que se produce, se hace imprescindible la colocacin de un tubo traqueal o la realizacin de una traqueostoma. en los ltimos aos tambin se ha reseado la utilidad del soporte ventilatorio con una presin positiva aplicada a travs de una mascarilla facial. los corticoesteroides sistmicos pueden emplearse con la intencin de reducir el componente inflamatorio, sobre todo el edematoso, de las lesiones epiglticas y de las zonas circundantes.the lack of a sound explanation for the seasonality of viral acute respiratory tract infections (varis) is a major problem for microbiology [1] [2] [3] [4] . other anomalous features of varis need to be explained too. for example, vari epidemics often erupt very rapidly after ambient temperature drops. the increase may, however, be too rapid and too short-lived to be the result of increased transmission [5] , as discussed below. surveys also show that epidemics often occur simultaneously throughout wide geographical areas [5] [6] [7] (see figs. 1 and 2) . moreover, influenza epidemics often cease very abruptly, even when many susceptible individuals remain in the population [7] .the viruses that cause varis include many unrelated families such as double-stranded dna viruses (e.g. adenovirus), positivesense single-stranded rna viruses (e.g. coronavirus), negativesense single-stranded rna viruses (e.g. respiratory syncytial virus (rsv), influenza, measles, mumps and parainfluenza virus), and positive-sense single-stranded rna viruses (e.g. hand foot and mouth virus, rhinovirus, rubella virus). they differ in their physical forms, with some having a lipid envelope (e.g. coronavirus, influenza, and parainfluenza viruses), which many others (e.g. adenovirus and rhinovirus) lack. some are icosahedral (e.g. adenovirus. rhinovirus and rubella virus) whereas many are spherical, filamentous or variable (e.g. rsv, influenza, and measles viruses). it is notable that the great majority of these diverse and often distantly-related strains share the same seasonality in temperate regions. for example, hope-simpson found in both 1954 and 1955 that the number of people suffering from ''colds" in a sample of 380 volunteers was roughly 50 times greater in february than at the beginning of september [3] (fig. 3) . the common cold is caused by over 200 serologically-distinct strains [8] . it is clear that the great majority of these strains share the same seasonality in temperate regions, since colds in general show such strong seasonality. however, variations in the precise timing of the various respiratory viruses within the cold season have been reported, and it has been suggested that these variations might reflect fundamental differences in the mechanisms of replication or transmission of the viruses involved [4, [9] [10] [11] . for example, rhinovirus is particularly prevalent in the autumn [12] , while rsv and influenza usually cause outbreaks around the turn of the year [12] . several comments can be made here: (1) very few varis have been found that consistently show the opposite seasonality, with more outbreaks in summer than in winter. for example, a study at a children's hospital in mainz, germany, that used modern diagnostic tests found that 7 out of 10 varis displayed normal seasonality, since these 7 showed significant inverse correlations with ambient temperature (p-value < 0.001) [4] . the remaining 3 were weakly inversely correlated with temperature. (a counter-example was reported by hope-simpson [13] , although the tendency was weak: of the type 3 parainfluenza viruses isolated by him over 14 years, 66% were collected in the warm semester.) (2) studies show that the reported variations in the timing of particular varis are in fact rather inconsistent. for example, rsv in children in mainz peaked in spring in 2002 and 2006, but in the winters of the intervening years [4] . ( 3) it is possible that certain varis are more prevalent in, say, spring and autumn as a result of ''interference" by other viral strains during winter. for example, the immune systems of hosts may frequently be activated by certain dominant viruses during the winter months, reducing the likelihood of subsequent infection by less active strains. the patterns of varis in the mainz study suggest the existence of such interference (compare the relatively smooth curve of all respiratory illnesses in fig. 1 in [4] with the irregular occurrences of the individual varis shown in figs. 1 and 2 of that report).these trends imply the existence of important mechanisms concerned with viral replication or transmission that are common to the majority of respiratory viruses, in spite of their widelydiffering physical structures and biochemistry. it seems likely that an explanation of seasonality would have far-reaching practical and economic implications for treating and protecting humans and animals from varis.microbiologists have put forward many explanations of the seasonality of varis. proposed explanations of influenza seasonality, for example, include factors that change host contact rates (school closures, ambient temperature and precipitation), factors that may influence virus survival outside the body (relative humidity, absolute humidity, solar radiation and temperature), and factors that may change the immunity of hosts (humidity, photoperiodicity, temperature, viral interference, as well as deficiency of selenium, vitamin c, vitamin d and vitamin e) [1] . (factors that may change the behavior of viruses at the biochemical level are seldom considered.) the same or similar explanations have been put forward for other respiratory viruses [4, [9] [10] [11] [12] [14] [15] [16] [17] [18] . however, these wellknown explanations are very difficult to reconcile with a straightforward observation: the varis in question are present in many tropical regions at intermediate levels throughout the year -often at much higher levels than in the summer in temperate locations [1, 2] . moreover, surveys show that the viral ''species" that commonly cause varis in the tropics are similar to those in other climates. for example, the four most frequently identified viruses in two large hospitals in a tropical location (singapore, 1990 (singapore, -1994 were, in order of prevalence, rsv, parainfluenza, influenza a and adenovirus [10] . (most samples came from hospitalized children.) fig. 1 . graph ii from van loghem's report [5] on the epidemiology of varis in the netherlands in the winter of 1925/26, with ambient temperature superimposed. the graph shows the percentages of persons with colds in seven regions of the netherlands for 37 weeks. the data was compiled from the reports of 6933 correspondents that were submitted by post each week. amsterdam had the largest number of informants (1159) and noord-holland the fewest (581). i have added the daily minimum outdoor air temperature (also averaged over 7 days at weekly intervals) from five dutch weather stations, with the temperature scale inverted (lowest temperatures at the top). note that by far the highest rate of varis was at the beginning of the study (september 1925) , and that varis in different regions are closely correlated with each other and with inverted temperature. these correlations are strongest in the first half of the cold season. correspondents reported coryza, angina, laryngitis, bronchitis and ''influenza". it is likely that a variety of viral ''species" were present. see the main text for discussion of the events occurring during the intervals labeled i1, i2 and i3. 1928, 2015. this figure was originally published in the journal of hygiene, 28(01), 33-54. a similar study in an oceanic climate (mainz, germany, 1998 found that the four viruses that were most frequently identified among hospitalized children were, in order, rhinovirus, rsv, adenovirus and influenza a [4] . in buenos aires (2003) (2004) (2005) (2006) , a city with a humid subtropical climate, they were rsv, influenza a, adenovirus, and parainfluenza [9] . note that rsv, influenza a and adenovirus are present on all three lists.almost all of the explanations of influenza and other vari seasonality mentioned above are associated with parameters that have more extreme values in the tropics throughout the year than in temperate summers. since similar viral species are present in all these locations, it is likely that some strains will migrate from tropical to temperate regions, where (according to the explanations put forward) they should be replicated and transmitted without difficulty during the summer months.the migration of influenza has been investigated in great detail recently using time-stamped viral sequences. these studies show that influenza does indeed frequently migrate from hotter to colder geographical regions. for example, the data of bedford et al. shows that 50% of european a/h3n2 influenza strains were descended from strains that were in tropical or subtropical regions one year earlier [19] . for a/h1n1, b/victoria-like and b/yamagata-like influenza strains, the proportions were 62%, 17% and 32% respectively [19] . a/h3n2 influenza, in particular, circulates continuously in east and southeast asia, and spreads to temperate regions from this network [19, 20] , so we would certainly expect it to have properties that allow it to be active during temperate summers. the predominant direction of migration of influenza in china is also of interest. on a one-year timescale, h3n2, h1n1, and b/yamagata/16/1988-like influenza were more likely to migrate from south to north china than in the opposite direction [19] . (the trend is not universal, however: b/victoria/2/1987-like influenza was more likely to migrate from north to south china [19] .) note also that influenza and other varis often show clear [7] . this remarkable figure requires scientific explanation. the antigenic changes in influenza a virus (occurring at both sites) clearly show that novel influenza strains repeatedly moved across europe during the period shown. there is, however, no evidence of moving ''waves" of influenza because epidemics at the two sites are almost perfectly closely synchronized. note that the shortest route between the two sites covers 1400 km by sea and road, crosses four national boundaries, and passes through some of the most densely-populated regions of europe. this suggests that the virus moved to both sites prior to its manifestation, and a stimulus that was present at both sites triggered the concurrent epidemics. bear in mind, however, that some influenza infections do not cause fevers. influenza may have spread across europe in the form of colds, before being strongly activated by low temperatures to yield febrile illness. these data are most readily explained by the fourth mechanism discussed below (m4), that virions can become dormant at some unknown location in the respiratory tract, and can subsequently be activated by host chilling. m3, which suggests that colder conditions weaken the immune defenses of hosts is also a possible explanation, but the very sudden onset of influenza in both locations is difficult to explain in this way. 1981. this figure was originally published in the journal of hygiene, 86(01), 35-47. seasonality in the tropics that is not correlated with temperature, humidity or solar radiation, but instead coincides with the rainy season [1, 10] . the strange global and seasonal distribution of influenza and other varis is shown schematically in fig. 4 . these issues were discussed in two recent reviews of influenza seasonality, both of which also noted the lack of a satisfactory explanation [1, 2] .a note on how the shared seasonality of most varis has been dealt with in this paper it is a remarkable fact that almost all varis share the same seasonality in temperate regions. pcr-based studies, discussed below, confirm this common seasonality [9, 4] . it is highly improbable that this common trend is coincidental, and this review will assume that an unrecognized common thread runs through the transmission or replication of respiratory viruses. if it were possible, more consistent conclusions might be arrived at by focusing instead on particular varis, but unfortunately the relevant data are not yet available. i will therefore consider influenza, the best-studied vari, as well as colds and other varis, always bearing in mind that important differences may exist between the various viral species considered.ambient temperature often has a dramatic effect on respiratory disease. in the uk, hajat et al. found that general practitioner consultations by elderly patients for lower respiratory tract infections in one uk city (norwich) increased by 19% for every degree that average temperature dropped below 5c, observed 0-20 days before the consultation [14] . absolute temperature, however, is not correlated with varis in a simple way. for example, we do not see a vari that is limited to all global regions or seasons where temperatures never rise above, say, 15c (fig. 4) . instead, evidence from many different sources shows that vari incidence is related to temperature fluctuations. for example, van loghem conducted a very extensive survey of varis in the winter of 1925/26 with 6933 participants from all regions of the netherlands [5] . his data is shown in fig. 1 , together with the temperatures recorded by five dutch weather stations. epidemics of varis in all seven regions were very closely synchronized with each other, and closely showing the highest rates of infection. the figure shows general trends rather than specific data, but it is compatible with e.g. the weekly epidemiological record of influenza a of the world health organization [7] and other studies [1] . the yellow curve shows the path of vertical solar radiation. the strange distribution of varis is shown, with more varis in the tropics throughout the year than in temperate regions during the summer months [1, 2, 20] . it is known that seed strains of influenza a (h3n2) circulate continuously in a network in east and southeast asia (blue arrows) and spread to temperate regions from this network (green arrows) [20] . many studies show that personal chilling increases the prevalence of varis [5, [14] [15] [16] [21] [22] [23] [24] [25] , and, since travel away from the tropical regions is associated with a decrease in temperature, it is likely that varis spread more quickly from the tropics to temperate regions (green arrows) than in the opposite direction (dotted red arrow). this is indeed the case for h3n2 influenza [20] . the degree to which viruses remain dormant during the summer in temperate regions (dotted purple arrow) is unknown. (for interpretation of the references to color in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.) correlated with inverted temperature with roughly a one week lag (i.e. lower temperatures were associated with increased varis). these correlations were strongest during the period when temperatures were generally falling, i.e. the first half of the cold season. note also that the highest infection rate, which occurred at the start of the study, coincided with almost the highest temperature in the study. just prior to the start of the study, however, the temperature declined after remaining nearly steady during the summer months -implying that the temperature dip triggered the epidemic. this emphasizes that we need to consider temperature fluctuations rather than absolute temperature levels.milam and smillie found similar patterns on the tropical island of st. john in the virgin islands in 1929, shown in fig. 5 [21] . between mid-afternoon and midnight each day the temperature on the island fell sharply by 5-7c. when the temperature dipped in the autumn by 1.5c (green bar) below the summer range, an epidemic of colds was triggered. more recently, jaakkola et al. found that ''sudden declines" in both air temperature and absolute humidity (in the three days that preceded the reporting of the sickness) increased the incidence of influenza a and b in military conscripts in northern finland [22] . paradoxically, the incidence of influenza was lower at very low temperatures, and it was the sudden decline of temperature rather than low absolute temperature (and, the authors suggested, the decline of humidity) that increased the risk of influenza.historical studies have some advantages over modern investigations. the study by van loghem was on a scale that would be difficult today, and he was able to collect data from multiple geographical locations within the netherlands (fig. 1) . the study by milam and smillie has the advantage that the island was very isolated, so that a limited set of viruses was studied (fig. 5 ). modern studies, however, have the great advantage that they can identify the viral species involved. two recent studies in argentina and germany compared weather parameters with hospital admissions of children suffering from known varis [4, 9] . both studies found that the combined number of cases for all pathogens was strongly inversely correlated with outside temperature. viegas et al. plotted the frequencies of rsv, adenovirus, influenza a virus and parainfluenza virus alongside mean temperature in buenos aires [9] . on all plots clear seasonality is apparent, but adenovirus and parainfluenza virus clearly lagged behind inverted temperature, peaking in early spring. du prel et al. presented similar plots and reported that rhinovirus, rsv, influenza a, adenovirus, metapneumovirus, influenza b and coronavirus were all strongly inversely correlated with temperature in mainz, germany (p < 0.001 in all cases). rhinovirus was also correlated with relative humidity (p < 0.001) [4] . this study (and the buenos aires study) used spearman's ranked correlation coefficients to find associations between meteorological parameters and hospitalizations for viral (and bacterial) infections [4, 9] . this tabular information is difficult to interpret, however, because correlation coefficients dramatically underestimate the closeness of a relationship when one of the parameters lags behind the other (e.g. if two data sets are perfectly correlated except that one lags by a quarter of a cycle, the correlation coefficient will be 0). it is therefore possible that associations with temperature were present in mainz for enterovirus, parainfluenza types 1 and 3, mycoplasma and chlamydophila, but not made evident by the correlation coefficients that the authors calculated. for example, rhinovirus in mainz had a spearman rank correlation coefficient with inverted temperature of only 0.42, but inspection of the plots shows a clear relationship, with the first rhinovirus epidemic of each season closely following the first major drop in temperature at the end of summer [4] . we can conclude that both papers show important correlations with weather, although other important relationships may not have been fully revealed by the analysis. it is also apparent that varis caused by completely unrelated viruses share the same seasonality both in a city with a humid subtropical climate, and in a city with an oceanic climate. it is very unlikely that these relationships are purely coincidental, which emphasizes that we should look for common causes of seasonality in these and other varis.studies at the individual level show that physical host chilling can increase the severity of varis. (the possible mechanisms involved will be discussed below.) the eurowinter group showed that shivering outside, being stationary outside, and wearing inadequate winter clothing increased respiratory disease-related mortality, while outdoor exertion sufficient to cause sweating was protective [15] . yanagawa et al. found that 11 of 13 patients recovering from cardiopulmonary arrest who were treated with mild hypothermia developed pneumonia, as compared to 6 of 15 control patients who were maintained at normal body temperature (p-value < 0.02) [23] .costilla-esquivel et al. found a relationship between weather and acute respiratory illnesses in monterrey (mexico), which they were able to model very accurately using only three weather parameters: weekly accumulated rainfall, minimum temperature in the week, and weekly median relative humidity [16] . rainfall and relative humidity were positively correlated with respiratory illnesses, while temperature was negatively correlated. both rainfall and low temperature can obviously cause personal chilling, while high relative humidity is a consequence of the other two.in summary, the available evidence shows that both sudden weather changes and factors that cause individual chilling frequently bring on varis, or increase their severity. this suggests that temperature sensitivity plays a role in seasonality, but the global patterns of varis rule out the possibility that viral activity is controlled solely by absolute temperature. rather, respiratory viruses seems to adapt over a few weeks or months to the ambient temperature, such that temperature fluctuations outside the previous range trigger varis.shaman et al. proposed absolute humidity as a ''physically sound" driver of influenza seasonality in temperate regions [26] . however, unlike say concentrated sulfuric acid or anhydrous salts, influenza virions cannot ''scavenge" low concentrations of water from dry air since virions are produced at moderate temperatures and pressures, and are in equilibrium with physiological fluids during their production. the absolute humidity that virions may be subjected to therefore has little or no significance. instead, (as with most biological phenomena) temperature and relative humidity are the meaningful parameters that should be considered, either singly or in combination.absolute humidity does however have significance in the context of indoor viral survival and transmission. since indoor temperatures in wealthy societies are maintained, by heating systems, at roughly constant levels throughout the year, indoor relative humidity is roughly determined by outdoor absolute humidity. variations in absolute humidity may therefore contribute to influenza seasonality in some instances. several points need to be considered, however: (1) reports of the effect of relative humidity on the survival of influenza virions at room temperature are inconsistent. whereas harper found that roughly twice as many viable pr8 virions were recovered after storage at 50% relative humidity in comparison to 64% [27] , schaffer et al. saw the opposite trend with their wsn virions from cell cultures, with roughly an order of magnitude lower recovery of virions at 50% relative humidity in comparison to 65% [28] . (2) influenza and most other vari epidemics are more frequent in the tropics during the rainy season, when both relative and absolute humidity levels are high [1, 10] . for example, fortaleza in brazil has a single large peak of influenza [1] (and, from personal experience, other varis) that coincides with the rainy season (january to july). (3) animal experiments with guinea pigs show that, while transmission of influenza generally decreased with increasing relative humidity, it actually increased at 20c when relative humidity moved from 50% to 65% [29] . (animal experiments with influenza are further discussed below.)turning to another common vari, du prel et al. explain the observed correlation of rhinovirus with relative humidity by pointing out that ''rhinoviruses cannot survive in a dry environment", i.e. they suggest that the seasonality of rhinovirus is driven by changes in the survival rate of the virions outside the body [4] . however other interpretations are possible: increased relative humidity is associated with rainfall, which can wet individuals' clothing and cause chilling. moreover, as noted above, indoor relative humidity in temperate climates is much lower in winter than in summer due to the effects of artificial heating in winter [3] . changes in the survival of rhinoviruses due to indoor relative humidity should therefore generate the opposite seasonality if transmission mainly occurs indoors, which seems likely.observations of the incidence of colds in the uk found no correlation with relative humidity or water-vapor pressure [17] . analysis of over 5000 person-years of data in two uk cities demonstrated that ''it is the low outdoor temperature, independent of the humidity, which is associated with the increased number of winter colds" [17] .clearly, correlations of varis with both relative and absolute humidity are at best inconsistent.experiments with guinea pigs suggest that the transmission of influenza a is more efficient at lower temperatures and lower relative humidity [29] . lowen et al. found a 3.5-fold increase in the transmission of human influenza a between guinea pigs at 5c compared to at 20c [29] (in fact this was true only at 50% relative humidity; at higher and lower humidity, transmission rates were either similar at both temperatures or higher at 20c). these differences are in agreement with measurements of the stability of influenza a virions generated in cell cultures in air of different temperatures and humidities [27, 28] . this might suggest that variations in transmission due to weather changes might determine or influence the seasonality of influenza (and other varis) in temperate regions. the results were, however, inconsistent; for example, transmission of influenza at 20c was higher at 65% relative humidity that at 50% [29] . moreover, a more recent study found that the transmission of influenza between guinea pigs by medium-range aerosol was eliminated at 30c, although transfer between animals in the same enclosure by short-range aerosol or direct contact was as efficient at 30c as at 20c [30] . the authors postulate that the normal mode of influenza transmission varies depending on climate: in temperate regions aerosol transmission may predominate, while in the tropics short-range and contact transmission may be more important. epidemics of h3n2 influenza in the temperate regions are, however, seeded each year from a network of temporarily overlapping epidemics in east and southeast asia [20] . there is therefore no reason why influenza cannot be transmitted by the contact route in the summer months into and within the temperate regions. lowen et al. recognize this difficulty, and they postulate the existence of unknown ''additional factors, other than warm temperature and high relative humidity, which suppress influenza transmission by all routes during the summer months" in temperate regions [30] . although the authors may have identified the important routes of influenza transmission at different latitudes, they have therefore not provided a robust explanation of its seasonality.viruses such as adenovirus [31] , rsv [32] , foot-and-mouth virus [33] and chickenpox virus -all of which can spread via the respiratory tract -are known to become dormant within their hosts. other respiratory viruses show similar behavior, sometimes on shorter timescales. morikawa et al. found human parechovirus, adenovirus, enterovirus, coronavirus 229e and hku1, and rhinovirus in the gargle specimens of eight asymptomatic children using polymerase chain reaction (pcr) tests [34] . the tests required at least 100 copies of the genetic material, suggesting that the viruses in question had begun to replicate [34] . however, the authors noted that it is difficult to interpret pcr results because it is a very sensitive method, and the positive results may reflect an asymptomatic past or concurrent infection, or an imminent infection. their data suggest, however, that at least some were imminent infections: four of the children had positive results when they were asymptomatic that were followed four weeks later by a vari that was associated with the same virus (or a strain that was indistinguishable using the pcr test); rhinovirus was detected in a fifth child who was at first asymptomatic, but experienced the symptoms of a cold caused by rhinovirus one week later. similarly, viral dormancy may explain the sudden arrival of autumn epidemics of rhinovirus in temperate regions; granados et al. studied rhinovirus activity in university students, and showed that asymptomatic rhinovirus activity preceded peak symptomatic activity in september and october and was associated with lower viral load [18] .influenza viruses have been detected several times in the absence of symptoms or an immune response in the host, which seems to indicate that dormant influenza virus is present. foy et al. identified 10 asymptomatic individuals who were shedding influenza b virus but did not respond with antibody by any of the five test methods employed [35] . during the 2009 influenza a (h1n1) pandemic, tandale et al. found that, of 65 asymptomatic individuals with pcr-confirmed h1n1, 12 had not seroconverted [36] . during the same pandemic, papenburg et al. found two asymptomatic individuals with pcr-confirmed infections who had not seroconverted [37] . in vietnam, thai et al. found that, of 11 individuals shown by pcr to have been infected with pandemic h1n1 by other members of their household, one remained asymptomatic and had not seroconverted [38] . the authors commented that this ''may indicate that viral rna remained in the respiratory tract without being internalized and eliciting an immune response". these observations show the reality of influenza persistence in the respiratory tracts of asymptomatic individuals, and are compatible with the suggestion that virions can become dormant, and, later, be reactivated, for example by chilling.observations of varis in antarctic stations after many months of complete isolation can provide evidence that is easy to interpret because varis are rare after the first month of isolation [24] , and only one or a few viral species are active at a time. for example, after 12 months of complete isolation in 1965/6, a geologist (''j.e. h.") at the mawson station picked up a respiratory virus from a visiting field party [24] . 17 days later he and three colleagues were exposed to cold and damp conditions, which brought on vari symptoms including muscle aches and a sore throat in j.e.h. and two of his colleagues. another study at adelaide island in 1969 found that after 17 weeks of complete isolation several men developed colds four days after the air temperature fell in one day from 0c to 24c [25] . both studies suggest that chilling caused by particular activities or weather changes can activate dormant virions, giving rise to varis. similarly, muchmore et al. reported parainfluenza shedding by healthy young adults throughout the 8-month winter isolation period at amundsen-scott south pole station during 1978 [39] . the study recorded two episodes of respiratory illness caused by parainfluenza at the station that year after 10 and 29 weeks of complete social isolation.in principle, any failure or blockage of a biochemical or physical step in the replication or transmission of respiratory viruses might give rise to dormancy. moreover, many respiratory viruses, including coronavirus, influenza, measles and mumps virus, require activation by proteolytic cleavage of viral proteins [40] . this (largely unexplained) phenomenon may provide opportunities for the establishment of dormancy. nevertheless, visualization of the physical whereabouts of the virus, during the weeks or months that dormancy can last, is difficult. the virus might be located on the surface of the cells that line the respiratory tract (for example attached to the cell membrane or the cilia), or within the cells, possibly in the cytoplasm or the nuclei (although it seems unlikely that respiratory viruses are usually incorporated into the host genome as is hiv). there are problems with each of these explanations, but pcr and antarctic studies show the reality of viral dormancy.taken together, the above observations strongly suggest that a variety of respiratory viruses can become dormant in human hosts for much longer periods than those reported in the literature [41] and that they can subsequently be activated by cold, giving rise to varis.if we accept that host chilling (with various causes) triggers vari epidemics and gives rise to vari seasonality in both temperate and tropical regions, four possible mechanisms, m1-4 can be put forward as follows. m1: low temperatures and seasonal events increase crowding of human hosts, increasing transmission; m2: colder conditions allow the virus to survive outside the body for longer, increasing transmission; m3: the susceptibility of hosts increases as a result of chilling; m4: chilling increases the activity of viruses in the respiratory tract. i will now consider the evidence for and against these four possibilities.a popular explanation of vari seasonality is that contact rates are lower in summer when children are out of school, and when people spend more time outdoors. however, in the usa seasonal differences in ''crowding" are minimal since the amount of time spent indoors varies by less than 10% between summer and winter [1] . in the uk, the number of school-days in the coldest six months of the year is less than 10% higher than in the warmest six months, but, like all temperate countries, the uk has marked vari seasonality. moreover, one of the two peaks of influenza activity in singapore [1] actually coincides with the school holidays in june. another negative observation is that festivals and sporting events are not associated with increased varis. for example, during the fifa world cup people spend more time indoors and often crowd together in bars etc. to watch matches on television, but no significant increase is apparent in google flu search activity in any country in the northern hemisphere during the 2014 fifa world cup [42]. lofgren et al. agreed that theoretical and empirical studies do not adequately explain influenza a seasonality, noting in particular that no published studies show directly that variations in crowding give rise to influenza seasonality [1] .another problem for this explanation of seasonality is the simultaneous arrival of influenza [6, 7] and other varis [5] throughout wide geographical areas, often following or coinciding with cold snaps (figs. 1, 3 and 5 ). if cold weather acted on varis only by increasing viral transmission, then as the temperature falls e.g. in autumn, waves of infection should appear and move through populations. we would not expect to see epidemics that arise simultaneously in both neighboring (fig. 1) and distant (fig. 2) populations. this point is discussed in more detail in the next section.in summary, temperature-dependent changes in human crowding may well play a role in the progress of vari epidemics, but there is no evidence that they provide a general or the main driver of vari seasonality.this is currently the most popular explanation of seasonality. the mechanism is, however, almost certainly not the main cause of seasonality, for several clear reasons.firstly, this explanation cannot explain why varis are present in many tropical regions all year round, but virtually absent from temperate regions during the summer months. if respiratory virions can adequately survive outside the body in the tropics, they should have no difficulty in surviving (according to this explanation) in the milder conditions of temperate summers. as noted above, a similar set of viruses give rise to varis that hospitalized children in temperate, subtropical and tropical cities [4, 9, 10] , and they presumably migrate between these locations. seed strains of influenza a (h3n2) spread from east and southeast asia to temperate regions every year [20] , and other respiratory viruses may follow similar routes. (the suggestion [22, 28, 29] that low absolute or relative humidity may increase viral survival does not help, because vari epidemics occur during the rainy season in many tropical locations [1] .) secondly, consider van loghem's data [5] (fig. 1) . while temperatures were generally decreasing (i.e. up to the end of january) varis were very well-correlated with inverted temperature, and extraordinarily well-synchronized across the country, with no evidence of ''waves" of infection moving between different locations, which would be expected if cold temperatures increased transmission during the study. we don't know which viruses were most prevalent in the study, but if any had seasonality that was driven by m2 it is clear that they were not common. hope-simpson made similar observations when he compared influenza epidemics in the uk and in prague, czechoslovakia, showing the temporal correspondence of epidemics at widely separated localities at a similar latitude [7] (see fig. 2 ). in another example, magrassi was impressed by cases of influenza in 1948 among shepherds living in complete social isolation in open country in sardinia, who developed the disease contemporaneously with the inhabitants of towns on the same island [6] .a third consideration is that records of vari epidemics show that they frequently respond to temperature fluctuations rather than absolute temperature levels. for example, the rapid drop in temperature during weeks 6-8 of van loghem's study (pink band, labeled i1 in fig. 1 ) was followed, with a lag of roughly one week, by rapid increases in varis. when the temperature subsequently hovered around 0c in weeks 9 and 10 (yellow band, labeled i2), however, the number of varis stabilized. if the rapid 70% increase in varis that occurred at temperatures between 10 and 0c (pink band) was caused by increased transmission we would then expect varis to continue to increase when temperatures stabilized around 0c. a little later (weeks 12 and 13, blue band, labeled i3) the temperature was well below 0c, but now it was rising, and the varis fell from their highs, again emphasizing that varis tend to be sensitive to temperature fluctuations rather than absolute temperature.a similar argument applies to the data of hope-simpson (fig. 3) , with the number of colds increasing very rapidly after temperature drops, but falling during two periods of constant low temperatures (yellow bands, labeled i1 and i2) in october and december 1954. milam and smillie's data (fig. 5 ) also showed fast-acting sensitivity to very small temperature drops outside the recent range, with these events occurring at a range of temperatures throughout the year [21] . jaakkola et al. reported that ''sudden declines" of around 5c preceded the onset of influenza in northern finland [22] , occurring at temperatures above 15c and also below 15c. other varis can be considered. an interesting and clear-cut example comes from singapore, where hii et al. studied the strong association of hand, foot and mouth disease (hfmd) with the weather [11] . the risk of the disease increased by 41% for every 1c that the weekly temperature difference increased above 7c. the authors concede that the ''exact reasons for the relationship between weather and hfmd are not known" [11] . again, it is difficult to imagine that weather anomalies of the order of 1c can significantly change the survival of respiratory viruses outside the body (or, indeed, the susceptibility of human hosts to vrtis, discussed in the next section).if the transmission of varis including influenza were driven purely by low temperatures, we would not expect to see the rapid cessation of influenza epidemics in mid-winter [7] , or the low attack rates that have been reported within families for influenza [43] [44] [45] and other varis [5] .in summary, we can see that temperature-dependent changes in viral transmission may well influence the progress of many vari epidemics, but, unless new evidence comes to light, we need to look elsewhere for a general explanation of the seasonality of varis.an interesting and ingenious recent review looked directly at the seasonality of immune responses in humans by investigating antibody responses following vaccination [46] . although the authors found seasonal variation in immunity, it could not explain vari seasonality: seven of the studies of vaccines reviewed reported a stronger immune response in winter than in summer, with only 1 showing the opposite trend. there was no clear trend with regard to the dry and rainy seasons in tropical regions and several other studies showed no trend at all. these data therefore suggest that variations in general host susceptibility do not explain the seasonality of varis.however, this leaves open the possibility that there are variations in host immune defenses that specifically affect the respiratory tract. eccles suggested that host chilling may cause reflex vasoconstriction of the blood vessels of the upper airways, thereby reducing host defenses against viral infection during the winter [47] [48] [49] . mudd and grant [50] and van loghem [5] made similar proposals. two lines of evidence support the idea that chilling reduces host respiratory tract defenses by this or other mechanisms.foxman et al. found that mouse airway cells infected with mouse-adapted rhinovirus 1b exhibited significantly lower expression levels of type i and type iii interferon genes and interferonstimulated genes at 33c relative to 37c [51] . this is a very interesting but puzzling result, and the authors offer no explanation of the possible benefits to the mouse. if airway cells possess mechanisms that can reduce infections, it seems strange that they should be down-regulated at lower temperatures. (one explanation is that the interferons severely damage airway cells, and the mouse prefers to deal with the virus with milder defenses unless it reaches sites where it may cause serious illness. a related proposal is that mice permit the growth of viruses in their respiratory tracts in order to raise antibodies against them before the virus can reach the internal organs.) we need to wait for equivalent results in the cells of other species, both in vitro and in vivo, before we can fully interpret these data.other support for m3 comes from a study by the eurowinter group, which found that exposure to cold outdoor air can affect varis in opposite directions [50] : shivering outside greatly increased respiratory disease-related mortality, in agreement with eccles' suggestions. however, outdoor exertion sufficient to cause sweating reduced mortality (p-value = 0.02), although breathing cold air rapidly is known to reduce the temperature of the respiratory tract [52] . this is more difficult to explain, but it seems clear that variations in host defenses are involved. this is discussed in the next section.other evidence, however, does not support m3 (unless it is combined with m4 below). since human immune defenses act well in a wide range of temperatures and climates (the climates of northern scandinavia and southern india for example), we would not expect temperature changes of 1-2c to have a noticeable impact on host defenses against varis. great sensitivity to temperature fluctuations is apparent, however. for example, consider again chart 1 of milam and smillie's paper [21] (fig. 5) . every night in the summer the temperature dropped by 5-7c. in the autumn the temperature fell by an extra 1.5c, which triggered an epidemic of colds. can we believe that the islanders' immune systems could cope well with a regular 6c drop but succumbed after a 7.5c drop? note that the absolute temperature after the dipabout 23c at night -was still very comfortable, and would certainly not cause a vari epidemic in, say, helsinki.note also that there is often a peak of varis in the early autumn, often associated with a rhinovirus epidemic [4, 12, 17] . this peak can be seen, for example in the very high level of colds at the beginning of the study by van loghem, on 19 september, 1925 [5] (fig. 1 ). the number of varis was then much higher than during the rest of the cold season. if we are going to say that the increase in varis in the cold season is due to the increased susceptibility of hosts in cold weather (m3), it is difficult to explain why the human immune system appears to be less efficient in early autumn than in, say, february.another problem for m3 is the abrupt cessation of influenza epidemics. hope-simpson noted that all the major influenza epidemics that he recorded in cirencester, uk, (1951, 1957, 1959, 1969 and 1973 ) rose rapidly to a single peak within four weeks, then abruptly ceased in the following 4-5 weeks (fig. 1 in ref. [7] ). in at least one case it was clear that this was not due to a lack of susceptible persons: the h2n2 subtype arrived explosively for the first time in cirencester in september 1957, with over 100 individuals suffering from acute febrile respiratory diseases by the third week of october. this epidemic abruptly ceased after only six weeks. it is known for certain that many susceptible individuals remained in the town's population at that time because this was the first h2n2 epidemic, and there was another h2n2 epidemic 16 months later, which was almost as large as the first [7] . the abrupt cessation of the first epidemic is therefore unexplained. the other four major epidemics listed above were in midwinter, when (according to this view) the immune system should be at its weakest, suggesting that the virus should spread and the epidemic should continue for more than eight weeks.numerous studies of the common cold in the 1950s and 60s used recycled ''pedigree" viral strains that were collected from volunteers and used to inoculate subsequent volunteers. these studies weigh against m3 because they found that chilling did not increase the likelihood of volunteers getting colds [53] [54] [55] [56] . these studies are discussed below.taken together, the available evidence suggests that temperature-dependent changes in host susceptibility (m3) may play a role in the epidemiology of varis, and may contribute to seasonality. however, changes in susceptibility alone cannot explain many observations of varis and it appears that this mechanism is not main driver of seasonality.lwoff proposed in 1959 that the degree of virulence of viruses is related to their level of temperature sensitivity, i.e. greater sensitivity to heat is correlated with reduced virulence [57] . in 1979, richman and murphy confirmed this association and reviewed its implications for the development of live virus vaccines [58] . they noted that the replication of temperature-sensitive (ts) 1 influenza, parainfluenza, rsv, and foot-and-mouth viruses was consistently more restricted in the lungs of a variety of animals than in their nasal cavities. they also found that both naturally-occurring and synthetic ts viruses were very frequently less virulent than their non-ts counterparts in humans and animals, noting several cases (including influenza and vaccinia virus) where the loss of the ts phenotype resulted in the restoration of the virulence or growth capacity of the virus, both in vivo and in vitro [58] . chu et al. later tested seven h1n1 strains with varying degrees of temperature sensitivity in volunteers and found a correlation between temperature sensitivity and the severity of symptoms, with strains that were more ts being less virulent [59] . it is reasonable to conclude that the ts phenotype facilitates the transmission of the wild virus because it prevents or reduces multiplication of the virus in the lungs or internal organs, which is likely to result in the immobilization, or possibly the death, of the host. one possible explanation of vari seasonality (m4) is therefore that the lower temperatures of winter increase the activity and virulence of respiratory viruses, as a side-effect of their tropism. this may explain why nearly all respiratory viruses share the same seasonality.it is known that there is a temperature gradient in the human respiratory tract, from around 24c at the glottis to around 35.5c at the subsegmental bronchi [52] . the temperature in the respiratory tract drops rapidly when the air being breathed is cold, when the host breaths rapidly, or -significantly -when the host is chilled [50, 52] . putting these observations together, a simple explanation (m4) of the seasonality and temperature sensitivity of varis can be proposed:(1) one or several steps in the life-cycle of most ''wild" respiratory viruses are ts. these ts steps might include the release of virions from cells, their binding to cells, their entry into cells, or any subsequent step in their replication (see the biochemical evidence reviewed below). (2) ts virions that bind to cells lower down the respiratory tract (therefore at relatively high temperatures) may remain dormant at some unknown cellular location (which might be on extracellular material, on the surface of, or within, the cells that line the respiratory tract). (3) virions that bind to cells higher up the respiratory tract (therefore at relatively low temperatures) may become active, but will not normally cause a vari because they are active in low numbers at any one time and can be removed 1 in this article temperature-sensitive or ts refers to viruses that are more active at lower temperatures, i.e. they are heat-sensitive.by the host's immune system (or, if a proportion of virions are defective, simultaneous invasion of each cell by several virions may be required to initiate infection). (4) each day the temperature of the respiratory tract varies, and this variation clears certain populations of virions from certain regions of the respiratory tract, leaving other populations intact. (5) if the temperature of the respiratory tract drops suddenly below its normal range, batches of virions that were previously dormant may be activated simultaneously, giving rise to a vari.the virions' binding sites in the respiratory tract might also reflect the correlation, noted by richman and murphy, that more virulent strains tend to be less ts [58] . for example, avian influenza virions that can infect human hosts might be expected to bind to cells lower down the respiratory tract than typical seasonal influenza.an important point is that m4 is sensitive to temperature fluctuations, not absolute temperature, because the temperature sensitivity of viruses may adapt quite rapidly as a result of selective pressures, and they can bind in different regions of the respiratory tract. this can explain the data of van loghem, milam, jaakkola and others, discussed above [5, [14] [15] [16] [21] [22] [23] [24] [25] . it can also explain the seasonality of varis, because chilling outside of the range of the previous few days or weeks becomes more likely when the seasonal temperature drops in the autumn. in the spring, by contrast, exceptional chilling becomes less frequent as the seasonal temperature steadily rises.m4 can explain the association of varis with wind and rain in the tropics, since these weather events often result in the chilling of individuals, even when the ambient temperature remains constant. it also provides an explanation for the strange epidemiology of influenza, including the low attack rate of many epidemics within families [5, [43] [44] [45] and the rapid cessation of epidemics when many susceptible individuals remain in the population [7] ; bear in mind that each member of a family has a different history of exposure to viruses and of chilling. for example, some family members may take regular outdoor exercise in the winter, which (i suggest) clears virions from the respiratory tract in small batches (outdoor exercise reduces mortality from varis [15] ). other family members may be exposed to a virus for the first time during particularly cold weather (e.g. in midwinter), so that virions bind and become dormant relatively low down the respiratory tract, and are therefore not activated unless even colder weather follows. still others, who remain indoors much of the time, but are chilled occasionally may be prime candidates for infection (e.g. waiting for a bus in the rain may put individuals at risk -standing still outside in cold weather, and shivering outside, have both been shown to be a dangerous activities [15] ). these trends can therefore explain the low attack rates and lack of transmission within families, as well as the rapid cessation of epidemics.note that the natural temperature sensitivity of respiratory viruses contributes to m4 in two steps; in a first step, it allows virions to become dormant; in a second step, it provides viral activation as a result of chilling.step 2, however, could also be the result of the depression of immunity in the host -m3 above. there is no reason to rule this out, and, in the absence of experimental data, the relative contributions of changes in host physiology and virus biochemistry remain unknown. i noted above that changes in host susceptibility alone probably cannot account for the extreme sensitivity of varis to small temperature drops, but they may contribute. m3 may contribute to the simultaneous arrival of varis across wide geographical areas, and may be at least partly responsible for the arrival varis in tropical regions during rainy seasons. however, it seems unlikely that m3 is the main driver of seasonality.as noted above, experiments carried out in the 1950s and 60s with the common cold failed to find an effect where host chilling increased the likelihood of volunteers getting colds [53] [54] [55] [56] . however, it seems likely that the procedure of recycling viruses used in these studies may have eliminated some of the wild virus's natural temperature sensitivity. m4 therefore offers an explanation of the negative results of these studies, as discussed in detail in the next section.i noted above that the eurowinter group found that exposure to cold outdoor air can have opposite effects according to the situation: shivering outside greatly increased respiratory disease-related mortality (p-value = 0.001), while outdoor exertion sufficient to cause sweating greatly reduced mortality (p-value = 0.020) [15] . (the absolute values of the regression coefficients of mortality due to respiratory disease on these two cold exposure factors were far higher than any others found by the group.) the first point, that shivering increased mortality, could be explained by either m3 or m4 -host defenses could be diminished, or virions could be activated, by cold. the second point, that outdoor sweating reduced mortality, is more difficult to explain. although heat stress may boost the immune system above its normal level, the result would not be noticeably protective if virions are dormant and therefore invisible to the immune system. if they were visible they should be destroyed anyway during the much greater time spent indoors. a roughly neutral effect of m3 would therefore be expected. m4 would suggest that mortality should increase, because outdoor exertion clearly causes cooling of the respiratory tract, due to rapid breathing. the best explanation may be a combination of m3 and m4: the cold air and rapid breathing cools of the respiratory tract, which activates some of the dormant virions that are present. however, the good blood flow to the respiratory tract that is associated with heat stress allows the activated virions to be destroyed by the immune system.there is extensive biochemical evidence for the temperature sensitivity in respiratory viruses, particularly influenza, which is discussed below. this includes temperature sensitivity that is associated with the steps of the uptake of virions into cells [60] , rna transcription [61] [62] [63] [64] [65] (including the ts control of the balance between the synthesis of mrna and replicative products [66, 67] ), and the transport to the cell surface of hemagglutininesterase-fusion protein, the protein that promotes the fusion of influenza c virions with cells [68] .in summary, many observations of varis cannot be satisfactorily explained without invoking the activation of respiratory viruses by temperature drops or host chilling (m4). the evidence is outlined in table 1 . m4 is probably the most important driver of seasonality in varis, although other mechanisms may also contribute to seasonality, especially the increased susceptibility of hosts as a result of chilling (m3). moreover, when we consider different virus families, we can expect variations in both the timing and underlying mechanisms of seasonality.it is widely believed by doctors and scientists that chilling does not affect varis, and that this idea is ''an old wives' tale" [75] . this belief seems to come from numerous studies from the 1950s and 1960s where volunteers who had been inoculated with respiratory viruses were chilled, including three influential reports by andrewes, dowling and douglas [53] [54] [55] . unfortunately, these studies generally used ''pedigree" strains of cold virus that were recycled by being collected from volunteers and used to inoculate subsequent batches of volunteers in later experiments. (volunteers were often kept in quarantine to avoid using natural ''wild" strains that they happened to be carrying [53] .) in these studies it seems likely the researchers selected strains that very quickly caused mild varis in a significant proportion of the volunteers -but without causing dangerous infections. this may well have removed some aspects of their natural temperature sensitivity, since temperature sensitivity might give rise to dormancy and thereby delay infection. this suggests that the results may have differed from those that would have been obtained using wild viruses, which might have shown an effect of chilling. one study, however, by jackson et al., did use wild viruses that the volunteers were carrying [56] . in some of their experiments, volunteers in scant dress were exposed to 15.5c air for four hours. in others, warmlydressed volunteers breathed air at 12c for two hours. of those who were chilled, only 10% developed colds in the next 7 days, whereas 12% of those who were not chilled developed colds. however, the authors do not tells us what proportion of volunteers were chilled by breathing cold air and what proportion by wearing scant clothing; breathing cold air while remaining warm can be protective [15] , presumably because viruses are activated but they can be removed by the immune system.more recently, johnson and eccles used wild strains that the participants were carrying by chance, and saw an effect of chilling by immersing the participants' feet in cold water [48] . of the chilled subjects, 28% developed colds, whereas only 9% of the control subjects who were not chilled did.simple experiments along similar lines need to be carried out to resolve these apparent contradictions.in an interesting review of 1975 [69] , preble table 1 four mechanisms, m1-4, that might explain the vari seasonality in temperate regions.school holidays and sporting events are not well-correlated with vari epidemics [1] the simultaneous arrival of vari epidemics throughout wide geographical regions [5] [6] [7] is a problem for this explanation there is little evidence for this mechanism [1, 2] (m2) colder conditions and low relative humidity may allow virions to survive outside the body for longer, increasing transmission the prevalence of varis year-round in the tropics [1, 2, 10, 11] is evidence against with this explanation since viruses (including influenza virus [19, 20] ) frequently spread from tropical to temperate regions the simultaneous arrival of vari epidemics during cold snaps throughout wide geographical regions [5] [6] [7] is also a problem m2 cannot explain why varis respond to temperature dips rather than sustained low temperature [3, 5, 21, 22] . the rapid cessation of influenza epidemics in mid-winter in the presence of many susceptible individuals [7] , and the low attack rate of varis including influenza within families [5, [43] [44] [45] are difficult to explain by m2(m3) chilling may increase the susceptibility of hosts vaccination studies [46] show that the human immune system is not in general weaker during the winter months than in summer it has been proposed that host chilling specifically reduces immune defenses in the respiratory tract [5, [47] [48] [49] [50] this mechanism is supported by a study using cultured mouse airway cells [51] and by the observation that outdoor exertion sufficient to cause sweating reduces mortality from respiratory disease [15] the prevalence of varis year-round in the tropics [1,2,10,11] but not in summers in temperate regions suggests that other explanations of seasonality are also required it is hard to reconcile m3 with the extreme sensitivity of varis to temperature dips [3, 5, 21, 22] the peak of colds in the early autumn, when temperatures have dropped only a few degrees from their summer highs [4, 5, 12, 17, 21, 42 ] is difficult to explain by m3 numerous studies of the common cold in the 1950s and 60s that used ''pedigree" strains weigh against m3 [53] [54] [55] [56] (m4) chilling may increase the activity of viruses in the respiratory tract as a result of their natural temperature sensitivity m4 is compatible with all of the above observations, including the extreme sensitivity of varis to temperature dips [3, 5, 21, 22] (since temperature varies with position in the respiratory tract [52] ) it provides an explanation of the low attack rate of influenza within families [5, [43] [44] [45] , and the rapid cessation of influenza epidemics [7] m4 is compatible with studies using ''pedigree" strains [53] [54] [55] [56] and with antarctic studies [24, 25, 39] it provides a biological explanation of the benefits of temperature sensitivity [57, 58, 69] to the virus, and an explanation of viral dormancy [18, 24, 25, [32] [33] [34] [35] [36] [37] [38] [39] m4 is compatible with the recovery of ts viruses from persistent infections of tissue cultures and animals [58, [69] [70] [71] [72] [73] , and the generation of non-ts viruses in conditions that allow rapid viral replication [59, 74] fig. 6 . the observed effect on temperature sensitivity of natural and (spontaneous) laboratory selection for increased and decreased viral activity. in this schematic 2-d plot the xs indicate the starting levels of activity (virulence) and temperature sensitivity of two hypothetical viral strains. (the xs could also indicate the properties of hypothetical viral proteins). selective pressures are indicated by dotted arrows, while the resulting changes to viral phenotype are indicated by solid arrows. the establishment of persistent viral infections of cell cultures generally requires reduced viral activity so that viral and cell replication can be in balance [58, 69] . the corresponding selective pressure is indicated by the dotted red arrow. unexpectedly, reduced activity is often (though not always) accompanied by the spontaneous appearance of temperature (heat) sensitivity. this is indicated by the solid red arrow. see the main text for examples [70] [71] [72] . the converse trend is equally surprising: when ts viruses are propagated in conditions that allow rapid growth (thereby selecting the most active mutants, dotted blue arrow), heat sensitivity has been lost (solid blue arrow) even when selection takes place at low temperatures (see main text [59, 74] ). (for interpretation of the references to color in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.) speculate that their temperature sensitivity may allow insectborne viruses to target the skin.) similarly, richman and murphy found that persistent infections of cell-cultures with mumps virus and vesicular stomatitis virus frequently yielded ts virus, although they noted that persistent infections could also be established or maintained by non-ts mutations [58] . three more recent reports described the recovery of spontaneously-generated ts strains of influenza a from persistent infections of cell cultures [70] [71] [72] . similar tendencies are seen in persistent infections of animals; footand-mouth viruses recovered from carrier animals are frequently ts, and show evidence of high rates of mutation with frequent amino acid substitutions and rapid antigenic variation [73] .preble and youngner pointed out that since ts strains tend to be less virulent they may allow persistent infections to become established, because a balance between viral and cell replication is required [69] . they do not, however, explain why ts mutations in particular should be selected in persistent infections, as opposed to non-ts attenuating mutations. in most cases the cells were grown in the laboratory at 37c, so temperature sensitivity should be a disadvantage. if, however, the wild virus from which the laboratory strain was derived was ts, the probability of reverting to the ts phenotype may be relatively high. for example, a protein might lose its ts character by a point mutation caused by a single nucleotide change, so that the ts character could be restored by reinstating the original nucleotide. this may be more probable than other mutations that would attenuate the virus without conferring temperature sensitivity. changes to rna secondary structure (discussed below) may have similar effects. bear in mind that many virus families include species that cause both systemic and respiratory tract infections, and strains may have jumped between these sites many times in their evolutionary history. for example influenza often infects the gut in birds, but it usually infects the respiratory tract in mammals. these considerations suggest that genetic pathways may exist that allow the rapid elimination and reintroduction of temperature sensitivity.if this interpretation is correct, it may explain how respiratory viruses such as influenza, rsv and adenovirus are able to infect hosts throughout the world. a tropical virus might cause serious illness if it arrives in colder parts of the world, because it might infect sites lower down the respiratory tract. since too much virulence may reduce viral transmission (as patients become bed-ridden), natural selection in the temperate site for reduced virulence may increase temperature sensitivity to a level that is appropriate to the virus's new location. a similar argument suggests that viral temperature sensitivity (and virulence) may be adjusted throughout the year by natural selection to a level that is appropriate to the season.the converse trend: the loss of the ts phenotype in conditions that allow rapid replication since ts strains are generally less virulent in vivo [57, 58, 69] , and are associated with persistent infections both in vivo and in vitro [58, 69] , it might be anticipated that the ts character would be lost in in vitro conditions that allow rapid replication of viruses, and this has indeed been observed. chu et al. found a naturallyoccurring ts influenza a strain that was a subclone of the h3n2 strain ningxia/11/72 [59] . when they passaged the strain three times through chicken embryos at a low temperature (33c), they were surprised to find that a non-ts strain was produced. similarly, oxford et al. [74] found that a naturally occurring ts virus, a/eng/116/78 (h1n1), progressively lost its ts character during five passages at low temperature (33c). both groups concluded that even at the permissive temperature (33c) the ts phenotype may confer a selective disadvantage in eggs -which allow rapid replication of influenza virions. again we can speculate that viru-lence and greater viral activity in general is genetically linked to temperature sensitivity as a result of the evolutionary history of the virus.the unexpected loss and gain of temperature sensitivity (in a wide variety of viruses) when increased or decreased viral activity is selected is shown schematically in fig. 6 .numerous studies have found that it is easier to propagate respiratory viruses that are freshly collected from patients by incubation at temperatures below 37c. rhinoviruses were first isolated at 35c but a greater variety of rhinoviruses was discovered at 33c [76] , and this is the temperature that is recommended today for their isolation by the clinical and laboratory standards institute [77] . coronaviruses were first isolated at 33c [78] although laboratory strains are now frequently propagated at 37c. naturally occurring influenza strains are also frequently ts. for example, in 1962 stern and tippett [79] propagated four viral specimens from patients with h2n2 ''asian" influenza, all of which were ts. all four gave cytopathic effects in monkey cells and the production of hemagglutinatinin-positive fluids in eggs at 33c but not at 37c. subcultures were able to adapt to culture at 37c but grew more slowly than at 33c. the authors also found (in 1962) that the fm1 (h1n1, 1947) and pr8 (old-style h0n1, 1934) strains grew more slowly in monkey cells at 37c than at 33c. in 1977, kung et al. found that nine of ten isolates of the newly emerged ''russian" h1n1 influenza were ts [80] . oxford et al. found that 17 of 26 recent h1n1 isolates, and 2 of 11 recent h3n2 isolates were ts, producing cultures that gave at least 10 times more viral plaques after incubation at 34c compared to 38.5c [74] .takashita et al. found that, in influenza c (c/ann arbor/1/50), roughly half the amount of the hemagglutinin-esterase-fusion protein (hef) was found on the cell surface at 37c compared to 33c [68] . (hef in influenza c carries out the functions of both hemagglutinin and neuraminidase in influenza a or b.) moreover, membrane fusion mediated by hef was observed at 33c but not at 37c. this was found to be due to instability of the trimeric form of hef at 37c.in an interesting study, russell saw an ''unexpected" result when he measured the uptake of the triple reassortant influenza virus a/jap/bel into cells [60] . uptake of the virus increased steadily from 0c, with 100% of the virus entering the cells at 30c. however, at 34c and 38c less a/jap/bel was taken up than at 30c (fig. 2 of ref. [60] ). this was repeated on two separate occasions using a chicken anti-h2 serum when 100% of virus escaped neutralization at 30c, compared to 50% at 38c, suggesting that viral entry into cells was ts.most laboratory respiratory viruses are propagated at 37c, which may result in the rapid loss of ts characters, especially since viruses mutate very rapidly when they are introduced to new hosts. if, however, temperature sensitivity is a common feature of wild respiratory viruses, we might expect to see remnants of temperature sensitivity in the biochemistry of laboratory strains. it turns out that such remnants are quite common.for several decades virologists have found that maximum rna transcription in influenza viruses occurs below normal body temperature. in 1977, plotch and krug [61] reported that the greatest activity of the rna polymerase of wsn virus was at 30-32c. this is similar to the optimum temperature of the polymerase of influenza c, which is 33c [62, 63] . ulmanen et al. [64] found that the rate of transcription by detergent-treated wsn viruses (influenza a) was about 10 times greater at 33c than at 39.5c, and also that the binding of a cleaved primer cap (the ''a13 fragment") to the viral cores was ''unexpectedly" much weaker at 39.5c than at 33c. scholtissek and rott [65] showed that the optimum for the polymerase of the rostock strain of fowl plague virus was 36c, five degrees below chickens' normal body temperature (41c). at least two reports show that temperature affects the balance between transcription and viral replication. kashiwagi et al. looked at the effect of temperature on rna production for five varied influenza a strains [66] . for all strains, vrna unexpectedly decreased when the temperature was increased from 37c to 42c. the pa subunit of the viral polymerase caused this thermal sensitivity. in another interesting study, dalton et al. showed that the production of mrna by the pr8 influenza strain is favored at a higher temperature (41c), with very little vrna being produced at that temperature [67] . a plasmid-based recombinant system showed that as the incubation temperature increased from 31c to 39c the amount of replicative rna products (c-and vrna) decreased and a greater accumulation of mrna was observed. the crna that is used as a template to make the vrna formed a complex with the polymerase that was particularly heat-labile, showing rapid dissociation even at 37c. the authors suggested that the ''switch" that regulates the transition from transcription to replication is dependent on temperature, but made no comments about how shifts in the host's body or respiratory tract temperature may influence this transition.much recent attention has focused on the role of rna secondary structure in influenza a, although discussion of its role in temperature sensitivity has been limited. ''rna thermometers" are rna segments (found in both microorganisms and higher organisms) that respond to temperature changes with three-dimensional conformational changes that alter gene expression [81] . they are frequently (but not always) found in the 5'-untranslated regions of mrna, and can act in both directions -translation can be augmented or suppressed at high temperatures [81] . chursov et al. used bioinformatic techniques to search for pronounced differences between mrna from cold-adapted ts influenza strains and the corresponding wild-type sequences [82] . pronounced differences were found in the mrnas of four viral proteins. the authors suggest that temperature-induced structural changes of mrna may constitute an ''unappreciated molecular mechanism of the cold adaptation/temperature sensitivity phenomena" [82] .little secondary structure is predicted in influenza vrna outside the untranslated 5 0 and 3 0 terminal ends of the vrna strands that form the promoter necessary for the initiation of rna synthesis [83] . however, the positive-sense rna is predicted to have extensive secondary structure, which is conserved, in segments 1, 5, 7 and 8 [83] . since ordered rna is intrinsically ts, and since individual base changes may have a cumulative effect on the overall secondary structure of rna, it is likely that viral temperature sensitivity can be fine-tuned by small sequence changes to untranslated regions of rna. for example changes to the secondary structure of vrna, crna and mrna might all affect temperature sensitivity in influenza.(changes to protein sequences may also be in involved of course.)we can speculate that temperature sensitivity might have profound effects on viral tropism. many or most respiratory viruses possess temperature sensitivity, and we can imagine that a respiratory virus that loses its temperature sensitivity might infect the lungs, gut or internal organs. (some method of limiting virulence other than temperature sensitivity might then be selected that can allow the virus to survive in the long-term.) conversely, viruses originating in the internal organs that develop temperature sensitivity could safely cause severe local infections that would be limited to the upper respiratory tract (possibly in addition to other cold parts of the body such as the feet), without greatly incapacitating the host (incapacitation would limit opportunities for transmission of the virus). obviously the resulting irritation of the respiratory tract might cause coughing, sneezing and runny noses, all of which might help to transmit the virus -in other words a respiratory virus has been generated. influenza infects the gut of water fowl but the respiratory tract of mammals (and birds), and is able to move between these two ecological niches. similarly, some adenovirus serotypes are mainly respiratory, others mainly cause gut-related disease. viruses that are transmitted via skin rashes and blisters that burst, such as chickenpox, measles, smallpox, and hand, foot and mouth disease in humans, and foot-andmouth disease in cloven-hoofed mammals, could also benefit from temperature sensitivity that might allow them to infect the skin preferentially and so to spread by direct contact. (in the diseases mentioned above contact transmission from blisters etc. coexists with aerosol transmission.) several examples indicate that what we think of as respiratory viruses can occasionally cause systemic infections: virulent human influenza strains sometimes give rise to viremia [84, 85] , and three children who were infected with pandemic h1n1 influenza in 2009 (''swine flu") presented with petechial rashes [86] . similarly, 33 patients presented with hemorrhagic cystitis caused by h3n2 influenza a in 1975 [87] .many suggestions have been put forward to explain the seasonality of varis, especially influenza. changes in crowding (m1), and changes in the survival rate of viruses outside the body (m2) cannot be completely ruled out, but they fall short in at least one important respect: they cannot explain why varis including influenza are transmitted in the tropics, especially during wet weather, but are mostly absent from temperate regions in the summer months. an alternative suggestion (m3), that chilled hosts are more susceptible as a result of ts changes to their immune defenses, is a better candidate. a biochemical study using cultured mouse cells supports the idea [51] , and m3 also seems to be part of the best explanation of the protective effect of winter outdoor exercise [15] . however, evidence from vaccination studies, epidemiological evidence that varis respond to small temperature changes throughout a wide range of absolute temperatures (figs. 1  and 3) , and evidence that varis frequently appear simultaneously throughout large geographical regions (figs. 1 and 2) , seem to rule out changes in host susceptibility as the main driver of vari seasonality.this leaves the explanation that might seem most intuitive to the lay-person -that viruses can become temporarily dormant, and are reactivated by chilling, which changes their behavior at the biochemical level (m4). this explanation is seldom considered by microbiologists, who seem to have ruled it out on the basis of historical reports from the 1950s and 1960s, which concluded that chilling does not bring on varis [53] [54] [55] [56] . however, there is now so much clear evidence that chilling does increase varis that we need to look more closely at those historical experiments. i suggest above that they were flawed because they generally used ''pedigree" viral strains which were passed by the investigators from volunteers to subsequent batches of volunteers in later experiments. obviously the investigators would have thought carefully about the choice of strains that they used; they certainly didn't want to put the volunteers at risk, so mild strains needed to be selected. however they naturally wanted their experiments to fit into the time available -for example andrewes worked with volunteers who each stayed at his unit for 10 days, and his experiments did not start until the volunteers had been in quarantine for three days. the incubation period of the strain that he used was most frequently two to three days. by selecting such a strain he and his colleagues may have eliminated the virus's natural temperature sensitivity during the early stages of infection (temperature sensitivity that is predicted by m4) -a flaw in the design of his experiments with potentially far-reaching implications.note, however, that the negative results of the host-chilling experiments using pedigree strains nevertheless weigh against m3 -because the lack of temperature sensitivity of the virus (or possibly other characters of a virus that had undergone prolonged serial passage) should not influence host susceptibility.leaving aside these early experiments, what is the evidence for or against the idea (m4) that temperature fluctuations can activate respiratory viruses and give rise to vari seasonality? epidemiological evidence shows that (a) surges in varis often follow a few days after temperature dips (even minor dips) [2, 3, 5, 14, 21, 22] ; (b) in all climates, it is temperature drops that are generally associated with vari epidemics rather than sustained low absolute temperature [3, 5, 21, 22] ; (c) the attack rate and the rate of transmission within families are often low, especially for influenza [5, [43] [44] [45] ; (d) vari epidemics often appear simultaneously throughout wide geographical areas, with no evidence of waves of transmission that move between neighboring (fig. 1 ) or widely separated (fig. 2) localities [5] [6] [7] ; and (e) influenza epidemics often occur in midwinter but cease while many susceptible individuals remain in the population [7] . all of these observations are compatible with m4, as discussed above. moreover, observations of the timing and location of vari epidemics suggest that respiratory viruses can become dormant, a suggestion that is confirmed by the occasional presence of varis in polar communities after many weeks or months of complete isolation [24, 25, 39] . biochemical tests of asymptomatic individuals who shed influenza a and b without seroconversion [35] [36] [37] [38] are compatible with dormancy, and pcr tests showed directly that individuals harboring a variety of viral pathogens subsequently developed the corresponding varis [18, 34] . if we accept this evidence of viral dormancy and reactivation, then the idea (m4) that chilling increases the activity of respiratory viruses that were present before the epidemic began can provide the rapid response, sensitivity to temperature dips, and occasional lack of transmission that we need to explain the epidemiological events (a-e) above. it is unclear how these events can be explained by the alternative mechanisms m1 -m3.we also need to explain the clear trend in the laboratory for persistent infections of cells to yield ts strains of a variety of viruses in the absence of obvious selective pressures [58, [69] [70] [71] [72] , and also the converse observation, that temperature sensitivity is lost when viruses are grown in cell cultures at low temperature in conditions that allow rapid replication [59, 74] (fig. 6) . moreover, biochemical studies show that many steps in the replication of laboratory strains of influenza and other viruses have residual natural temperature sensitivity [60] [61] [62] [63] [64] [65] [66] [67] [68] 83] , in spite of many cycles of replication of most laboratory viruses at 37c. we can explain these data by suggesting a link between loss of temperature sensitivity and the acquisition of increased virulence in respiratory viruses, which seems to be a legacy of their evolutionary history. lwoff (1959) , and richman and murphy (1979) suggested that the temperature sensitivity of respiratory viruses allows them to target the respiratory tract, and to avoid the lungs [57, 58] . this idea, and the related idea that less ts strains tend to be more viru-lent, seems to be widely accepted by microbiologists. however, the corollary, that ambient temperature dips can activate viruses that were previously inactive, is less popular. it is, however compatible with the well-known ''trade-off" model of virulence. this model suggests that the benefits of virulence (in particular the increased rate of virus production and shedding) are balanced against the reduction of the time during which shedding takes place (and also changes to the behavior of hosts that reduce transmission) if virulence is too great. the implication is that mechanisms are required to moderate virulence, and temperature sensitive mechanisms can clearly achieve this in the case of respiratory viruses. an analogy in the form of a joke may be helpful here. two scientists are out hiking, when they meet an angry-looking bear. ''it's no use," says one scientist to the other, ''you can never outrun a bear". ''i don't need to outrun the bear," replies his companion, ''i only need to outrun you". it is often assumed that an ''evolutionary arms race" exists between viruses and the host immune system, with each making a series of small improvements to gain an advantage over the other [88] . this assumption may be incorrect -it may be that most viruses could easily overcome the defenses of hosts that lack specific immunity, but that selective pressures nevertheless reduce the virulence of well-adapted viruses, as predicted by the trade-off model. some of the evidence for this comes from viruses that have recently jumped from one host species to another, such as myxomatosis in european rabbits, and, in humans, hiv, sars, middle eastern respiratory syndrome, avian influenza and ebola. these viruses are unusually virulent, in spite of -or because of -having had little time to adapt to their hosts. the main arms race may not be between viruses and hosts, but between competing hosts, where each needs to reduce its susceptibility to outcompete other members of the same species.of course, respiratory viruses comprise many unrelated families, and there may be important differences in the mechanisms that give rise to their seasonality. multiple mechanisms could contribute to seasonality, and the mix could vary between viruses. nevertheless it seems likely that that the common seasonality of these diverse viruses is not coincidental, that common mechanisms give rise to this near-universal trend, and that some variant of m4 is the most important in many or most cases.it is unlikely that either evidence gleaned from studies that were designed to investigate other aspects of viral biochemistry or epidemiological observations can determine the causes of vari seasonality with certainty. instead it will be necessary to investigate temperature sensitivity directly in vivo and in vitro, working with viruses that are as close as possible to wild viruses. as a start, wild and laboratory viral samples should be ''deep sequenced" (i.e. the relative proportions of different sequences in a sample should be established at multiple genetic sites) to determine the mix of ts and non-ts sequences in wild samples, and to establish the impact on temperature sensitivity of propagating wild viruses in the laboratory. this analysis needs to include consideration of rna secondary structure. the information gained can be applied at many levels, from observations and experiments with living organisms to experiments with cell cultures and in solution. it may be possible to image the distribution of virions in the respiratory tracts of animals, and to see e.g. differences in animals that were housed at high and low temperatures prior to the investigation. virions might be released from tissues or cells by raising the temperature, or captured by lowering the temperature. (note that the genetic information remains attached to the chemical probe, in a manner analogous to the phage display technique.) the entry of virions into cells can be investigated by measuring the escape rate of preadsorbed virus from neutralization by antibody in temperature shift experiments [60] . in tissue cultures, transcription and the production of genetic material can be followed during temperature shifts (for example the production of mrna, crna and vrna can each be studied in influenza). similarly, the production of viral proteins can be followed during temperature-shift experiments. experiments in solution can also yield valuable information. for example, the thermal stability of mutants of influenza hemagglutinin and neuraminidase can be investigated in solution by thermal shift assays, and similar experiments can be undertaken with other respiratory viruses. the thermal stability of secondary structures of wild-type and laboratory viral rna and rna/protein complexes can be measured in solution. bioinformatics can be applied to the problem. for example the sequences of hemagglutinin, neuraminidase and other viral proteins from wild and laboratory strains, and from the viruses obtained from different animal hosts and laboratory procedures can be analyzed. this analysis can consider the impact of mutations on the structures of viral proteins and complexes that have been determined by x-ray crystallography and other techniques. for example the effect of changing a particular residue can be anticipated or investigated experimentally. secondary structure prediction techniques can be applied to viral rna, dna and protein/nucleic acid complexes. yet another approach is to investigate and model viral epidemiology with these ideas in mind. finally, experiments can be performed at the whole organism level. for example, chilblains and chapped lips can be examined for the presence of respiratory and other viruses. other, very simple, experiments can be performed with human volunteers. for example, groups of volunteers can be subjected to chilling in the autumn or midwinter (which are the seasons when individuals are particularly susceptible to varis) and compared to control groups who are kept warm. the number of varis suffered by both groups can then be compared. this approach would make use of dormant viruses that the participants were already carrying by chance.author's information i am one of the two founders and directors of douglas instruments ltd, a small uk company that manufactures automatic systems for protein crystallization. i worked with professor david blow in the 1990s, and have published 15 papers about protein crystallization that have together been cited over 750 times. a few years ago i began to think about respiratory viruses when a friend bet me that i couldn't find biochemical evidence that chilling could trigger varis. i started to write a short note, but everything fell into place so neatly that it rapidly grew into the current document.this research did not receive any specific grant from funding agencies in the public, commercial, or not-for-profit sectors 3 the epidemiologic and clinical characteristics of cases with covid-19 have been reported [1] , but little is known about the patients who neither had travel history to infected area nor had a direct contact with a case-patient. this study reports a potential association between tos and los in covid-19 infection without epidemiological link. epidemiological investigation separated samples into two groups (patients with epidemiological trace vs patients without one). 4 first case in the sample had symptoms onset on january 17th. tos is defined as the time interval from january 17th to the date of symptom onset for each individual.the primary outcome was los, defined as the duration of admission to discharge.generalized linear regression models were used to examine what independent variables significantly predict the primary outcome los.a total of 38 patients were admitted. epidemiological investigation showed that 26 patients neither had travel history to infected area nor had a direct contact with a case-patient. potential epidemiological links of these patients were listed as travel to non-infected area, visit shopping mall, attend dinner party, and contact with healthcare facility. patients presented with symptoms of cough, fever, diarrhea, sore throat, and chest pain. no respiratory support of non-invasive ventilation or extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ecmo) were applied. all individuals had images of consolidation or ground-glass opacification on computed tomography scan.in patients without epidemiological trace, tos was negatively associated with los (irr = 0.980; 95% ci = 0.967 to 0.993; p = 0.003). no such pattern was found in patients with established epidemiological link (irr = 0.997; 95% ci = 0.984 to 1.010; p = 0.633). age was positively associated with los in both groups (table) . 5 the current coronavirus outbreak around world shared different epidemic characteristics from those in the early stage [3, 4] . more patients without travel history to infected area or direct contact with a case-patient were diagnosed with covid-19 [5] . although full scale of review showed no epidemiological link, several potential risks were found. for example, a few patients were diagnosed with covid-19 after a trip to non-infected area, indicating a potential larger epidemic area and an underestimated spread rate of virus. shopping mall and catering business posed a high risk of infections, given the outbreak of covid-19 in spring vestival. in addition, special care should be took to limit visits to hospitals for treating chronic diseases such as hypertension and diabetes.as the global covid-19 epidemic continues to grow [6] , it's crucial to understand the predictors of los to facilitate a better deployment of medical resources. in this study, elder patients were more susceptible to longer los, which was consistent with previous study [7] . in addition, tos was found to be negatively associated with los, indicating that as the pandemic spread, the length of hospitalization for patients recovery from covid-19 may become shorter. this pattern was only found in cases without epidemiological trace, suggesting that the course of this disease was potentially impacted by mode of transmission. given the late onset of symptom accompanied with short los, it appeared that the severity of virus may decline over time. future studies may focus on the identification of modes of transmission other than travel to infected area or direct contact with a case-patient.our finding of shorter los among cases with later symptom onset could contribute to 6 optimized distribution of medical resourse and risk-stratified approach to therapy in covid-19. the severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2) and its associated coronavirus disease (covid-19) emerged from probable zoonotic origin from china's hubei province in early december 2019. the virus and disease are collectively referred to as covid-19 in this paper. covid-19 rapidly spread around the world and was declared a pandemic by the world health organization (who) on 11 march 2020 (https ://www.who.int/emerg encie s/disea ses/novel -coron aviru s-2019/event s-as-they-happe n). as of 29 april 2020, the john hopkins university coronavirus dashboard (https ://coron aviru s.jhu.edu/map.html) electronic supplementary material the online version of this article (https ://doi.org/10.1007/s1066 9-020-09772 -1) contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users. reports more than 3.1 million confirmed infections and more than 217,200 fatalities globally. this paper uses quantitative and qualitative measures to assess the likelihood of natural hazards coinciding with, and influencing epidemiological characteristics of, the covid-19 pandemic. natural hazard curves for seasonal (e.g. tropical cyclone, floods, heat waves, monsoons, tornadoes) hazards are plotted against covid-19 time-series forecasts (fig. 1) . stochastic (e.g. earthquakes, volcanic eruptions) hazards are also considered in a general sense but not specifically analysed. the effects of these natural hazards on human life depends on the severity of the hazard, the exposure of humans and infrastructure to it, the vulnerability of exposed elements, and the ability to respond and recover. covid-19 has the potential to significantly impact the exposure, vulnerability and response elements associated with natural disasters and vice-versa, thereby requiring a systems approach to analyse risk and resilience (e.g. simonovic 2011; harrison and william 2016) .approaches to mitigating covid-19 risks share some commonalities with natural disaster mitigation. for example, enacting social distancing protocols to reduce covid-19 exposure could be considered analogous to land-use planning to reduce exposure to natural hazards (e.g. floods, fig. 1 epidemiological forecast models for covid-19 fatalities and infections for a the united states, b australia, c bangladesh and d china, developed using https ://covid 19-scena rios.org/ software and boot-strapping reproduction number (1.9  ro  3.2), simulation date ranges, and % mitigation estimate parameters (see legend in each panel) to maximize goodness-of-fit between confirmed cumulative fatalities and model curves. epidemiological curves are labelled in the format country_average ro_mitigation#1%effect iveness_mitigation#2%effectiveness_mitigation #3%effectiveness. epidemiological curves are subject to large and spatiotemporally varying uncertainties and are thus intended for illustrative purposes only, rather than accurate and precise forecasts. the grey box in (a) is the 95% confidence interval for the institute for health metrics and evaluation u.s. cumulative fatality projection with preferred value (black line). model parameters and results for a-d are presented in the supplementary information accompanying this paper. representative seasonal hazard curves for each country as shown. tcs tropical cyclones. see text for interpretations. these hazard curves are derived from a variety of sources (brooks et al. 2003; landsea 1993; nissan et al. 2017; sheridan and kalkstein 2010) and expert knowledge earthquakes) . covid-19 health and service policies aimed to preference vulnerable groups including the elderly, those with ill health and comorbidities, the homeless or underhoused, and people from vulnerable socioeconomic groups that might be vulnerable to financial, psychosocial and/or physical challenges (lancet 2020), are crudely analogous to defining and enforcing seismic building codes, and strengthening earthquake-vulnerable buildings, to reduce life safety risks (e.g. stucchi et al. 2011; hosseini et al. 2009 ).epidemiological forecasts of covid-19 infections and fatalities ( fig. 1 ) exhibit large spatial and temporal variations due to differences in modelling approaches, mitigation scenarios (e.g. "supress and lift" strategy used in hong kong and singapore; see normile 2020), health system capacity, epidemiological parameters, and demographic parameters (https ://covid 19-scena rios.org/). changes induced by external (e.g. the concurrency of other emergent phenomena such as natural disasters) and internal factors (e.g. relaxation of social distancing measures, return-to-work decisions) can impact on many of these parameters significantly and thus create more uncertainty in infection and fatality predictions (fig. 1) . it is therefore challenging to define what a 'worsecase' covid-19 fatality scenario is, given the susceptibility of forecasts to major perturbations induced by phenomena with uncertain spatial and temporal properties.given this context, resolving policy priorities in response to the covid-19 pandemic and associated compounding effects of natural hazards involves a complex higher-level decision-making process that must inevitably be guided by scientific insight (colwell and machlis 2019; filippelli 2020) . in view of this, our study seeks to provide a qualitative analysis of the combined effect of covid-19 epidemic and external perturbations, specifically natural disasters, to propose that:(i) covid-19 epidemiological models may be highly sensitive to disasters originating from natural hazards, and thus inclusion of seasonal and / or stochastic events might better enable worst-case scenarios to be considered, (ii) contemporary covid-19 related policies, such as relaxations of mitigative measures, may increase the probability that diverse multi-hazards will interact with the covid-19 crisis and stimulate concurrent and cascading crises, and (iii) disaster preparedness strategies and resourcing should carefully consider the impact of covid-19 on future response operations, including: adaptation of implementation modalities to account for the disruption of critical supply chains, the potential localisation of response efforts due to limited mobility of humanitarian actors, availability of evacuation cen-tres with capacity for social distancing, the capacity of humanitarian workers/volunteers and medical staff to respond to natural disasters in covid-affected regions, and the availability of personal protective equipment and medical equipment (e.g. respirators) to incorporate large spikes in need.in this paper, we forthwith use the term 'natural disaster' to refer to an adverse event or series of events that originate from the interaction of hazardous event(s) of natural origin with humans and/or their physical and/or socioeconomic systems and infrastructure. droughts, floods (meteorological) and earthquakes (geophysical) are the most common natural disasters in the world, affecting millions of people every year (kouadio et al. 2012) . natural disaster fatalities since 1900 reveal decreases in average annual deaths from major drought and flood events and increases in fatalities associated with earthquakes (including tsunamis) and extreme weather (e.g. tornadoes, tropical cyclones) and temperature events (e.g. heat waves) (fig. 2) . fatality estimates from extreme temperature events are considered a minimum value because heat and cold temperature extremes may exacerbate pre-existing medical conditions and contribute to mortality rates without formal attribution (medina-ramon et al. 2006) . a concurrent hazard is defined herein as hazardous event(s) of natural physical (e.g. earthquake, volcanic eruption, flood, tropical cyclone) or biologic origin (e.g. an infectious disease such as covid-19) that overlap in time and space. the occurrence of two or more hazardous events (e.g. an earthquake during covid-19) is referred to here as a multi-hazard scenario [a.k.a. "compound events", although this term has a broader definition than used here (e.g. zscheischler et al. 2018) ]. hazards that are sourced from, triggered by, and/or influenced by preceding hazards are referred to as cascading hazards. for context, we provide brief examples below.on january 12, 2010, a catastrophic 7.0 magnitude earthquake struck haiti, causing more than 200,000 fatalities, displacing more than 1.5 million people, and affecting 3 million people overall (doocy et al. 2013, see also fig. 2) . the earthquake severely damaged the public sanitation system and created ideal conditions for outbreaks of major infectious diseases. nine months later, a cholera outbreak originating from human transmission (orata et al. 2014) began to spread across the country, eventuating in more than 9000 deaths and 650,000 infections (https ://www.cdc.gov/chole ra/haiti /index .html). prior to 2010, there was no reported history of cholera in haiti. long-term impacts and hazards originating from the earthquake crisis (socioeconomic impacts, infrastructure impacts, hazards such as aftershocks) spatially and temporally overlapped, interacted with, and amplified the cholera impacts; these could be considered as a protracted multi-hazard scenario with cascading elements and disastrous impacts.other cascading, multi-hazard examples include:(i) increased long-term flood hazard in christchurch, new zealand caused by, and concurrent with, the 2010-2011 canterbury earthquake sequence (quigley and duffy 2020) caused significant damage to property and infrastructure and increased vulnerability to coastaltidal hazards, (ii) large death tolls in puerto rico and some caribbean islands due to the cascading effects of hurricanes irma and maria compounded societal vulnerability through infrastructure damage and power outages that left millions without electricity, water, and cell phone service for 2-4 weeks; (iii) the 2015 magnitude 7.8 nepal earthquake along with its magnitude 7.3 aftershock triggered snow avalanches (largest ~ 2.3 km 2 ) and thousands of landslides, the latter of which caused flooding due to river blockages and landslide dam breaches (martha et al. 2017) . blocked and damaged road infrastructure directly impacted earthquake response efforts, including search and rescue activities, the timely provision of emergency aid, the ability to conduct rapid needs assessments, and the provision of essential services (khazai et al. 2015) . the complex spatial distribution of landslides highlights the need for considering additional dimensions including seasonality in a multi-hazard scenario (roback et al. 2018 ); (iv) extreme events (e.g. floods of 1987, 1998, and 2007, tropical cyclone in 1991) in bangladesh that offer a perspective of the interaction between extreme natural hazards and socioeconomic vulnerabilities, and how that could be amplified by covid-19 (siddique et al. 1991; khalil 1993; mushtaque et al. 1993; dove and khan 1995; chowdhury 2000; benson and clay 2002; mirza 2002; sherman and shapiro 2005; mcmahon 2007; zoraster 2010; rahman et al. 2013 ). (v) the 2011 tohoku magnitude 9.1 earthquake, which caused shaking damage, triggered a tsunami with disastrous impacts, including a major malfunction at the fukushima daiichi nuclear power plant that exposed people to severe radiation hazards locally and significant hazards globally (ten hoeve and jacobson 2012).it is also pertinent to consider hazard cascades with epidemic components. for instance, previous cases of acute respiratory infections (aris) following natural disasters can shed light on disaster response needed to counter the spread of covid-19. aris were a major concern following natural disasters such as the south asian tsunami (world health organization 2005; doocy et al. 2007) , major-togreat earthquakes (weekly morbidity and mortality report pakistan, vol. 42/ dews 2006-36; woersching and snyder 2004; akbari et al. 2004) , volcanic eruptions (surmieda et al. 1992) , and hurricanes (campanella 1999) . outbreaks of other communicable diseases (e.g. water borne diseases) in communities affected by natural disasters are commonly attributed to crowding of displaced people in camps (weekly morbidity and mortality report pakistan, vol. 23/dews 2006 -2017 marin et al. 2006; watson et al. 2007; kouadio et al. 2012) .several natural disasters have now occurred during the covid-19 crisis. we consider some of these in sects. 3 and 4. many countries around the world, including those with increasing covid-19 infection and fatality rates are highly susceptible to seasonal natural disasters. some decision-makers have reduced (or are considering reduction of) covid-19 mitigation measures based on epidemiologic data and/or priority valuation of other inputs (e.g. economic, political). the likelihood of future natural disasters and potential impacts on covid-19 exposure and vulnerability is scarcely mentioned in these narratives.3 plausible covid-19 epidemic scenarios, multi-hazard curves, and the importance of expeditiously reducing infection rates prior to disaster seasons figure 1 presents epidemiological forecast models for covid-19 fatalities and infections for the usa, australia, bangladesh and china, developed using https ://covid 19-scena rios.org/ software. curves were generated by iteratively bootstrapping the covid reproduction number (r o ), simulation onset date, and % mitigation variables to maximize goodness-of-fit between confirmed cumulative fatalities and modelled deaths through the same time period. several alternative scenarios were considered by adjusting the % mitigation variable only. the average r o ranges from 1.9 (australia) to 3.9 (china); bangladesh is 3.8 and the united states is 3.2. these estimates are consistent with the range of reported r o values from scientific literature (https ://www.natur e.com/artic les/ d4158 6-020-01003 -6); noting that the r o values used here are intended to be an average value since covid-19 onset (rather than a value representing the current situation) that are modified by adjusting the % mitigation parameter at various time-slices. mitigation dates for each country were derived from internet media reports by searching "country name", and "covid-19 mitigation actions" in google and google news search engines. the mitigation % effectiveness parameter was estimated from our analysis of the mitigation protocols taken, as represented by the media consulted for mitigation dates. a preference was given to peer-reviewed literature and/or government-issued information sources. for example, in australia, we assigned a mitigation estimate of 75% (range 50% to 90% effectiveness) commencing on 23 march 2020, when many places of social gathering were closed and a variety of mitigation strategies aimed to reduce social contact were progressively enacted, based on a government source summary document (https ://www.healt h.gov.au/news/healt h-alert s/novel -coron aviru s-2019-ncovhealt h-alert /how-to-prote ct-yours elf-and-other s-from-coron aviru s-covid -19/limit s-on-publi c-gathe rings -for-coron aviru s-covid -19). some countries have highly incremented and highly regionalized mitigation processes (https ://www.cdc.daily new infectee rate in croatia. the time of the mw 5.3 zagreb earthquake is also shown along with the covid-19 incubation time range defined by who. an apparent increase in the infectee rate proceeding the earthquake is discernible. data source dong et al. (2020) gov/mmwr/volum es/69/wr/mm691 5e2.htm?s_cid=mm691 5e2_x) for which a single r o metric grossly simplifies the reality (for example the u.s., where 20 march, 2 april, 12 april); in these cases we acknowledge this complexity but consider our estimates to best represent available information at the time of writing. r o values, mitigation dates and % effectiveness estimates, and projected fatalities are included in the supplementary information item 2 accompanying this manuscript.infection and cumulative fatality scenarios vary widely and are highly sensitive to small changes in % mitigation scenarios (e.g. fig. 1d , chn_3.9_85_67 vs chn_3.9_85_67), particularly for countries with higher r o values. both estimates are intended for the main purpose of demonstrating how reducing mitigation measures can dramatically influence these projections.in the case of the u.s., where a lifting of restrictions and re-opening of businesses is being considered, reduction in mitigation measures is likely to sustain higher infection and fatality rates (see usa_3.2_30_70_80 curve) concurrent with peak tornado hazard season in the southeast and central u.s. (blue curve), overlapping with increasing (and peak) wildfire and heatwave hazards, and potentially overlapping with increasing flood, hurricane, and tropical cyclone hazards. other covid-19 related restrictions are likely to compound natural disaster and covid-19 risks. for example, the u.s. forest service has cancelled its planned seasonal burns due to covid-19 restrictions, and travel restrictions may reduce the likelihood of provision of international support for firefighting. this is explored in more detail in sect. 6.in the case of australia, where strong and increasing social distancing measures were enacted nationally beginning on 23 march, daily confirmed infections are reducing significantly, and the cumulative fatality curve has mostly plateaued (as of 16 april 2020). infection and fatality rates began to increase in australia after the cessation of the severe 2019-2020 bushfire season ("black summer fires") in which thousands of australians were forced to evacuate into communal environments; had covid-19 emerged only 1-2 months earlier in australia community transmission risks would have been significantly higher. all of the major (1) (red-dashed line; see sect. 5 for equation). see main text for parameters used. bottom panel: an example model output (see main text for details) showing the daily new infectee rate over time for larger (blue) and smaller (red) spreading rates. while the infected population size (n max = 10,000) remains the same, a reduction in spreading rate from g = 0.2 (blue curve) to g = 0.1 (red curve) "flattens the curve" over a time horizon of 150 days seasonal hazards are reducing or at low levels; it seems less likely that natural multi-hazard scenarios will concur with covid-19, although the protracted nature of the latter and possibility of stochastic hazards (e.g. earthquakes and outof-peak season floods) means this is still possible.in the case of bangladesh, infection and cumulative fatality rates are currently steeply increasing. some mitigation measures have been in effect; however, the effectiveness of these is currently unclear. cumulative fatality projections vary widely; our results suggest sustained 70% average effectiveness (in the absence of other concurrent disasters or major changes in internal variables) could keep fatalities below 10,000, but weaker mitigation strategies forecast > 500,000 deaths. regardless of the mitigation scenarios considered here, sharp increases in infections and deaths are predicted to overlap with the forthcoming tropical cyclone and heatwave peak hazard seasons and may overlap with peaks in monsoonal flood hazard. these aspects are further considered in sect. 6.in the case of china, renewed 'secondary spikes' in infections in late march and early april enhance uncertainty in epidemiologic projections. if the average post-peak infection and fatality rate reductions have plateaued, our model suggests ~ 4500 deaths (chn_3.9_85). however, if mitigative restrictions are relaxed, and if infection resurgences are sustained and stimulate cascading infections, it is conceivable (albeit unlikely) that cumulative fatalities could exceed 70,000 or more (e.g. chn_3.9_85_67). in the latter scenario, infection and fatality rates could increase concurrently with increasing flood, heatwave, and hurricane and tropical cyclone hazards, which cause more than 1000 fatalities per year in china on average (han et al. 2016) . china also contains regions with high earthquake hazard. to reduce risks of concurrent and cascading multi-hazards, our analysis indicates that strong and sustained mitigation to reduce covid-19 infection rates are required.the covid-19 pandemic is active and continuously evolving. the time interval over which our forecast models are valid is shorter than the expected duration of this crisis. for example, capturing rapid movement of hot spots through china, italy, spain, turkey, and the united states due to continuously evolving population dynamics and government measures adds an additional layer of complexity, reducing the predictive power of forecasts over longer time periods. in the absence of a vaccine, it is conceivable that the covid-19 pandemic might last for multiple months or years and its resurgence may occur in waves as in any other previous major pandemic (e.g. cohn 2008) . adapting resurgence histories of previous covid-19 like pandemics (e.g. human corona virus hcov-oc43) for modelling transmission dynamics, kissler et al. (2020) suggest that the current pandemic or its waves may last through 2024. this effectively translates into an increase in compound risks associated with covid-19 pandemic, and therefore, while our preliminary analysis of concurrent compound hazards is useful for the time interval considered, it does not preclude the possibility for future multi-hazard scenarios concurrent with covid-19 to occur beyond the temporal extent of our analysis.on 19 march 2020 at midnight, the croatian government introduced strict measures to counter the spread of covid-19 virus as the number of confirmed cases rose to 105 (dong et al. 2020 ). these included, closing of borders, shutting down all non-essential activities such as public events and gatherings and service facilities, and requiring employers to facilitate working-from-home arrangements (https ://balka ns.aljaz eera.net/vijes ti/u-hrvat skoj-na-snagu -stupi le-strog e-mjere -zabra njen-prela zak-grani ca). these strict measures were enforced to promote social-distancing to reduce covid-19 communal infection risks.concurrent with the countrywide partial lockdown, a moment magnitude (mw) 5.3 earthquake occurred in the northern suburbs of zagreb, the capital of croatia with a population of over 800,000. prior to this earthquake, zagreb has been devastated by several moderate earthquakes, the latest of which occurred in 1880 with a magnitude of 6.3 (kozk and ermk 2010) that caused damage to about 500 buildings within a ~ 25 km radius from the epicentre. past experiences have shaped earthquake preparedness in zagreb and approximately 80% of buildings are built to standards consistent with the earthquake building design codes. however, the mw 5.3 event and its aftershocks in march 2020 caused significant damage and disruption in the city. there was one fatality and at least 27 people suffered injuries. electricity, water, and heating were lost in some parts of the city and about 250 houses sustained significant damage. an estimated 59 people required temporary shelters due to loss of dwellings (https ://abcne ws.go.com/healt h/wires tory/after shock s-rattl e-croat ian-capit al-day-stron g-quake -69744 525).the croatian earthquake is not an extreme natural disaster scenario. however, it provides a useful perspective of compound risks. for example, in the immediate aftermath of a natural disaster, measures imposed to ensure socialdistancing may collapse temporarily. due to the moderate size of the event and relatively localized damage zone, the croatian government managed to clamp down on partial lockdown measures within about a day by issuing new directives, whereby the natural human behaviour of congregating in numbers and comforting each other in the aftermath of such an event was disrupted. nonetheless, it is evident that the risk of covid-19 transmission increased in a short-time window immediately following the zagreb earthquake.the daily new infectee rate (fig. 3) shows an apparent increase following the zagreb earthquake on 22 march 2020 within the covid-19 incubation time range. further analysis is needed to ascertain the exact cause of this apparent signal although it is not unreasonable to presume that temporary disruption of social-distancing measures not only in zagreb but also in other parts of the country in the immediate aftermath of the earthquake might have played a role. therefore, the importance of acting rapidly and decisively by governing bodies in the immediate aftermath of a natural disaster is highlighted by the zagreb earthquake. identifying probable natural disasters and advance preparation might enable enforcing such actions more efficiently and systematically, reducing risks posed by the covid-19 virus.tch originated as a severe meteorologic event in the pacific ocean and made landfall in solomon islands, vanuatu, fiji, and tonga between 1 april 2020 and 8 april 2020 (https :// publi c.wmo.int/en/media /news/tropi cal-cyclo ne-harol d-chall enges -disas ter-and-publi c-healt h-manag ement ), disrupting covid-19 early intervention made by these communities. it first hit the solomon islands as a category 2 event and rapidly transitioned into a category 5 event by the time it reached vanuatu, sustaining high winds of 200 km/h. moving further southeast, it traversed fiji and tonga as a category 4 tropical cyclone.initial assessments indicate that 59,000 people were affected in solomon islands and 27 people are missing at sea to date. in vanuatu, the northern province sanma sustained severe damage, where 90% of the population lost their homes and about 50% schools and 25% health centres were damaged. initial aerial investigations conducted by the national disaster management office of vanuatu indicate that 159,474 people have been affected with possible 3 deaths (https ://ndmo.gov.vu/tropi cal-cyclo ne-harol d). the damage to houses, evacuation centres, gardens, water systems, health facilities, and schools vary between 50 and 90% across seven different provinces (https ://ndmo.gov.vu/ tropi cal-cyclo ne-harol d/categ ory/100-01-ndmo-situa tionrepor ts#). in fiji, more than 1500 people have been moved to evacuation centres. the coastal flooding early warning system recently installed under the coastal inundation forecasting demonstration project in fiji recorded storm surge heights between 6.5 m and 8.5 m during the passage of tch, which suggests that damage to life and property might be higher than known at present. damage in tonga is less documented but expected to be widespread with damage to homes, water supply, and food crops. tch provides an example of how disaster response and recovery may impact covid-19 measures. for example, vanuatu has reduced in-country travel restrictions to facilitate humanitarian and relief operations. however, reduced capacity of communication services, disruptions infrastructure lifelines and supply chains, and limited resources are likely to compromise relief efforts and may increase societal vulnerability to covid-19. fortunately, these islands have recorded a very low number of covid-19 confirmed cases to date, and it is yet to be seen if tch has perturbed this trend.anak krakatoa garnered much attention after its southwestern flank collapsed in an eruption in december 2018 and generated a tsunami that killed 437 and injured thousands along western java and southern sumatra (ye et al. 2020) . the volcano started a new eruption cycle on 10 april 2020 concurrent with the covid-19 pandemic. this has remained an active situation to date with constant alerts being disseminated to the public (https ://magma .esdm. go.id/v1/vona?page=1) with a volcano observatory notice for aviation (vona) alert level assigned as orange (3/4): "volcano is exhibiting heightened unrest with increased likelihood of eruption with column height below 6000 m above sea level". to our knowledge, no damage has been reported from this latest eruption cycle. a flank collapse analogous with the december 2018 is very unlikely as the volcano has greatly reduced in aerial extent as a result of that event. however, this highlights in general the high volcanic hazard throughout indonesia, and the risk of volcanic activity to cause fatalities and population displacements that could impact on current covid-19 mitigation strategies. indonesia is still in early stage of the pandemic with only 4839 confirmed cases and 459 deaths; however, the mortality rate of 9.5% is higher than global average of 6.4% on 14 april 2020.on 12 and 13 april, cold fronts crossed the southeast of the united states bringing widespread rainfall and embedded mesoscale convective systems (mcss) with associated strong winds and tornadoes. the mcss within the larger weather system crossed several states, but mississippi, georgia and south carolina were the worst impacted. the severe weather killed at least 30 people (https ://www.nytim es.com/2020/04/13/us/torna do-storm -south .html) across four states and destroyed many more peoples' homes.the typical immediate emergency response during a tornado outbreak is centred around finding shelter and this is practised by the community in the central and southeast us which has been well drilled in this process through past experience of severe weather. there is obvious potential for social distancing to be compromised where large tornado shelters are used, but accurate weather forecasts allowed for planning so that individual families within shelters were instructed to stand apart. concerns about managing disaster response during the covid-19 pandemic prompted the american meteorological society to draw up a list of guidelines for sheltering from tornadoes during the covid-19 pandemic (https ://www.amets oc.org/index .cfm/ams/about -ams/ams-state ments /state ments -of-the-ams-in-force /torna do-shelt ering -guide lines -durin g-the-covid -19-pande mic/). much of the advice is consistent with standard procedures for severe weather, but additionally people should be sure ahead of time that specific tornado shelters are open.the us was in the midst of a steep rise in covid-19 cases and fatalities at the time of this tornado outbreak. it is presently unclear whether this severe weather has compounded the effects of the covid-19 pandemic in the southeast us.to qualitatively understand the effect of an external perturbation such as a natural hazard on the daily covid-19 infectee rate, we created a simple epidemic model assuming that the cumulative growth of infectees over time follows a logistic differential function [eq.(1)]. for a holistic analysis, this simple model is appropriate as the distribution of confirmed cumulative covid-19 cases in countries that have implemented strict counter measures (e.g. china, south korea, and australia) can be approximately explained by this model. the exponential growth of covid-19 cases observed in other countries is an indication of early stage exposure to the disease and that patient distribution is not sustainable over a longer time horizon due to the finiteness of populations and counter measures taken by governments. therefore, the cumulative distribution of covid-19 cases can be expected to converge to a model similar to that described by some variation of eq. (1).where n is the cumulative number of infectees at any given time, t is time, n max is the expected maximum number of infectees, and g is the fractional growth of cumulative infectees. figure 4 compares data from china and the model based on eq. (1) with g = 0.3, n max = 83,213 and a time horizon of 83 days, where an approximate value for g is selected based on visual inspection of the fit between data and the model.note that the first patient in china was potentially discovered on 10 december 2019 and data for the period from that day to 22 january 2020 (start date given in the figure) is not reliably recorded (https ://www.wsj.com/artic les/how-it-all-start ed-china s-early -coron aviru s-misst eps-11583 50893 2). rather than analysing cumulative infectee numbers, we focus on the effect on the "flattened" daily new infectee rate following an external perturbation (e.g. a natural disaster) as it is the behaviour of this curve that is being used to design covid-19 counter measures ("curve flattening" shown in fig. 4 bottom panel) . we make several assumptions to construct our simple models:(1) in the immediate aftermath of an extreme natural disaster, it is reasonable to assume that measures taken to contain the spread of covid-19 collapse in the area directly affected by the event and the control over spreading rate is lost, resulting a spike in infectees. in this case, we assume that the spreading rate increases to the background value that existed prior to imposing "curve flattening" measures.(2) governments re-establish social-distancing measures fully over a finite time horizon (p days ) following the external perturbation, which means that the flattened spreading rate that existed prior to the external perturbation will take effect beyond p days . in the interim period (i.e. within p days ), it is highly likely that governments will take partial measures that will reduce the spreading rate as was seen for the earthquake in croatia. also, compliance of citizens to these partial measures can be expected although it may depend on the severity of the event and the socio-political profiles of countries. thus, we model this effect by linearly reducing the spreading rate from the background value to the flattened value in the interim period. we test several reasonable time horizons to understand their effect on the flattened daily new infectee rate curve. depending on the nature of the external perturbation, different scenarios may play out. for instance, in the event of a flood, a population may get displaced and scattered from days to months (sastry 2009) or it may be that populations get displaced but not scattered as in the case of an earthquake (akbari et al 2004; asokan and vanitha 2017) . these different scenarios will have an effect on the spreading rate. describing the spreading rate quantitatively for different scenarios is not the focus of our modelling. instead, we model the general behaviour of the "flattened curve" in the event of an external perturbation subjected to above (1).(3) the covid-19 incubation time period (the time between exposure to the virus and emergence of symptoms) is five days, consistent with the median incubation time published by who (https ://www.who.int/ news-room/q-a-detai l/q-a-coron aviru ses). this means that no new cases will be found within the first five days following an event. this simplifies the "ground truth" somewhat, as according to who, incubation time range varies between one and fourteen days.in our models, we set nmax = 10,000, a background spreading rate (g b ) of 0.2, a flattened spreading rate (g f ) of 0.1, and a time horizon of 150 days. we test the perturbation to the flattened curve with p days = 1, 7, 14, 21, and 28 days. figure 5 shows the results of modelling the flattened daily new infectee rate after introducing a concurrent event with p days = 1, 7, 14, 21, and 28 days. for each p days , we tested two scenarios, where we introduce external perturbations at 72 (left panels) and 112 days (right panels) from the start date of the flatten curve. these two time points are located symmetrically on either side of the peak of the flattened curve (day 92), and thus, provide qualitative insights into demands on the health services depending on the event occurrence relative to the peak.our results provide two main insights: (1) a concurrent event occurring prior to reaching the peak of the flattened curve increases the new infectee rate more in the aftermath of a concurrent event than if it were to occur at a post-peak time. this translates into increased demand on health services in the pre-peak period than in the post-peak period. in some instances, pre-peak concurrent events increase curveflattened peak infection rates to levels approaching unmitigated peaks. (2) the number of days a government takes to re-establish covid-19 spreading control measures (p days ) is a critical factor that determines the level of demand placed on health services. that is, the longer it takes for a government to re-establish control measures, the higher the demand on the health services particularly in the pre-peak period.these results based on our simple model emphasize two main policy recommendations that governments could consider. first, measures must be enforced as early as possible to flatten the daily new infectee rate curve to minimize risks of temporally-overlapping covid-19 infection rate increases with concurrent disasters. this reduction of risk of a natural disaster occurring in the pre-peak period could reduce demand on health services. second, contingency plans must be devised with a focus on re-establishing covid-19 counter measures as fast as possible in the wake of an event. this would involve identifying possible natural disasters, their magnitude, timing (for example seasonal events), and regional dependencies.following our example, more sophisticated models can be built to incorporate infectious disease dynamics in the wake of a concurrent event. for example, we have only considered the infected component in this instance, whereas a standard epidemiological compartmental model will incorporate susceptible and recovered components in addition to the infected component (kermack and mckendrick 1927) enabling the mapping of dynamic interactions between different population groups. prediction capabilities can be further improved with even more complex models, where the underlying assumption of a well-mixed population is relaxed, and structured populations are used to reflect variable dynamics among different groups of population (e.g. inaba and nishiura 2008) . for real time applications, however, more work will be needed to reduce uncertainties in parameters that capture the spatiotemporal characteristics of spreading of a disease (e.g. r 0 , ridenhour et al. 2014 ).the combined epidemiological covid-19 forecasts and seasonal hazard risk plots in fig. 1 illustrate the different extreme weather hazards that countries will likely need to manage during different stages of the pandemic. while we have not modelled stochastic hazards such as earthquakes, they contribute a non-negligible to high hazard with regional variability for all the countries considered. volcanic hazard is highly regionalized and not further discussed, but is highly relevant in some locations.in australia, summer 2019/20 saw substantial natural hazards including major heatwaves that brought record high temperatures to populated areas including canberra and western sydney, severe bushfires that swept through an unprecedented area of the continent (boer et al. 2020) and continuing drought that has devastated farming areas, diminished water supplies and primed the australian forests for bushfire (king et al. 2020 ). australia's "black summer" also the daily new infectee rate with a concurrent event (e.g. a natural disaster). red and blue curves are same as those given in fig. 4 (bottom panel) and the grey dash-dot curve is the flattened curve perturbed by a concurrent event. the vertical dashed black line is the event day. the left panel shows the effect on the flattened curve for an event occurrence in the pre-peak period, whereas the right panel is for an event occurrence in the post-peak period. each row represents a given p day , the number of days a government takes to fully re-establish covid-19 counter measures following the concurrent event. pre-peak events increase the daily new infectee rate more than post-peak events. also, the longer the governments take to reestablish strict covid-19 counter measures, the higher the daily new infectee rate  saw millions of people experience very poor air quality for several days at a time as smoke from the fires blanketed sydney, canberra and melbourne on several occasions. the bushfires, which resulted in 33 fatalities, led to mass evacuations from vulnerable areas and people sheltering on crowded beaches in mallacoota, victoria amongst other places.the "black summer" came only months before the covid-19 pandemic began and as australia approaches winter the risks of severe weather related to heatwaves, bushfires, tropical cyclones and hailstorms is reduced. while there are still natural hazard risks in australian winter, notably related to floods and extratropical cyclones, the overall rate of meteorological hazards is lower than in summer. in that sense australia is fortunate to have not experienced major natural hazards coincident with the covid-9 pandemic, and it is less likely to do so than northern hemisphere countries over the coming months. note, that there are non-natural hazards that could also occur during winter that could exacerbate the effects of covid-19 in australia such as seasonal flu.in the us, we have already highlighted the tornado outbreak of 12 and 13 april as occurring during the covid-19 pandemic. the us experiences its seasonal peak in tornado probability in may, so there are likely to be further severe storms around this time. during boreal summer, the us often experiences other natural hazards including heatwaves and hurricanes. while these extremes both have devastating impacts their interaction with the ongoing covid-19 pandemic will likely differ. heatwaves tend to exacerbate preexisting health conditions. this would place an additional burden on a healthcare system that may also be stretched due to covid-19. in contrast, hurricanes tend to damage infrastructure, and, like tornadoes, people evacuate and shelter, often travelling interstate or sheltering with many other people in large buildings. such a response to a hurricane in summer 2020 would not abide by social distancing protocols and could aid the spread of the virus. alternate plans should be considered. both heatwaves and hurricanes affect larger areas than tornadoes and have the potential to strain emergency response systems already managing the covid-19 pandemic.south asian countries with some of the highest population densities (https ://neo.sci.gsfc.nasa.gov/view.php?datas etid=sedac _pop) are exposed to compound risks from covid-19 pandemic and extreme weather events such as severe floods as the region enters the wet season from may to october. for instance, 1110 people died and nearly 14 million were affected in the floods of june 2007 in bangladesh (dewan 2015) . in addition, northern pakistan and india, nepal, and bhutan are located along the himalayan main frontal thrust capable of producing large mw > 7.0 earthquakes (lav et al. 2005) . the devastation caused by the 2015 mw 7.8 gorkha earthquake that occurred in nepal exemplifies the exposure of this region to extreme geologic hazards. this particular event killed 8,790 people, injured 22,304 and affected another 8 million people and damaged 755,549 buildings (gautam 2017) . it is evident from these statistics that solitary extreme natural hazards in this region have the potential to affect large numbers of people and displace them. in particular, displacement in large numbers during severe natural events is mainly attributable to the poor quality of dwellings and infrastructure. this in turn is detrimental to measures enforced to counter the spread of covid-19, foremost of which is social distancing. in the event of natural hazards, these measures are highly likely to disintegrate completely, substantially increasing the risk of covid-19 infections.while we have qualitatively aggregated these hazards on an domestic scale, the countries considered herein (and many other countries with high natural disaster risk including japan, the philippines, iran, turkey, and many central america and pacific island nations) have strong regional variations in hazard, exposure, and vulnerability that are superimposed on spatiotemporal variabilities in covid-19 risks. it is well beyond the scope of this article to consider these regional variations. however, we provide one example, from the u.s. state of texas (fig. 6) . currently texas has implemented two of four potential social distancing measures but has a climbing rate of covid-19 hospitalizations and deaths that are collectively increasing demand on resources (fig. 6 ). projected peaks in fatality rate and hospital demand overlap with the seasonal peak in tornado hazard (long et al. 2018) . upper bounds (95% confidence) on projected icu resource capacity currently approach icu bed availability; if tornadoes increase icu demand (by increasing critical care injuries associated with the tornado and/or covid-19 infectees) or reduce capacity (by power outages and infrastructure damage) then it is conceivable that resource limits could be approached.in 2020 it is estimated that 167 million people across 55 countries will require humanitarian assistance (ocha 2019). with ongoing global economic uncertainty (imf 2020), it is unclear what impact the covid-19 pandemic will have on humanitarian financing and resource mobilization. in the event that a crisis exceeds the coping capacity of a host country, a funding or resourcing gap resulting from covid-19 would severely impair the government's ability to deliver critical humanitarian aid and to scale-up response efforts to meet the needs of the affected population.for many countries, a hazard response beyond the coping capacity of the government will trigger a level 3 (l3) inter-agency standing committee (iasc) humanitarian system-wide scale-up (iasc 2018) involving one or more clusters/ sectors (i.e. water sanitation and hygiene (wash), health, protection, logistics, shelter) to coordinate response efforts. responding to a l3 multi-hazard situation during covid-19 will require additional resources and rely more heavily on integrated programming and inter-sectorial coordination incorporating competing priorities from different clusters/ sectors.where countries have an existing humanitarian response plan (hrp), or contingency planning simulations have been carried out such as the 2019 "bangladesh contingency plan for earthquake response in major urban centres" (hctt 2019), response plans will need to be revised, to account for the increased risk of disease transmission and additional limitations and access considerations imposed by covid-19 during response and recovery operations.where an iasc system-wide l3 emergency response is triggered, such as a major earthquake on a similar scale to the 2015 gorkha earthquake, global humanitarian response mechanisms may be limited in their ability to rapidly mobilize international surge capacity (including humanitarian staff and volunteers) and resources typically relied on for large-scale humanitarian response. international military deployments may also be limited due to an increasing focus on domestic priorities. as a result, response efforts will likely need to become much more localized, with a focus on improving remote coordination and support for local responders. movement restrictions will make it increasingly difficult for remote and isolated populations to seek medical services and assistance (ocha 2020) and specialized services such as psychosocial support will increasingly need to be delivered through remote systems, as already observed during the recent croatia earthquake response (ifrc, 2020). multi-hazard risk profiles in these circumstances will need to include an array of often compounding vulnerabilities, such as the risk to elderly populations and the elevated risk of sexual and gender-based violence.logistics supply chains have already been severely compromised by covid-19, with a disruption of critical supply chains due to border closures, import/export restrictions, and access restrictions (ocha 2020). this will influence the way humanitarian programming can be implemented. stimulation of local markets (where they still exist) through cash and voucher assistance (cva) programming, improved engagement with the private sector, and utilization of local industry and resources and will likely play an increasing role in strategies for recovery. the concurrency of increased covid-19 and tornado hazards define heightened risk of a multi-hazard scenario that could greatly increase demand on hospital resources and increase covid-19 exposure risks in instances where existing tornado evacuation procedures such as communal clustering into shelters are undertaken a multi-hazard situation in an already compounded and protracted or 'complex' emergency is of particular concern. these include densely populated camp-like situations with a high risk of natural hazard, such as the bangladesh rohingya refugee response. as of december 2019, some 810,000 rohingya refugees live in 34 congested camps at high risk of flooding, landslides and seasonal cyclones, and are reliant on humanitarian aid to meet basic needs (ocha 2019). the added complication of covid-19 containment measures into this already protracted crisis will put populations at significant risk of loss of life and will cause unprecedented complexity for humanitarian response efforts in the event of a natural hazard. dense settlements, with a high population density will need to carefully consider social and physical distancing measures in humanitarian programming. this will limit the types of assistance (emergency centres, camps, emergency shelter, cash distributions, rental assistance, etc.) that can be delivered and the implementation modalities that can be used without increasing risk of transmission, and thereby compromising efforts to contain covid-19.it is essential that humanitarian response remains proportionate, appropriate and relevant to the emergency, while still being timely and effective (sphere 2020) . humanitarian response should avoid exposing populations to further harm, and it is critical that preparedness plans pre-emptively assess and evaluate the compounding risks posed by covid-19 in multi-hazard situations. a tiered resilience approach that concurrently integrates resilience indices, visualization tools, and modelling methods from multiple agencies, organizations, and researchers could assist in reconciling analytical complexity with stakeholder (humanitarian organizations and beneficiaries) needs and resources available for creating actionable recommendations to enhance resilience (linkov et al. 2018) .our analysis suggests that without good planning there is an increased risk of compounding impacts originating from natural hazard event(s) during the covid-19 pandemic. this could include both the effects of the natural disaster being worse than they would otherwise be, and additional spread of covid-19. here we make several recommendations we believe could alleviate some of the worst effects of natural hazards during the pandemic:the compounding effect of seasonal natural hazards (e.g. floods, cyclones) on the covid-19 pandemic is largely a foreseeable problem and plans developed ahead of time could prevent some of the worst potential impacts from occurring. these plans can be based on modelling similar to that shown in this paper and we encourage emergency management agencies to consider use of these hybrid models to build response plans. covid-19 epidemiological models may be highly sensitive to natural disasters, and thus inclusion of seasonal and / or stochastic events might better enable worst-case scenarios to be considered. this may be particularly important considering (a) the effect on infectee rate of the timing of a concurrent event relative to the peak of the infectee rate curve as demonstrated in this study (fig. 5) ; (b) the uncertainty in intensity and duration with which covid-19 counter measures must be implemented for them to be effective.where possible, use of prediction models may help agencies ramp up emergency planning procedures days and weeks before meteorological extremes occur. for example, seasonal prediction allows advance planning for the possibility of specific weather extremes and this should be undertaken to prevent some of the worst impacts of such events. there is already an indication that the 2020 atlantic hurricane season will be unusually active (e.g. https ://engr.sourc e.colos tate. edu/csu-resea rcher s-predi cting -activ e-2020-atlan tic-hurri cane-seaso n/), so planning for major land-falling hurricanes in the us over heavily populated cities during the covid-19 pandemic could be beneficial. in particular, developing alternate response plans and communicating these well in advance should prepare people for the most suitable actions to take that keep them safe from the hazard while also adhering to social distancing, could help in preventing a major disaster. even on the timescale of numerical weather prediction, the response to the 12-13 april tornado outbreak demonstrates that several days may be enough to prepare for well-forecast small-scale extreme weather events.it is likely that hazard mitigation measures for worst-case scenarios of expected natural disasters, seasonal or stochastic, are already in place for many countries and regions (e.g. hurricanes in the us, floods in bangladesh, earthquakes in nepal). however, these plans do not account for the existing covid-19 crisis that requires social-distancing as the primary counter measure. thus, incorporating effects of natural hazards in epidemiological models can guide modifications required in existing natural hazard mitigation plans. the compound risks associated with stochastic natural disasters (e.g. earthquake, volcanic eruptions) can potentially be mitigated by modifying existing hazard mitigation plans. specific suggestions include establishing strategies for decongestion of densely populated spontaneous camps and settlements, introducing clear physical distancing protocols for distribution of essential assistance, increasing space allocations for vulnerable populations in shelters to reduce the risk of covid-19 transmission, and the use of more emergency shelter locations with fewer people so that some semblance of social distancing may be achieved even in the aftermath of a hurricane or earthquake. large-scale availability of personal protective equipment (ppe) to emergency responders would also help prevent the spread of infection.given the disproportionate impacts of many prior pandemic and natural hazards on the developing world, plans to equip developing countries and ngos in preparing for and responding to natural hazards during the covid-19 pandemic would help limit the impacts of such disasters. as our simple epidemiology models show, spikes in daily new infectee rates are a likely scenario in the wake of a natural disaster. the magnitude and duration of these spikes could in principle be controlled by policy decisions (described above). thus, disaster planning strategies and resourcing, such as the introduction of remote coordination platforms, the localisation of response efforts and resources, availability of evacuation centres with capacity for social distancing, potential mobility of humanitarian actors, volunteers and medical staff that could respond to natural disasters in covid-affected regions, and the availability of personal protective equipment and medical equipment (e.g. respirators) must be designed in combination with above (ii). countering challenging conditions associated with natural hazards (limited road access, lack of communication etc.) must be considered in upholding covid-19 social-distancing measures.we offer these recommendations in the hope that they may be used to prevent some of the worst-impact scenarios of coincident natural hazard occurrences with the ongoing covid-19 outbreak. these recommendations support the independently-derived strategic disaster risk reduction recommendations proposed by djalante et al. (2020) : (i) strengthen knowledge and science provision in understanding disaster and health-related emergency risks, (ii) mobilize existing disaster risk governance structure to manage disaster risk and potential health-emergencies, (iii) utilize existing disaster coordination mechanisms at regional level to inform epidemic response, (iv) understand covid-19 economic implications and resilience, (v) prepare inclusive early recovery plans, and (vi) strengthen community-level preparedness and response. urgent sharing of scientific information (models, methods), particularly with developing countries, is important because many of these countries may lack capacity to generate knowledge rapidly to improve resilience against foreseeable compound risks.our recommendations are framed around the ideas of building resilience to natural hazard risks such that their impacts are reduced in the era of covid-19. we note that the concept of increasing resilience to mitigate impacts of extreme events is not novel (bostik et al. 2018; linkov et al. 2018) ; however, we hope that our suggested actions will build on those provided previously and will be used to reduce risks from natural hazards during the covid-19 outbreak. our use of plausible scenarios could stimulate production of resilience analyses that incorporate uncertainty and complex dynamics of physical and human/social factors across multiple spatial and temporal scales (e.g. bostik et al. 2018) .the entire world has almost stopped theoretically in the month of march 2020. this is one of the most unexpected and unbelievable situation in world's history. a virus, starting its journey from wuhan city of china in december 2019, has now reached almost all major cities and has created colonies very rapidly. as per world health organization (who), the first case of covid19 was identified on 8th december 2019 [1] . initially the disease was misunderstood as some variation of influenza. scientists, researchers and doctors, after doing continuous analysis, then came up with information about this novel corona virus. though the drug is not yet in the market, the structural details of the virus are now known to us [2] . because of its similarities with the behavior of severe acute respiratory syndrome (sars) corona virus, this virus was named as severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2) and the disease was identified as coronavirus disease (covid19) by who [3] . seasonal diseases which have higher mortality rate usually belong to sars category. observing the high infection rate, on11th march 2020, who declared covid19 as pandemic [4] . in 2003, asian countries were badly affected by sars epidemic which originated in china. the worldwide death toll was 774, having a ratio of 1:10 of registered cases [5] . in 1957, asian flu virus claimed around thousand lives in india [6] . one of the severest global pandemic in the history of recent past was 1918 flu. this flu was first reported in a spanish newspaper, and it infiltrated india through bombay port. the disease was contagious. it claimed 400 million lives worldwide [7] . it is claimed that one third of the population was infected. different articles claimed china as the origin of the flu [8] [9] [10] . but death in china itself was very few, whereas india lost almost one fifth of its population [11] . the estimated death toll was 14 million [12] . the flu was so deadly, that it brought the population down for first time as well as the last time, till date in the history of india. but the virus disappeared almost suddenly after few months. it is assumed that like any other pathogen, this virus also rapidly mutated to a lesser lethal strain and then finally died out [5] .covid19 has many similarities with these 1918 flu and 2003 sars. all are viral and contagious infections, epidemic in nature, turning into pandemic within few weeks, transmitted through droplets and very easily transmissible from human to human. it is also suspected that coronavirus can be transmitted through air and it can survive in environment without any decrease in its efficiency for a long time and thus the chance of infection increases [13] . if coronavirus is transmissible and airborne, this is an alarming situation for india. normally during season change, indians suffer from different common ailments like cold and cough, nasal congestion, conjunctivitis etc. many of these diseases are infectious and transmissible. a large part of the population suffers from one or more of these issues commonly. along with those common epidemics, covid19 has to be taken care of. due to nor'westers during march/april the chances of fast spreading of covid19 is also high. many people are already infected, among which all are not having significant symptoms and hence not identified. finding ways to stop community transmission, case identification at initial stage and controlling the death rate is an emergency. even the cure will not be easy to save the world if the infection is not prevented. faster and easier worldwide transportation system has turned into a curse in case of viral epidemics. due to international travels, almost all the countries in the world have got infected by this transmissible virus within a very short duration simultaneously. covid19 has affected 209 countries and territories around the world as of 8th april 2020. from the information of the impact of 1918 pandemic in india, we have tried to understand the underlying facts. a large population who lived near and below poverty line got affected by the 1918 pandemic [14] . apparently, it seems that, the sanitation had a significant relation with the disease infection, spread and severity. but the high mortality rate in case of covid19 even in developed countries raises a question on this easy assumption. light from a different angle may have some answer to it.people from lower economic segment not only failed to maintain sanitation but also suffered from improper diet. lack of consumption of proper and healthy food weakened their immunity. before 1918, no vaccine other than for smallpox was available. no vaccine or antibacterial was invented to prevent the pandemic diseases. it is not very difficult to assume that the practice of vaccination among the poor people in india was also low. so, hygiene was not solely responsible for the devastating death toll of 1918. immunity also played a bigger role in it. in this article, we have tried to give some insight from available worldwide information, in order to understand the nature of this new coronavirus infection which is causing covid19. we have tried to inspect its dependencies on other known parameters. a measure of the possible effects of different parameters on the outbreak and infection growth has also been estimated in order to understand the risk in india. the scientists, from different parts of world, already have done researches and have published valuable information. all the important outcomes have been considered and examined before concluding our findings. a common drawback is associated with most of the reported works. they have discussed impact of single dimensions like temperature, vaccination or life cycle of virus. this has restricted the scope of understanding of the virus's overall activities and limited the chance of prediction and prevention. we have tried to overcome this limitation by replacing univariate analysis with multivariate approach. this article has considered different possible aspects to get a robust outcome.to keep the result as unbiased as possible, we have collected data of multiple cities and countries all over the world having different geographical locations and climatic conditions. we have conducted analysis of several relevant factors to look into the situation from all possible corners. possible dependency of the number of total infection and death has been examined against the environmental conditions taking different weather parameters as independent variables. for this purpose, data of 43 cities all over the world has been considered. these cities are significantly affected by sars-cov 2. we have collected the covid19 related data from who site and other data from particular websites for each individual type of parameter to minimize the biases. the duration considered to check dependency of weather parameters is from 1st to 27 th march, as because by 1 st of march, a large number of countries got significantly infected. the days have been limited to 27 th , as by 3 rd week of march majority of the countries applied social distancing and isolation. data beyond that time may have significant impact of isolation. isolation includes noise in the measure of infection and death, as it puts restriction in virus transmission due to lower availability of hosts. the weather information of all those locations have been collected from a single website [15] to keep it uniform even if the information includes any noise or bias. we also have taken a measure of the population to compare the infection rate. human to human infection depends on the population for transmission. other than these affecting parameters, another checking has been done on the impact due to the lockdown. how the duration of lockdown has been affecting the number of new infection, have also been examined to understand its importance. we have considered life expectancy also to inspect its impact on the number of infected cases and deaths. the life expectancy includes the impact of different parameters like average living standard, socioeconomic situation, health service qualities, natural calamities etc. a comparison with life expectancy refers to be have a relation with all those hidden parameters though the insights of each are not accessible. the data is collected from united nations development program reports [16] . as proposed in a paper [17] , vaccination may have great impact on death. in this article, the data of bacillus calmette-gurin (bcg) vaccination has been compared with present death rate of different countries. this observation has a significant impact in our final outcome. this data is collected from who and review articles [18] [19] [20] . the additional factors included in this study are the impact of lung cancer (lc), chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (copd) and lower respiratory infect (lri). these diseases have shown an impact on death rate in many countries which are badly affected by coronavirus. the required data are retried from online resources [21] .. cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.is the (which was not peer-reviewed) the copyright holder for this preprint .the total number of cases per million and total death per million are very much correlated as per our examination (=0.69, p= 6.2e-31) as of 12 th april 2020. because of the good correlation, any of these two parameters can be used for prediction analysis and the outcome will remain comparable. in this article we have used either of these parameters to understand the impact of all other parameters on covid19 and the results are compared later.we have divided our test result into different parts. in the first part we have discussed the impact of different weather parameters on the number of infected cases. we have not considered active cases because the number is ever changing with continuous addition of new cases, elimination of recovery numbers and deaths. initially the number of infected cases increased rapidly due to lack of awareness, availability of more hosts, free movement of hosts etc. and then gradually decreased for enforcement of quarantine, growing awareness like washing our hands regularly, social distancing etc. these qualitative parameters are not traceable but have significant impact on the number of new cases. different cities, selected in this article, have different geographical locations with widely varying atmospheric condition. if any of the considered weather parameters have a significant effect on infection transmission, then that will impact the transmission equally, irrespective of the location. the list of the cities with parameters details is given in the appendix. we have taken data per million to nullify the population bias. as the virus can be transmitted from human to human and can travel a small distance through droplets with airflow, higher population increases the availability of new hosts and hence the rate of infection. our target is to inspect the significance of that impact. this study is very important for india as its population is very high.the correlation between number of registered infected cases per million and the different weather parameters like temperature measures, humidity, dew points and precipitation have been found. we have used pearson's correlation to check the dependency of identified case numbers with the other parameters. we have used linear regression correlation to understand the linearity in the relationship, its statistical significance and to make a prediction. the results are presented in tabular form in table 1. . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.is the (which was not peer-reviewed) the copyright holder for this preprint .the p-value in each case is high enough to support null hypothesis and reject any considerable correlation. but we decided to inspect further. each parameter is examined separately to find any possible impact of covid19 deaths. this method offers exciting information about lowest temperature and highest temperature. we have considered death of 0.01% of population as the threshold. above this rate is considered as a matter of concern. as per central intelligence agency, present population of india is 1,326,093,247 [22] . the 0.01% of this population is about 1,32,609 which is a few thousand more than present death count all over world and not an ignorable count. the countries which experienced higher death rate (as well as death) had the minimum temperature below 0c as shown in figure 1 . the y-axes are changed to logarithmic scale to enhance the datapoint visibility. the linear trend lines are also shown in the figures for visual depiction of our understanding, that is with increase in minimum temperature the death rate and total death (hence infection rate) decreases. on contrary, for highest temperature of a place, a range of the temperatures has shown higher risk of death due to covid19. the countries with high death rate had highest day temperature in between 17 to 25 degree centigrade as per figure 2. we have given a try to understand the effect of lockdown. how this lockdown is impacting the community transmission is an important study. the entire world is depending on this policy in absence of vaccines. a detailed study of this factor will help us to predict the required lockdown duration for india. we have taken the number of new registered cases of different countries at the starting of lockdown and then after completion of each week till 9 th april 2020. we have considered the total change per week to reduce the noise of a temporary change in rate. a sudden change in the number for one or two days without any consistency does not portray any significant change of the overall situation of a country. the result is presented as graph in figure 3. only norway and italy have entered into the 5 th week of lockdown and both countries have shown a drop in new cases after 4 th week. but the steadiness is which is yet to be known, and it is highly required to conclude in a positive note. italy has completed 4 days of 5 th week on 9 th april 2020. the new cases registered in this duration are 14314, which is a little lower rate than the rate per day of 4 th week of lockdown. austria and australia have shown notable reduction after 3 weeks of lockdown. after 4 th day of the 4 th week, the average per day new cases is still very low in austria. australia has just completed 1 day of next week as on 10 th april. though per day rate is lower than last week but it is higher for new cases registered in each of the last 2 days. though no conclusion can be drawn about prevention of infection through lockdown, a prospective evidence of slowdown in the rate of spread of covid19 pandemic is available. for a decisive interpretation the impact of lockdown needs to be observed for few more weeks. cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.is the (which was not peer-reviewed) the copyright holder for this preprint . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.16.20066159 doi: medrxiv preprint life expectancy has no direct impact on infection growth and death due to that. but life expectancy is connected with different facts as discussed in introduction. along with those, depression, low average education and unemployment also have an impact on the life span of a community. to have a measure of all such hidden factors, we have checked the relation between life expectancy and death rate. here we have taken death per million to compare the change in it with respect to life expectancy. the graph is shown in figure 4 . the surprising observation is that, the high death rate is mostly associated with high life expectancy. inspection of causation is required to understand the actual impact of this finding. this is beyond the scope of our present study and can be considered during advance analysis. not all the affected countries are equally prone to covid19 as per the report of who. though our preceding analyses have failed to find any strong relationship between the discussed parameters and this pandemic, the presence of some factors influencing the rate of spread of this infection and death rate is obvious. a literature [17] showed some hope in its study of relation between covid19 and bacillus calmette-gurin (bgc) vaccination. we have repeated that study to find the relation with present scenario. the work was reported in the middle of march when many countries were not as affected as of today. the scenario in usa has changed dramatically in the last 3 weeks; india also has shown significant increase in the number of infected cases in the last 15 days. hence, the repetition of the analysis is necessary before concluding any decision. our study has shown that vaccination has good impact in most of the cases but there are many exceptions too. the comparison is presented in the figure 5. france, iran, ireland, portugal and sweden have significant death toll even after having good history of vaccination. on the contrary, australia and canada have quite low death rate without vaccination program. hence the hypothesis of any direct relation between bcg vaccination and covid19 has been rejected. a further, in depth analysis including more details of vaccination program, coverage of the population, specially in the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.is the (which was not peer-reviewed) the copyright holder for this preprint .below poverty level population, is required to find the exact relation. a low level dependency of death rate on bcg vaccination is visible in the graph which is supported by statistical analysis of correlation resulting in  = 0.382 and p-value = 0.054. covid19 is a severe acute respiratory syndrome (sars) disease. it attacks human lungs, creates trouble in breathing and gradually becomes deadly to claim lives. to understand its relation with other lungs disease, a study has been conducted. top 10 diseases of each country are examined to see the burden of other lung diseases. after preliminary scrutiny, we decided to consider lung cancer (lc), chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (copd) and lower respiratory infect (lri). data cleaning and preprocessing was done before analysis. the rank of these diseases which are among the top 10 and primarily responsible for death in a country has been considered for further analysis. if a disease is not listed in a country's top 10 diseases, a numerical value 0 has been considered. the correlation and p-value of these 3 diseases with death rate are  = 0.535, p-value = 0.06. the p-value depicts a higher tendency towards null hypothesis though the correlation is average. the relation lc alone is better with death rate. with a  = 0.477, p-value = 0.013 lc demands a command over death rate due to covid19. this finding does not offer any way of prevention of the pandemic but gives an idea about the risk of a country.none of the above discussed parameters has significant effect covid19 except lungs cancer. though few have shown impact in increase in number of cases (or deaths) in some cities, nothing convincing has been found. it seems like the disease gets transmitted with almost equal potential in different atmosphere. impact of lockdown is also not considerably good to get any definite suggestion. hence the question remains unsolved. how india is going to response to this pandemic? negative minimum temperature, a specific range of maximum temperature, lack of bcg vaccination and tendency of other lungs diseases have shown some positive impact in increasing the number of covid19 cases and death. we have combined all these four parameters to see their combined effect on death rate. before statistical analysis, we have done preprocessing of each parameter to create four distinguished features. the temperature data are analogous in nature having no significant impact in case of a minute change. using the already acquired knowledge from the previous analysis, we have classified the temperature into two different classes. in case of minimum temperature, values equal to or below 0c are considered as one class which has strong negative impact on death and hence represented by 10. rest of the temperature values which have less impact or no impact on death are considered as 1. similarly, maximum temperatures between 17 to 25c are converted to 10 and rest are to 1. disease scores are divided into 3 classes -10 to 6, 5 to 1 and 0. score greater than 5, represents disease rank within top 5. for these ranks a disease is represented by 10. scores from 5 to 0 means the disease is ranked between 6 to 10 and rank below 5 is presented by 5. when a disease is not listed in top 10 diseases of the corresponding country, it has been represented by 0. this data preprocessing steps are important for better insight. vaccination is represented by number of the years the program is continued in a country since 1980 as mentioned before.after creating a clean dataset with these four features, statistical analysis was done to check if any useful correlation is present. this analysis offers a prominent correlation,  = 0.634 with high acceptance, p = 0.024. the features are plotted in figure 7 along with increasing death rate. in the figure, singapore, australia and france have shown exception in vaccination impact. the probable reason can be the temperature. both singapore and australia are hot countries. australia is not prone to any lungs disease and singapore has low tendency of lc. on the other hand, france has low temperature and high impact of lc in country's death rate. hence, a significant impact of these parameters can be assumed, and this needs further research for definite conclusion. in april, temperature remains significantly high in india (non-hill zones). in most of the areas, specially in the cities which are reporting high rate of cases and death, the lowest temperature remains higher than 15c and maximum temperature goes well above 30c. india also have different vaccination program for years and bcg vaccination is done for almost 90% of the population. the negative factor is that the lung diseases are very common in india. copd (rank 2), lri (rank 5) and tuberculosis (rank 6) are major causes of death here, though lc is not that common like other countries which are badly affected by covid19 pandemic. this information and data dependent statistical analysis is not self-sufficient to understand the nature of coronavirus. along with this geographic, demographic and meteorological analysis, information from other branches of science like virology, biotechnology must be considered. an important finding about such pandemic is their sudden disappearance after few months. it happened every time in the world's history. not considering the expected life of sars-cov2 with respect to environmental conditions and continuous mutation will be impractical. the faster the virus will selflimit itself, the earlier the rate of infection will go down.india has imposed quarantine through locked down for 21 days starting from 23 rd of march 2020. in last 15 days the number of cases as well as death has increased significantly. the lockdown do restrict the community transmission but the rate is increasing may be because of detection of already infected cases. fast identification of old cases is required to access the effect of isolation on infection transmission rate. the mortality and morbidity ratio may be affected by the immune system of a population and will vary with different life style factors starting from food habits, common diseases, vaccination programs etc. in the high altitude areas (mainly the himalayan region) with low temperature throughout the year, the risk is higher as per our analysis. february, march are not tourism season of these himalayan region of india because of chilling cold, road blockage due to snowfall and for academic session ending with examinations. probably due to little tourist flow, these regions are still not reporting cases of covid19. once the severity of pandemic will fall and the country will start resuming its normal life, the free movement of tourists can be a threat for those hilly areas and it could ignite a reappearance of the disease in cities too through the returned tourists. a proper protection plan and . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.is the (which was not peer-reviewed) the copyright holder for this preprint . restricted movement for reasonably longer time after the pandemic is required to keep the citizens safe.to summarize the risk of india with more accuracy, we have to consider the socioeconomic condition too. a good vaccination program, history of having seasonal endemics ensures better immunity against similar diseases. sars-cov-2 is a new virus and hence the old antibodies cannot completely prevent it. but whether any antibody has any significant impact on its growth or not is under research. cyclicity is ubiquitous for acute infectious diseases [23] . each disease is unique on its own. the sars diseases occupy the span of two months, march and april, of indian epidemic calendar. the reason is that the seasonal variation has significant impact on transmission of infectious diseases. this is known as seasonal forcing. if the vaccine of tuberculosis is resistive for covid19, then the already present antibodies in the blood will reduce the severity of the disease and death rate in india.the first pneumonia case of unknown cause was found close to a seafood market in wuhan, the capital city of hubei province, china, on december 8, 2019. several clusters of patients with similar pneumonia were reported through late december 2019. the pneumonia was later identified to be caused by a new coronavirus (severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2, or sars-cov-2) (zhu et al. 2020), later named coronavirus disease 2019 by the world health organization (who). 1 while the seafood market was closed on january 1, 2020, a massive outflow of travelers during the chinese spring festival travel rush (chunyun) in mid-january 2 led to the rapid spread of covid-19 throughout china and to other countries. the first confirmed case outside wuhan in china was reported in shenzhen on january 19 ). as of april 5, over 1.2 million confirmed cases were reported in at least 200 countries or territories. 3 two fundamental strategies have been taken globally, one focused on mitigating but not necessarily stopping the virus spread and the other relying on more stringent measures to suppress and reverse the growth trajectories. while most western countries initially implemented the former strategy, more and more of them (including most european countries and the usa) have since shifted towards the more stringent suppression strategy, and some other countries such as china, singapore, and south korea have adopted the latter strategy from the beginning. in particular, china has rolled out one of the most stringent public health strategies. that strategy involves city lockdowns and mandatory quarantines to ban or restrict traffic since january 23, social distance-encouraging strategies since january 28, and a centralized treatment and isolation strategy since february 2.this study estimates how the number of daily newly confirmed covid-19 cases in a city is influenced by the number of new covid-19 cases in the same city, nearby cities, and wuhan during the preceding 2 weeks using the data on confirmed covid-19 case counts in china from january 19 to february 29. by comparing the estimates before and after february 2, we examine whether the comprehensive set of policies at the national scale delays the spread of covid-19. besides, we estimate the impacts of social distancing measures in reducing the transmission rate utilizing the closed management of communities and family outdoor restrictions policies that were gradually rolled out across different cities.as covid-19 evolves into a global pandemic and mitigating strategies are faced with growing pressure to flatten the curve of virus transmissions, more and more nations are considering implementing stringent suppression measures. therefore, examining the factors that influence the transmission of covid-19 and the effectiveness of the large-scale mandatory quarantine and social distancing measures in china not only adds to our understanding of the containment of covid-19 but also provides insights into future prevention work against similar infectious diseases.in a linear equation of the current number of new cases on the number of new cases in the past, the unobserved determinants of new infections may be serially correlated for two reasons. first, the number of people infected by a disease usually first increases, reaches a peak, and then drops. second, there are persistent, unobservable variables, such as clusters that generate large numbers of infections, people's living habits, and government policies. serial correlations in errors give rise to correlations between the lagged numbers of cases and the error term, rendering the ordinary least square (ols) estimator biased. combining insights in adda (2016) , the existing knowledge of the incubation period of covid-19 (world health organization 2020b) , and data on weather conditions that affect the transmission rates of covid-19 (lowen and steel 2014; wang et al. 2020b ), we construct instrumental variables for the number of new covid-19 cases during the preceding 2 weeks. weather characteristics in the previous third and fourth weeks do not directly affect the number of new covid-19 cases after controlling for the number of new covid-19 cases and weather conditions in the preceding first and second weeks. therefore, our estimated impacts have causal interpretations and reflect population transmission rates.meanwhile, we estimate the mediating effects of socioeconomic factors on the transmission of covid-19 in china. these factors include population flow out of wuhan, the distance between cities, gdp per capita, the number of doctors, and contemporaneous weather conditions. we examine whether population flows from the origin of the covid-19 outbreak, which is a major city and an important transportation hub in central china, can explain the spread of the virus using data on real-time travel intensity between cities that have recently become available for research. realizing the urgency of forestalling widespread community transmissions in areas that had not seen many infections, in late january, many chinese cities implemented public health measures that encourage social distancing. we also examine the impacts of these measures on curtailing the spread of the virus.we find that transmission rates were lower in february than in january, and cities outside hubei province had lower transmission rates. preventing the transmission rates in non-hubei cities from increasing to the level observed in late january in hubei caused the largest reduction in the number of infections. apart from the policies implemented nationwide, the additional social distancing policies imposed in some cities in late january further helped reduce the number of infections. by mid february, the spread of the virus was contained in china. while many socioeconomic factors moderated the spread of the virus, the actual population flow from the source posed a higher risk to destinations than other factors such as geographic proximity and similarity in economic conditions.our analysis contributes to the existing literature in three aspects. first, our analysis is connected to the economics and epidemiological literature on the determinants of the spread of infectious diseases and prevention of such spread. existing studies find that reductions in population flow zhang et al. 2020; fang et al. 2020 ) and interpersonal contact from holiday school closings (adda 2016) , reactive school closures (litvinova et al. 2019) , public transportation strikes (godzinski and suarez castillo 2019), strategic targeting of travelers from high-incidence locations (milusheva 2017) , and paid sick leave to keep contagious workers at home (barmby and larguem 2009; pichler and ziebarth 2017) can mitigate the prevalence of disease transmissions. in addition, studies show viruses spread faster during economic booms (adda 2016) , increases in employment are associated with increased incidence of influenza (markowitz et al. 2019) , and growth in trade can significantly increase the spread of influenza (adda 2016) and hiv (oster 2012) . vaccination (maurer 2009; white 2019) and sunlight exposure (slusky and zeckhauser 2018) are also found effective in reducing the spread of influenza.second, our paper adds to the epidemiological studies on the basic reproduction number (r 0 ) of covid-19, i.e., the average number of cases directly generated by one case in a population where all individuals are susceptible to infection. given the short time period since the beginning of the covid-19 outbreak, research is urgently needed to assess the dynamics of transmissions and the implications for how the covid-19 outbreak will evolve (wu et al. 2020b, c) . liu et al. (2020) identify 12 studies that estimated the basic reproductive number in the wide range of 1.4 to 6.5 (with a mean of 3.28 and a median of 2.79) for wuhan, hubei, china, or overseas during january 1 through january 28, 2020. 4 our r 0 estimate relies on spatially disaggregated data during an extended period (until february 29, 2020) to mitigate potential biases, and the instrumental variable approach we use isolates the causal effect of virus transmissions and imposes fewer restrictions on the relationship between the unobserved determinants of new cases and the number of cases in the past. simultaneously considering a more comprehensive set of factors in the model that may influence virus spread, we find that one case generates 2.992 more cases within 2 weeks (1.876 if cities in hubei province are excluded) in the sub-sample from january 19 to february 1. in the sub-sample from february 2 to february 29, the transmission rates fall to 1.243 (0.614 excluding hubei province). our estimate of r 0 for the period in late january 2020 that overlaps with existing studies falls well within the range of the estimated r 0 in the emerging covid-19 literature .third, our study contributes to the assessments of public health measures aiming at reducing virus transmissions and mortality. through a set of policy simulations, we report initial evidence on the number of avoided infections through the end of february 2020 for cities outside hubei province. specifically, the stringent health policies at the national and provincial levels reduced the transmission rate and resulted in 1,408,479 (95% ci, 815,585 to 2,001,373) fewer infections and poten-tially 56,339 fewer deaths. 5 in contrast, the effects of the wuhan lockdown and local non-pharmaceutical interventions (npis) are considerably smaller. as a result of the wuhan lockdown, closed management of communities, and family outdoor restrictions, 31,071 (95% ci, 8296 to 53,845), 3803 (95% ci, 1142 to 6465), and 2703 (95% ci, 654 to 4751) fewer cases were avoided, respectively. these three policies may respectively avoid 1,243 deaths, 152 deaths, and 108 deaths. making some additional assumptions, such as the value of statistical life and lost productive time, these estimates may provide the basis for more rigorous cost-benefit analysis regarding relevant public health measures. this paper is organized as follows. section 2 introduces the empirical model. section 3 discusses our data and the construction of key variables. section 4 presents the results. section 5 documents the public health measures implemented in china, whose impacts are quantified in a series of counterfactual exercises. section 6 concludes. the appendix contains additional details on the instrumental variables, data quality, and the computation of counterfactuals.our analysis sample includes 304 prefecture-level cities in china. we exclude wuhan, the capital city of hubei province, from our analysis for two reasons. first, the epidemic patterns in wuhan are significantly different from those in other cities. some confirmed cases in wuhan contracted the virus through direct exposure to huanan seafood wholesale market, which is the most probable origin of the virus 6 . in other cities, infections arise from human-to-human transmissions. second, covid-19 cases were still pneumonia of previously unknown virus infections in people's perception until early january so that wuhan's health care system became overwhelmed as the number of new confirmed cases increased exponentially since mid-january. this may have caused severe delay and measurement errors in the number of cases reported in wuhan, and to a lesser extent, in other cities in hubei province. to alleviate this concern, we also conduct analyses excluding all cities in hubei province from our sample. 5 we assume a case fatality rate of 4%, the same as china's current average level. of course, the eventual case fatality rate may be different from the current value, and it depends on many key factors, such as the preparedness of health care systems and the demographic structure of the population outside hubei province in comparison to china as a whole. also importantly, among patients who have died from covid-19, the time from symptom onset to outcome ranges from 2 to 8 weeks (world health organization 2020b), which is partially beyond the time window of this analysis. therefore, we defer more rigorous estimates about avoided fatality to future studies. 6 document the exposure history of the first 425 cases. it is suspected that the initial cases were linked to the huanan seafood wholesale market in wuhan.to model the spread of the virus, we consider within-city spread and between-city transmissions simultaneously (adda 2016 where c is a city other than wuhan, and y ct is the number of new confirmed cases of covid-19 in city c on date t. regarding between-city transmissions, d cr is the log of the distance between cities c and r, and r =c d 1 cr y rt is the inverse distance weighted sum of new infections in other cities. considering that covid-19 epidemic originated from one city (wuhan) and that most of the early cases outside wuhan can be traced to previous contacts with persons in wuhan, we also include the number of new confirmed cases in wuhan (z t ) to model how the virus spreads to other cities from its source. we may include lagged y ct , y rt , and z t up to 14 days based on the estimates of the durations of the infectious period and the incubation period in the literature 7 . x ct includes contemporaneous weather controls, city, and day fixed effects 8 . ct is the error term. standard errors are clustered by province.to make it easier to interpret the coefficients, we assume that the transmission dynamics ( within,s ,  between,s ,  s ) are the same within s = 1,    , 7 and s = 8,    , 14, respectively, but can be different across weeks. specifically, we take averages of lagged y ct , y rt , and z t by week, as  ct = 1 7 7 s=1 y ct7( 1)s , y  rt = 1 7 7 s=1 y rt7( 1)s , andz  t = 1 7 7 s=1 z t7( 1)s , in which  denotes the preceding first or second week. our main model is(1) we also consider more parsimonious model specifications, such as the model that only considers within-city transmissions,7 the covid-19 epidemic is still ongoing at the time of writing, and the estimates are revised from time to time in the literature as new data become available. the current estimates include the following. the incubation period is estimated to be between 2 and 10 days (world health organization 2020a), 5.2 days , or 3 days (median, guan et al. (2020) ). the average infectious period is estimated to be 1.4 days (wu et al. 2020a there are several reasons that  ct ,  rt , andz  t may be correlated with the error term ct . the unobserved determinants of new infections such as local residents' and government's preparedness are likely correlated over time, which causes correlations between the error term and the lagged dependent variables. as noted by the world health organization (2020b), most cases that were locally generated outside hubei occurred in households or clusters. the fact that big clusters give rise to a large number of cases within a short period of time may still be compatible with a general low rate of community transmissions, especially when measures such as social distancing are implemented. therefore, the coefficients are estimated by two-stage least squares in order to obtain consistent estimates on the transmission rates in the population.in eq. 2, the instrumental variables include averages of daily maximum temperature, total precipitation, average wind speed, and the interaction between precipitation and wind speed, for city c in the preceding third and fourth weeks. detailed discussion of the selection of weather characteristics as instruments is in section 3.2. the timeline of key variables are displayed in fig. 1 . the primary assumption on the instrumental variables is that weather conditions before 2 weeks do not affect the likelihood that a person susceptible to the virus contracts the disease, conditional on weather conditions and the number of infectious people within the 2-week window. on the other hand, they affect the number of other persons who have become infectious within the 2-week window, because they may have contracted the virus earlier than 2 weeks. these weather variables are exogenous to the error term and another objective of this paper is to quantify the effect of various socioeconomic factors in mediating the transmission rates of the virus, which may identify potential behavioral and socioeconomic risk factors for infections. for within-city transmissions, we consider the effects of local public health measures (see section 5 for details) and the mediating effects of population density, level of economic development, number of doctors, and environmental factors such as temperature, wind, and precipitation. for between-city transmissions, apart from proximity measures based on geographic distance, we also consider similarity in population density and the level of economic development. to measure the spread of the virus from wuhan, we also include the number of people traveling from wuhan. the full empirical model is as follows:whereh k ct includes dummies for local public health measures and the mediating factors for local transmissions.m k crt andm k c,wuhan,t are the mediating factors for between-city transmissions and imported cases from wuhan.january 19, 2020, is the first day that covid-19 cases were reported outside of wuhan, so we collect the daily number of new cases of covid-19 for 305 cities from january 19 to february 29. all these data are reported by 32 provincial-level health commissions in china 10 . figure 2 shows the time patterns of daily confirmed new cases in wuhan, in hubei province outside wuhan, and in non-hubei provinces of mainland china. because hubei province started to include clinically diagnosed cases into new confirmed cases on february 12, we notice a spike in the number of new cases in wuhan and other cities in hubei province on this day (fig. 2) . the common effects of such changes in case definitions on other cities can be absorbed by time fixed effects. as robustness checks, we re-estimate models a and b without the cities in hubei province. in addition, since the number of clinically diagnosed cases at the city level was reported for the days of february 12, 13, and 14, we recalculated the daily number of new cases for the 3 days by removing the clinically diagnosed cases from our data and re-estimate models a and b. our main findings still hold (appendix b). regarding the explanatory variables, we calculate the number of new cases of covid-19 in the preceding first and second weeks for each city on each day. to estimate the impacts of new covid-19 cases in other cities, we first calculate the geographic distance between a city and all other cities using the latitudes and longitudes of the centroids of each city and then calculate the weighted sum of the number since the covid-19 outbreak started from wuhan, we also calculate the weighted number of covid-19 new cases in wuhan using the inverse of log distance as the weight. furthermore, to explore the mediating impact of population flow from wuhan, we collect the daily population flow index from baidu that proxies for the total intensity of migration from wuhan to other cities 11 . figure 3 plots the baidu index of population flow out of wuhan and compares its values this year with those in 2019. we then interact the flow index with the share that a destination city takes (fig. 4) to construct a measure on the population flow from wuhan to a destination city. other mediating variables include population density, gdp per capita, and the number of doctors at the city level, which we collect from the most recent china city statistical yearbook. table 1 presents the summary statistics of these variables. on average, gdp per capita and population density are larger in cities outside hubei province than those in hubei. compared with cities in hubei province, cities outside hubei have more doctors.we rely on meteorological data to construct instrumental variables for the endogenous variables. the national oceanic and atmospheric administration (noaa) provides average, maximum, and minimum temperatures, air pressure, average and maximum wind speeds, precipitation, snowfall amount, and dew point for 362 weather stations at the daily level in china. to merge the meteorological variables with the number of new cases of covid-19, we first calculate daily weather variables for each city on each day from 2019 december to 2020 february from station-level weather records following the inverse distance weighting method. specifically, for each city, we draw a circle of 100 km from the city's centroid and calculate the weighted average daily weather variables using stations within the 100-km circle 12 . we use the inverse of the distance between the city's centroid and each station as the weight. second, we match the daily weather variables to the number of new cases of covid-19 based on city name and date.the transmission rate of covid-19 may be affected by many environmental factors. human-to-human transmission of covid-19 is mostly through droplets and contacts (national health commission of the prc 2020). weather conditions such as rainfall, wind speed, and temperature may shape infections via their influences on social activities and virus transmissions. for instance, increased precipitation 11 baidu migration (https://qianxi.baidu.com). 12 the 100-km circle is consistent with the existing literature. most studies on the socioeconomic impacts of climate change have found that estimation results are insensitive to the choice of the cutoff distance (zhang et al. 2017) . transmissions. in addition, increased rainfall and lower temperature may also reduce social activities. newly confirmed covid-19 cases typically arise from contracting the virus within 2 weeks in the past (e.g., world health organization 2020b). the extent of human-to-human transmission is determined by the number of people who have already contracted the virus and the environmental conditions within the next 2 weeks. conditional on the number of people who are infectious and environmental conditions in the previous first and second weeks, it is plausible that weather conditions further in the past, i.e., in the previous third and fourth weeks, should not directly affect the number of current new cases. based on the existing literature, we select weather characteristics as the instrumental variables, which include daily maximum temperature, precipitation, wind speed, and the interaction between precipitation and wind speed. we then regress the endogenous variables on the instrumental variables, contemporaneous weather controls, city, date, and city by week fixed effects. table 2 shows that f-tests on the coefficients of the instrumental variables all reject joint insignificance, which confirms that overall the selected instrumental variables are not weak. the coefficients of the first stage regressions are reported in table 9 in the appendix. this table reports the f -tests on the joint significance of the coefficients on the instrumental variables (iv) that are excluded from the estimation equations. our iv include weekly averages of daily maximum temperature, precipitation, wind speed, and the interaction between precipitation and wind speed, during the preceding third and fourth weeks, and the averages of these variables in other cities weighted by the inverse of log distance. for each f statistic, the variable in the corresponding row is the dependent variable, and the time window in the corresponding column indicates the time span of the sample. each regression also includes 1-and 2-week lags of these weather variables, weekly averages of new infections in the preceding first and second weeks in wuhan which are interacted with the inverse log distance or the population flow, and city, date and city by week fixed effects. coefficients on the instrumental variables for the full sample are reported in table 15 in the appendix we also need additional weather variables to instrument the adoption of public health measures at the city level. since there is no theoretical guidance from the existing literature, we implement the cluster-lasso method of belloni et al. (2016) and ahrens et al. (2019) to select weather characteristics that have good predictive power. details are displayed in appendix a.our sample starts from january 19, when the first covid-19 case was reported outside wuhan. the sample spans 6 weeks in total and ends on february 29. we divide the whole sample into two sub-samples (january 19 to february 1, and february 2 to february 29) and estimate the model using the whole sample and two sub-samples, respectively. in the first 2 weeks, covid-19 infections quickly spread throughout china with every province reporting at least one confirmed case, and the number of cases also increased at an increasing speed (fig. 2 ). it is also during these 2 weeks that the chinese government took actions swiftly to curtail the virus transmission. on january 20, covid-19 was classified as a class b statutory infectious disease and treated as a class a statutory infectious disease. the city of wuhan was placed under lockdown on january 23; roads were closed, and residents were not allowed to leave the city. many other cities also imposed public policies ranging from canceling public events and stopping public transportation to limiting how often residents could leave home. by comparing the dynamics of virus transmissions in these two sub-samples, we can infer the effectiveness of these public health measures.in this section, we will mostly rely on model a to interpret the results, which estimates the effects of the average number of new cases in the preceding first and second week, respectively, and therefore enables us to examine the transmission dynamics at different time lags. as a robustness check, we also consider a simpler lag structure to describe the transmission dynamics. in model b, we estimate the effects of the average number of new cases in the past 14 days instead of using two separate lag variables. table 3 reports the estimation results of the ols and iv regressions of eq. 2, in which only within-city transmission is considered. after controlling for time-invariant city fixed effects and time effects that are common to all cities, on average, one new infection leads to 1.142 more cases in the next week, but 0.824 fewer cases 1 week later. the negative effect can be attributed to the fact that both local authorities and residents would have taken more protective measures in response to a higher perceived risk of contracting the virus given more time. information disclosure on newly confirmed cases at the daily level by official media and information dissemination on social media throughout china may have promoted more timely actions by the public, resulting in slower virus transmissions. we then compare the transmission rates in different time windows. in the first sub-sample, one new infection leads to 2.135 the dependent variable is the number of daily new cases. the endogenous explanatory variables include the average numbers of new confirmed cases in the own city in the preceding first and second weeks (model a) and the average number in the preceding 14 days (model b). weekly averages of daily maximum temperature, precipitation, wind speed, the interaction between precipitation and wind speed, and the inverse log distance weighted sum of each of these variables in other cities, during the preceding third and fourth weeks, are used as instrumental variables in the iv regressions. weather controls include contemporaneous weather variables in the preceding first and second weeks. standard errors in parentheses are clustered by provinces. *** p <0.01,more cases within a week, implying a fast growth in the number of cases. however, in the second sub-sample, the effect decreases to 1.077, suggesting that public health measures imposed in late january were effective in limiting a further spread of the virus. similar patterns are also observed in model b.many cases were also reported in other cities in hubei province apart from wuhan, where six of them reported over 1000 cumulative cases by february 15 13 . their overstretched health care system exacerbates the concern over delayed reporting of confirmed cases in these cities. to mitigate the effect of such potential measurement errors on our estimates, we re-estimate (2) excluding all cities in hubei province. the bottom panel of table 3 reports these estimates. comparing the iv estimates in columns (4) and (6) between the upper and lower panels, we find that the transmission rates are lower in cities outside hubei. in the january 19-february 1 sub-sample, one new case leads to 1.483 more cases in the following week, and this is reduced to 0.903 in the february 2-february 29 sub-sample. we also find a similar pattern when comparing the estimates from model b.people may contract the virus from interaction with the infected people who live in the same city or other cities. in eq. 1, we consider the effects of the number of new infections in other cities and in the epicenter of the epidemic (wuhan), respectively, using inverse log distance as weights. in addition, geographic proximity may not fully describe the level of social interactions between residents in wuhan and other cities since the lockdown in wuhan on january 23 significantly reduced the population flow from wuhan to other cities. to alleviate this concern, we also use a measure of the size of population flow from wuhan to a destination city, which is constructed by multiplying the daily migration index on the population flow out of wuhan (fig 3) with the share of the flow that a destination city receives provided by baidu (fig. 4) . for days before january 25, we use the average destination shares between january 10 and january 24. for days on or after january 24, we use the average destination shares between january 25 and february 23 14 . table 4 reports the estimates from iv regressions of eq. 1, and table 5 reports the results from the same regressions excluding hubei province. column (4) of table 4 indicates that in the first sub-sample, one new case leads to 2.456 more cases within 1 week, and the effect is not statistically significant between 1 and 2 weeks. column (6) suggests that in the second sub-sample, one new case leads to 1.127 more cases within 1 week, and the effect is not statistically significant between 1 and 2 weeks. the comparison of the coefficients on own city between different sub-samples indicates that the responses of the government and the public have effectively decreased the risk of additional infections. comparing table 4 with table 3 , we find that although the number of new cases in the preceding second week turns insignificant (3) table 6 . each estimation sample contains 14 days with the starting date indicated on the horizontal axis and smaller in magnitude, coefficients on the number of new cases in the preceding first week are not sensitive to the inclusion of terms on between-city transmissions. as a robustness test, table 5 reports the estimation results excluding the cities in hubei province. column (4) of table 5 indicates that in the first sub-sample, one new case leads to 1.194 more cases within a week, while in the second sub-sample, one new case only leads to 0.899 more cases within a week. besides, in the second subsample, one new case results in 0.250 fewer new infections between 1 and 2 weeks, which is larger in magnitude and more significant than the estimate (0.171) when cities in hubei province are included for estimation (column (6) of table 4 ).the time varying patterns in local transmissions are evident using the rolling window analysis (fig. 5) . the upper left panel displays the estimated coefficients on local transmissions for various 14-day sub-samples with the starting date labelled on the horizontal axis. after a slight increase in the local transmission rates, one case generally leads to fewer and fewer additional cases a few days after january 19. besides, the transmission rate displays a slight increase beginning around february 4, which corresponds to the return travels and work resumption after chinese spring festival, but eventually decreases at around february 12. such decrease may be partly attributed to the social distancing strategies at the city level, so we examine the impacts of relevant policies in section 5. moreover, the transmission rates in cities outside hubei province have been kept at low levels throughout the whole sample period (columns (4) and (6) of table 5 ). these results suggest that the policies adopted at the national and provincial levels soon after january 19 prevented cities outside hubei from becoming new hotspots of infections. overall, the spread of the virus has been effectively contained by mid february, particularly for cities outside hubei province.in the epidemiology literature, the estimates on the basic reproduction number of covid-19 are approximately within the wide range of 1.4  6.5 ). its value depends on the estimation method used, underlying assumptions of modeling, time period covered, geographic regions (with varying preparedness of health care systems), and factors considered in the models that affect disease transmissions (such as the behavior of the susceptible and infected population). intuitively, it can be interpreted as measuring the expected number of new cases that are generated by one existing case. it is of interest to note that our estimates are within this range. based on the results from model b in tables 4 and 5 , one case leads to 2.992 more cases in the same city in the next 14 days (1.876 if cities in hubei province are excluded). in the second sub-sample (february 2-february 29), these numbers are reduced to 1.243 and 0.614, respectively, suggesting that factors such as public health measures and people's behavior may play an important role in containing the transmission of covid-19.while our basic reproduction number estimate (r 0 ) is within the range of estimates in the literature and is close to its median, five features may distinguish our estimates from some of the existing epidemiological estimates. first, our instrumental variable approach helps isolate the causal effect of virus transmissions from other confounded factors; second, our estimate is based on an extended time period of the covid-19 pandemic (until the end of february 2020) that may mitigate potential biases in the literature that relies on a shorter sampling period within 1-28 january 2020; third, our modeling makes minimum assumptions of virus transmissions, such as imposing fewer restrictions on the relationship between the unobserved determinants of new cases and the number of cases in the past; fourth, our model simultaneously considers comprehensive factors that may affect virus transmissions, including multiple policy instruments (such as closed management of communities and shelter-at-home order), population flow, within-and between-city transmissions, economic and demographic conditions, weather patterns, and preparedness of health care system. fifth, our study uses spatially disaggregated data that cover china (except its hubei province), while some other studies examine wuhan city, hubei province, china as a whole, or overseas.regarding the between-city transmission from wuhan, we observe that the population flow better explains the contagion effect than geographic proximity (table 4 ). in the first sub-sample, one new case in wuhan leads to more cases in other cities receiving more population flows from wuhan within 1 week. interestingly, in the second sub-sample, population flow from wuhan significantly decreases the transmission rate within 1 week, suggesting that people have been taking more cautious measures from high covid-19 risk areas; however, more arrivals from wuhan in the preceding second week can still be a risk. a back of the envelope calculation indicates that one new case in wuhan leads to 0.064 (0.050) more cases in the destination city per 10,000 travelers from wuhan within 1 (2) week between january 19 and february 1 (february 2 and february 29) 15 . note that while the effect is statistically significant, it should be interpreted in context. it was estimated that 15,000,000 people would travel out of wuhan during the lunar new year holiday 16 . if all had gone to one city, this would have directly generated about 171 cases within 2 weeks. the risk of infection is likely very low for most travelers except for few who have previous contacts with sources of infection, and person-specific history of past contacts may be an essential predictor for infection risk, in addition to the total number of population flows 17 .a city may also be affected by infections in nearby cities apart from spillovers from wuhan. we find that the coefficients that represent the infectious effects from nearby cities are generally small and not statistically significant (table 4 ), implying that few cities outside wuhan are themselves exporting infections. this is consistent with the findings in the world health organization (2020b) that other than cases that are imported from hubei, additional human-to-human transmissions are limited for cities outside hubei. restricting to cities outside hubei province, the results are similar (table 5 ), except that the transmission from wuhan is not significant in the first half sample.we also investigate the mediating impacts of some socioeconomic and environmental characteristics on the transmission rates (3). to ease the comparison between different moderators, we consider the mediating impacts on the influence of the average number of new cases in the past 2 weeks. regarding own-city transmissions, we examine the mediating effects of population density, gdp per capita, number of doctors, and average temperature, wind speed, precipitation, and a dummy variable of adverse weather conditions. regarding between-city transmissions, we consider the mediating effects of distance, difference in population density, and difference in gdp per capita since cities that are similar in density or economic development level may be more closely linked. we also include a measure of population flows from wuhan. table 6 reports the estimation results of the iv regressions. to ease the comparison across various moderators, for the mediating variables of within-city transmissions that are significant at 10%, we compute the changes in the variables so that the effect of new confirmed infections in the past 14 days on current new confirmed cases is reduced by 1 (columns (2) and (4)). 15 it is estimated that 14,925,000 people traveled out of wuhan in 2019 during the lunar new year holiday (http://www.whtv.com.cn/p/17571.html). the sum of baidu's migration index for population flow out of wuhan during the 40 days around the 2019 lunar new year is 203.3, which means one index unit represents 0.000013621 travelers. the destination share is in percentage. with one more case in wuhan, the effect on a city receiving 10,000 travelers from wuhan is 0.00471  0.000013621  100  10000 = 0.064. 16 http://www.whtv.com.cn/p/17571.html 17 from mid february, individual specific health codes such as alipay health code and wechat health code are being used in many cities to aid quarantine efforts. the dependent variable is the number of daily new confirmed cases. the sample excludes cities in hubei province. columns (2) and (4) report the changes in the mediating variables that are needed to reduce the impact of new confirmed cases in the preceding 2 weeks by 1, using estimates with significance levels of at least 0.1 in columns (1) and (3), respectively. the endogenous variables include the average numbers of new cases in the own city and nearby cities in the preceding 14 days and their interactions with the mediating variables. weekly averages of daily maximum temperature, precipitation, wind speed, the interaction between precipitation and wind speed, and the inverse log distance weighted sum of these variables in neighboring cities, during the preceding third and fourth weeks, are used as instrumental variables in the iv regressions. additional instrumental variables are constructed by interacting them with the mediating variables. weather controls include these variables in the preceding first and second weeks. standard errors in parentheses are clustered by provinces *** p <0.01, ** p <0.05, * p <0.1in the early phase of the epidemic (january 19 to february 1), cities with more medical resources, which are measured by the number of doctors, have lower transmission rates. one standard deviation increase in the number of doctors reduces the transmission rate by 0.12. cities with higher gdp per capita have higher transmission rates, which can be ascribed to the increased social interactions as economic activities increase 18 . in the second sub-sample, these effects become insignificant probably because public health measures and inter-city resource sharing take effects. in fact, cities with higher population density have lower transmission rates in the second sub-sample. regarding the environmental factors, we notice different significant mediating variables across the first and second sub-samples. the transmission rates are lower with adverse weather conditions, lower temperature, or less rain. further research is needed to identify clear mechanisms. in addition, population flow from wuhan still poses a risk of new infections for other cities even after we account for the above mediating effects on own-city transmission. this effect is robust to the inclusion of the proximity measures based on economic similarity and geographic proximity between wuhan and other cities. nevertheless, we do not find much evidence on between-city transmissions among cities other than wuhan.as the 2002-2004 sars outbreak has shown, non-pharmaceutical interventions (npis) or public health measures may decrease or effectively stop the transmission of covid-19 even without vaccines. although the effectiveness of a single intervention strategy can be limited, multiple interventions together may generate substantial impacts on containing the spread of the virus. figure 6 depicts the timeline for a series of policies enacted at the national, provincial, and city levels in china since january 19. after the official confirmation of human-to-human transmission by the chinese authorities on january 20, china has adopted a variety of npis to contain the covid-19 outbreak. at the national level, covid-19 was classified as a statutory class b infectious disease on january 20, and prevention and control measures for class a infectious diseases have been taken. government agencies across the country were mobilized. the joint prevention and control mechanism of the state council was established on january 20, and the central leadership group for epidemic response was established on january 25. on january 23, national healthcare security administration announced that expenses related to covid-19 treatments would be covered by the medical insurance and the government if necessary, in order that all covid-19 cases could be hospitalized 19 . at the provincial level, 30 provinces declared level i responses to major public health emergencies from january 23 to 25, and all provinces had declared level i responses by january 29 20 . level i responses in china are designed for the highest state of emergencies. measures taken include enhanced isolation and contact tracing of cases, suspension of public transport, cancelling public events, closing schools and entertainment venues, and establishment of health checkpoints (tian et al. 2020) . these policies together represent population-wide social distancing and case isolation (ferguson et al. 2020) .early detection of covid-19 importation and prevention of onward transmission are crucial to all areas at risk of importation from areas with active transmissions (gilbert et al. 2020) . to contain the virus at the epicenter, wuhan was placed under lockdown with traffic ban for all residents starting on january 23. the lockdown is not expected to be lifted until april 8. local buses, subways, and ferries ceased operation. ridehailing services were prohibited, and only a limited number of taxis were allowed on road by january 24. residents are not permitted to leave the city. departure flights and trains were canceled at the city airport and train stations. checkpoints were set up at highway entrances to prevent cars from leaving the city. since january 22, it became mandatory to wear masks at work or in public places. 19 there was insufficient hospital capacity in hubei (and wuhan in particular) in late january. most patients in wuhan were hospitalized and isolated around mid february with the completion of new hospitals, makeshift health facilities, and increased testing capacity. see section 5.1 for details. 20 we should note that the summary of china's policy responses here is not a comprehensive list. other entities have also made efforts to help curtail the spread of covid-19. for example, on january 27, the state grid corporation of china declared that it would continue supplying electricity to resident users even if payment was not received on time. school and universities were closed already because of lunar new year holidays. in addition, all cities in hubei province implemented the lockdown policy, and most hubei cities had also adopted measures commensurate with class a infectious diseases by january 28 21 . residents in those areas were strongly encouraged to stay at home and not to attend any activity involving public gathering.health facilities in wuhan had been extremely overstretched with shortage in medical supplies and high rates of nosocomial infections until february 2 when (1) two new hospitals, i.e., huoshenshan and leishenshan, were built to treat patients of covid-19 with severe symptoms, and (2) 14 makeshift health facilities were converted to isolate patients with mild symptoms and to quarantine people suspected of contracting covid-19, patients with fever symptoms, and close contacts of confirmed patients. this centralized treatment and isolation strategy since february 2 has substantially reduced transmission and incident cases.however, stringent public health measures within hubei province enforced after the massive lockdown may have little to do with virus transmissions out of hubei province due to the complete travel ban since january 23.quarantine measures have been implemented in other provinces that aim at restricting population mobility across cities and reducing the risk of importing infections 22 . seven cities in zhejiang, henan, heilongjiang, and fujian provinces had adopted the partial shutdown strategy by february 4 (fang et al. 2020) 23 . in wenzhou, most public transportation was shut down, and traffic leaving the city was banned temporarily. on january 21, the ministry of transport of china launched level 2 responses to emergencies in order to cooperate with the national health commission in preventing the virus spread. on january 23, the ministry of transport of china, civil aviation administration of china, and china state railway group company, ltd. (csrgc) declared to waive the change fees for flight, train, bus, and ferry tickets that were bought before january 24. later, the csrgc extended the fee waiver policy to train tickets that were bought before february 6. by february 2, all railway stations in china had started to monitor body temperature of travelers when they enter and exit the station. across the whole country, transportation departments set up 14,000 health checkpoints at bus and ferry terminals, at service centers and toll gates on highways, monitoring the body temperature of passengers and controlling the inflow of population (world health organization 2020b). recent visitors to high covid-19 risk areas are required to self-quarantine for 14 days at home or in designated facilities. on february 2, china's exit and entry administration temporarily suspended the approval and issuance of the travel permits to hong kong and macau.on january 23, wuhan municipal administration of culture and tourism ordered all tour groups to cancel travels to wuhan. on january 27, the ministry of education of china postponed start of the spring semester in 2020, and on february 7, it further announced that students were not allowed to return to school campus without approvals from school.recent studies suggest that there is a large proportion of asymptomatic or mildsymptomatic cases, who can also spread the virus (dong et al. 2020; mizumoto et al. 2020; nishiura et al. 2020; wang et al. 2020a ). thus, maintaining social distance is of crucial importance in order to curtail the local transmission of the virus.the period from january 24 to 31, 2020, is the traditional chinese spring festival holiday, when families are supposed to get together so that inter-city travel is usually much less. people were frequently reminded by official media (via tv news and phone messages) and social media to stay at home and avoid gathering activities. on january 26, china state council extended this holiday to february 2 to delay people's return travel and curtail the virus spread. nevertheless, economic activities are still supposed to resume after the spring festival, bringing people back to workplaces, which may increase the risk of virus spread. to help local residents keep social distance and decrease the risk of virus transmissions, many cities started to implement the "closed management of communities" and "family outdoor restrictions" policies since late january (table 7) , encouraging residents to restrict nonessential travels. from january 28 to february 20, more than 250 prefecture-level cities in china implemented "closed management of communities," which typically includes (1) keeping only one entrance for each community, (2) allowing only community residents to enter and exit the community, (3) checking body temperature for each entrant, (4) testing and quarantining cases that exhibit fever immediately, and (5) tracing and quarantining close contacts of suspicious cases. meanwhile, residents who had symptoms of fever or dry cough were required to report to the community and were quarantined and treated in special medical facilities. furthermore, local governments of 127 cities also imposed more stringent "family outdoor restrictions"-residents are confined or strongly encouraged to stay at home with limited exceptions, e.g., only one person in each family may go out for shopping for necessities once every 2 days 24 . exit permits were usually distributed to each family in advance and recollected when residents reenter the community. contacts of those patients were also traced and quarantined. table 7 summarizes the number of cities that had imposed "closed management of communities" or "family outdoor restrictions" by different dates in february.in order to help inform evidence-based covid-19 control measures, we examine the effect of these local quarantine measures in reducing the virus transmission rates. dummy variables for the presence of closed management of communities or family outdoor restrictions are created, and they are interacted with the number of infections in the preceding 2 weeks.several factors may contribute to the containment of the epidemic. the transmission dynamics may change during the course of this epidemic because of improved medical treatments, more effective case isolation and contact tracing, increased public awareness, etc. therefore, we have split the sample into two sub-samples, and the estimated coefficients can be different across the sub-samples (section 4). npis such as closed management of communities, city lockdowns, and restrictions on population flow out of areas with high infection risks may also directly affect the transmission rates. while many public health measures are implemented nationwide, spatial variations exist in the adoption of two types of measures: closed management of communities (denoted by closed management) and family outdoor restrictions (denoted by stay at home), which allow us to quantify the effect of these npis on the transmission dynamics.because most of these local npis are adopted in february and our earlier results indicate that the transmission of covid-19 declines during late january, we restrict the analysis sample to february 2-february 29. we also exclude cities in hubei province, which modified the case definition related to clinically diagnosed cases on february 12 and changed the case definition related to reduced backlogs from increased capacity of molecular diagnostic tests on february 20. these modifications coincide with the adoption of local npis and can significantly affect the observed dynamics of confirmed cases. the adoption of closed management or stay at home is likely affected by the severity of the epidemic and correlated with the unobservables. additional weather controls that have a good predictive power for these npis are selected as the instrumental variables based on the method of belloni et al. (2016) . details are displayed in appendix a. the estimation results of ols and iv regressions are reported in table 8 .effects of local non-pharmaceutical interventions the sample is from february 2 to february 29, excluding cities in hubei province. the dependent variable is the number of daily new confirmed cases. the instrumental variables include weekly averages of daily maximum temperature, wind speed, precipitation, and the interaction between wind speed and precipitation, in the preceding third and fourth weeks, and the inverse log distance weighted averages of these variables in other cities. additional instrumental variables are constructed by interacting these excluded instruments with variables that predict the adoption of closed management of communities or family outdoor restrictions (table 17 ). the weather controls include weather characteristics in the preceding first and second weeks. standard errors in parentheses are clustered by provinces. *** p <0.01, ** p <0.05,we find that closed management and stay at home significantly decrease the transmission rates. as a result of closed management of communities, one infection will generate 0.244 (95% ci, 0.366  0.123) fewer new infections in the first week. the effect in the second week is also negative though not statistically significant. family outdoor restrictions (stay at home) are more restrictive than closing communities to visitors and reduce additional infections from one infection by 0.278 (95% ci, 0.435  0.121) in the first week. the effect in the second week is not statistically significant. to interpret the magnitude of the effect, it is noted that the reproduction number of sars-cov-2 is estimated to be around 1.4  6.5 as of january 28, 2020 .many cities implement both policies. however, it is not conclusive to ascertain the effect of further imposing family outdoor restrictions in cities that have adopted closed management of communities. when both policies are included in the model, the ols coefficients (column (5)) indicate that closed management reduces the transmission rate by 0.547 (95% ci, 0.824  0.270) in the first week, and by 0.259 (95% ci, 0.485  0.032) in the second week, while the additional benefit from stay at home is marginally significant in the second week (0.124, 95% ci, 0.272  0.023). the iv estimates indicate that closed management reduces the transmission rate in the first week by 0.193 (95% ci, 0.411  0.025), while the effect in the second week and the effects of stay at home are not statistically significant. additional research that examines the decision process of health authorities or documents the local differences in the actual implementation of the policies may offer insights into the relative merits of the policies.we further assess the effects of npis by conducting a series of counterfactual exercises. after estimating (3) by 2sls, we obtain the residuals. then, the changes in y ct are predicted for counterfactual changes in the transmission dynamics (i.e., coefficients  k within, ) and the impositions of npis (i.e.,h k ct , and the lockdown of wuhanm k c,wuhan,t ). in scenario a, no cities adopted family outdoor restrictions (stay at home). similarly, in scenario b, no cities implemented closed management of communities. we use the estimates in columns (2) and (4) of table 8 to conduct the counterfactual analyses for scenarios a and b, respectively. in scenario c, we assume that the index of population flows out of wuhan after the wuhan lockdown (january 23) took the value that was observed in 2019 for the same lunar calendar date (fig. 3) , which would be plausible had there been no lockdown around wuhan. it is also likely that in the absence of lockdown but with the epidemic, more people would leave wuhan compared with last year (fang et al. 2020) , and the effect would then be larger. in scenario d, we assume that the within-city transmission dynamics were the same as those observed between january 19 and february 1, i.e., the coefficient of 1-week lag own-city infections was 2.456 and the coefficient of 2-week lag own-city infections was 1.633 (column (4) of table 4 ), which may happen if the transmission rates in cities outside hubei increased in the same way as those observed for cities in hubei. appendix c contains the technical details on the computation of counterfactuals.in fig. 7 , we report the differences between the predicted number of daily new cases in the counterfactual scenarios and the actual data, for cities outside hubei province. we also report the predicted cumulative effect in each scenario at the bottom of the corresponding panel in fig. 7 . had the transmission rates in cities outside hubei province increased to the level observed in late january, by february 29, there would be 1,408,479 (95% ci, 815, 585  2, 001, 373) more cases (scenario d). assuming a fatality rate of 4%, there would be 56,339 more deaths. the magnitude of the effect from wuhan lockdown and local npis is considerably smaller. as a result of wuhan lockdown, 31,071 (95% ci, 8296  53, 845) fewer cases would be reported for cities outside hubei by february 29 (scenario c). closed management of communities and family outdoor restrictions would reduce the number of cases by 3803 (95% ci, 1142  6465; or 15.78 per city with the policy) and 2703 (95% ci, 654  4751; or 21.98 per city with the policy), respectively. these estimates, combined with additional assumptions on the value of statistical life, lost time from work, etc., may contribute to cost-benefit analyses of relevant public health measures.our counterfactual simulations indicate that suppressing local virus transmissions so that transmission rates are kept well below those observed in hubei in late january is crucial in forestalling large numbers of infections for cities outside hubei. our retrospective analysis of the data from china complements the simulation study fig. 7 counterfactual policy simulations. this figure displays the daily differences between the total predicted number and the actual number of daily new covid-19 cases for each of the four counterfactual scenarios for cities outside hubei province in mainland china. the spike on february 12 in scenario c is due to a sharp increase in daily case counts in wuhan resulting from changes in case definitions in hubei province (see appendix b for details) of ferguson et al. (2020) . our estimates indicate that suppressing local transmission rates at low levels might have avoided one million or more infections in china. chinazzi et al. (2020) also find that reducing local transmission rates is necessary for effective containment of covid-19. the public health policies announced by the national and provincial authorities in the last 2 weeks in january may have played a determinant role (tian et al. 2020) in keeping local transmission rates in cities outside hubei at low levels throughout january and february. among the measures implemented following provincial level i responses, shen et al. (2020) highlight the importance of contact tracing and isolation of close contacts before onset of symptoms in preventing a resurgence of infections once the covid-19 suppression measures are relaxed. we also find that travel restrictions on high-risk areas (the lockdown in wuhan), and to a lesser extent, closed management of communities and family outdoor restrictions, further reduce the number of cases. it should be noted that these factors may overlap in the real world. in the absence of the lockdown in wuhan, the health care systems in cities outside hubei could face much more pressure, and local transmissions may have been much higher. in china, the arrival of the covid-19 epidemic coincided with the lunar new year for many cities. had the outbreak started at a different time, the effects and costs of these policies would likely be different.this paper examines the transmission dynamics of the coronavirus disease 2019 in china, considering both within-and between-city transmissions. our sample is from january 19 to february 29 and covers key episodes such as the initial spread of the virus across china, the peak of infections in terms of domestic case counts, and the gradual containment of the virus in china. changes in weather conditions induce exogenous variations in past infection rates, which allow us to identify the causal impact of past infections on new cases. the estimates suggest that the infectious effect of the existing cases is mostly observed within 1 week and people's responses can break the chain of infections. comparing estimates in two sub-samples, we observe that the spread of covid-19 has been effectively contained by mid february, especially for cities outside hubei province. data on real-time population flows between cities have become available in recent years. we show that this new source of data is valuable in explaining between-city transmissions of covid-19, even after controlling for traditional measures of geographic and economic proximity.by april 5 of 2020, covid-19 infections have been reported in more than 200 countries or territories and more than 64,700 people have died. behind the grim statistics, more and more national and local governments are implementing countermeasures. cross border travel restrictions are imposed in order to reduce the risk of case importation. in areas with risks of community transmissions, public health measures such as social distancing, mandatory quarantine, and city lockdown are implemented. in a series of counterfactual simulations, we find that based on the experience in china, preventing sustained community transmissions from taking hold in the first place has the largest impact, followed by restricting population flows from areas with high risks of infections. local public health measures such as closed management of communities and family outdoor restrictions can further reduce the number of infections.a key limitation of the paper is that we are not able to disentangle the effects from each of the stringent measures taken, as within this 6-week sampling period, china enforced such a large number of densely timed policies to contain the virus spreading, often simultaneously in many cities. a second limitation is that shortly after the starting date of the official data release for confirmed infected cases throughout china, i.e., january 19, 2020, many stringent measures were implemented, which prevents researchers to compare the post treatment sub-sample with a pre treatment subsample during which no strict policies were enforced. key knowledge gaps remain in the understanding of the epidemiological characteristics of covid-19, such as individual risk factors for contracting the virus and infections from asymptotic cases. data on the demographics and exposure history for those who have shown symptoms as well as those who have not will help facilitate these research. adjustment in covid-19 case definitions in hubei province in february. section a contains details on the computation of the counterfactuals.weather conditions affect disease transmissions either directly if the virus can more easily survive and spread in certain environment, or indirectly by changing human behavior. table 9 reports results of the first stage of the iv regressions (table 4 ) using the full sample. in columns (1) and (2), the dependent variables are the numbers of newly confirmed covid-19 cases in the own city in the preceding first and second weeks, respectively. in columns (3) and (4), the dependent variables are the sum of inverse log distance weighted numbers of newly confirmed covid-19 cases in other cities in the preceding first and second weeks, respectively. these are the endogenous variables in the iv regressions. the weather variables in the preceding first and second weeks are included in the control variables. the weather variables in the preceding third and fourth weeks are the excluded instruments, and their coefficients are reported in the table. because the variables are averages in 7-day moving windows, the error term may be serially correlated, and we include city by week fixed effects. also included in the control variables are the average numbers of new cases in wuhan in the preceding first and second weeks, interacted with the inverse log distance or the population flow.because the spread of the virus depends on both the number of infectious people and the weather conditions, the coefficients in the first stage regressions do not have structural interpretations. the wald tests on the joint significance of the excluded instruments are conducted and their f statistics are reported. the excluded instruments have good predictive power.the implementation of local public health measures is likely correlated with the extent of the virus spread, so weather conditions that affect virus transmissions may also affect the likelihood that the policy is adopted. the influence of weather conditions on policy adoption may be complicated, so we use the cluster-lasso method of belloni et al. (2016) to select the weather variables that have good predictive power on the adoption of closed management of communities or family outdoor restrictions. let d ct be the dummy variable of the adoption of the local public health measure, i.e., d ct = 1 if the policy is in place in city c at day t. q ct is a vector of candidate weather variables, including weekly averages of daily mean temperature, maximum temperature, minimum temperature, dew point, stationlevel pressure, sea-level pressure, visibility, wind speed, maximum wind speed, snow depth, precipitation, dummy for adverse weather conditions, squared terms of these variables, and interactions among them. first, city and day fixed effects are removed. d ct = d ct  1 n c d ct  1 t t d ct + 1 nt ct d ct andq ct is defined similarly. the cluster-lasso method solves the following minimization problem: 1 nt ct d ct q ct b 2 +  nt k  k |b k |. (ahrens et al. 2019) , which implements the cluster-lasso method of belloni et al. (2016) . city and date fixed effects are included. candidate variables include weekly averages of daily mean temperature, maximum temperature, minimum temperature, dew point, station-level pressure, sea-level pressure, visibility, wind speed, maximum wind speed, snow depth, precipitation, dummy for adverse weather conditions, squared terms of these variables, and interactions among them  and  are penalty parameters. a larger penalty value forces more coefficients to zero. the penalty parameters are picked using the theoretical result of belloni et al. (2016) . the estimation uses the stata package by ahrens et al. (2019) . table 10 lists the selected weather variables, which are used as the instruments in table 8 . the dependent variable is the number of daily new cases. the endogenous explanatory variables include the average numbers of new confirmed cases in the own city and nearby cities in the preceding first and second weeks (model a) and averages in the preceding 14 days (model b). weekly averages of daily maximum temperature, precipitation, wind speed, the interaction between precipitation and wind speed, and the inverse log distance weighted sum of these variables in other cities, during the preceding third and fourth weeks, are used as instrumental variables in the iv regressions. weather controls include contemporaneous weather variables in the preceding first and second weeks. standard errors in parentheses are clustered by provinces. *** p <0.01, ** p <0.05, * p <0.1el asma es la enfermedad crnica infantil ms frecuente. su prevalencia se estima en un 8-10%. el asma debe considerarse como el resultado del entorno en un paciente predispuesto y se han realizado numerosos estudios sobre la gentica del asma, aunque hasta el momento slo han identificado genes de susceptibilidad [1] . los progresos relativos a los mecanismos fisiopatolgicos y la mejora de las estrategias teraputicas centradas en el tratamiento de la inflamacin deberan permitir en la actualidad a los nios asmticos llevar una vida (casi) normal a la vez que se conserva o se recupera su funcin respiratoria. en francia metropolitana, la mortalidad por asma ha disminuido desde 1990, pero se mantiene ms o menos estable desde 2005. en 2005, la tasa bruta de mortalidad en los menores de 15 aos era de 0,05 por 100.000, con seis fallecimientos. era de 0,2 por 100.000 en los pacientes de 15-44 aos. en 2011, la mortalidad por asma era de 0,03 por 100.000 nios menores de 15 aos (con cuatro fallecimientos) y de 0,2 en personas de 11-55 aos [2] . el asma infantil adopta sus caractersticas tpicas a partir de los 3 aos. se tiende a diferenciar el asma de los nios mayores y el de los preescolares. asma, definido como un acceso paroxstico de cualquier duracin. en la actualidad, se distinguen por una parte las exacerbaciones y, por otra, los sntomas crnicos. la exacerbacin se define por la presencia de sntomas agudos que duran ms de 24 horas y que requieren un cambio de tratamiento. en la mayora de los casos, estas manifestaciones aparecen de forma progresiva, a menudo precedidas de prdromos que varan de un nio a otro, pero que son casi siempre iguales en el mismo nio: rinorrea transparente acuosa, tos seca en quintas. los sntomas principales son una tos inicialmente seca, sibilancias, taquipnea, disnea con prolongacin del tiempo espiratorio, retracciones/tiraje, distensin torcica, obstruccin bronquial por secreciones y taquicardia; en las formas ms graves, puede haber trastornos del nivel de consciencia, cianosis y pulso paradjico. la respuesta inicial a los broncodilatadores, la naturaleza y la intensidad de los sntomas permiten clasificar la exacerbacin en leve, moderada o grave (cuadro 1). desde un punto de vista prctico, pero tambin epidemiolgico, se distinguen las exacerbaciones leves a moderadas y las exacerbaciones graves, definidas por la necesidad de tomar corticoides orales o de requerir asistencia mdica (consulta de urgencia, hospitalaria o no, hospitalizacin) [3] . el asma aguda grave (antes denominada estatus asmtico) es una exacerbacin que no responde al tratamiento o cuya intensidad es inusual en su evolucin o su semiologa. los factores de riesgo se presentan en el cuadro 2.los sntomas de corta duracin (tos, sibilancias, sensacin de opresin, disnea) que requieren la toma puntual de broncodilatadores de accin corta (bdac) reflejan el control cotidiano del asma.en la anamnesis, se busca un factor desencadenante: infecciones virales (en particular, los rinovirus), contactos alergnicos, ejercicio fsico, emociones, contrariedades, contaminacin (incluido el humo de cigarrillos), cambio del tiempo o de clima. algunas circunstancias tambin conllevan un riesgo: inicio del curso escolar, viajes, retorno al domicilio tras las vacaciones, retorno de una estancia climtica, etctera.en los nios con asma conocida, no se realizan radiografas de trax de forma sistemtica en una exacerbacin moderada. mostraran una distensin torcica con horizontalizacin de las costillas, aplanamiento del diafragma y aumento del nmero de arcos anteriores que se proyectan en el campo pulmonar ( siete arcos anteriores de las costillas), as como una acentuacin del espacio radiotransparente retroesternal y retrocardaco y un mal vaciamiento espiratorio en la proyeccin lateral. en cambio, en las exacerbaciones graves, con fiebre o que presentan sntomas clnicos inusuales, las radiografas de trax son necesarias para buscar una complicacin.manifestaciones atpicas. formas complicadas. trastornos de ventilacin: un tapn mucoso puede obstruir un bronquio segmentario o lobular (en particular, el lobular medio) y, ms raramente, un bronquio principal, lo que provoca una atelectasia o un enfisema obstructivo (figs. 1 y 2). puede ramificarse en sentido distal, provocando una impactacin mucoide rica en polimorfonucleares eosinfilos y cristales de charcot-leyden. la evolucin con un tratamiento que asocie broncodilatadores, corticoides y kinesiterapia respiratoria suele ser favorable. la endoscopia bronquial slo est indicada en caso de fracaso.  neumomediastino, enfisema subcutneo y neumotrax: el diagnstico se sospecha por la presencia de dolor retroesternal irradiado a los brazos y el cuello, con agravamiento por los movimientos respiratorios y, en ocasiones, por la deglucin. suele asociarse a un enfisema subcutneo, cuyo signo clnico esencial es la percepcin de una crepitacin similar a la nieve en la regin cervical y torcica superior, dolorosa a la palpacin. el neumomediastino se manifiesta en la radiografa de trax por la presencia de hiperclaridades lineales verticales a lo largo del mediastino y de los contornos cardacos, que levantan las dos hojas pleurales. el enfisema subcutneo se manifiesta por la presencia de imgenes claras subcutneas cervicales o parietales (fig. 3) . stas son complicaciones generalmente benignas del asma, su tratamiento es igual al de la exacerbacin y se resuelven cuadro 2. factores de riesgo de exacerbaciones graves.  tos y traquetis espasmdicas. la tos espasmdica equivalente de asma se manifiesta clsicamente por episodios de tos seca, a menudo con predominio nocturno, sobre todo en la segunda parte de la noche, pero tambin al rer, durante las tensiones o emociones, al interrumpir un esfuerzo o durante los cambios de tiempo. es poco o nada sensible al tratamiento sintomtico habitual, pero responde a los tratamientos antiasmticos. la tos crnica es muy frecuente en los nios y, aunque durante muchos aos en una gran proporcin de tosedores crnicos se haba considerado que tenan un equivalente de asma, varios argumentos han limitado posteriormente el marco de la tos espasmdica equivalente de asma: ausencia de beneficio de los 2-agonistas frente al placebo en los ensayos aleatorizados en nios con tos crnica inespecfica; los estudios longitudinales muestran que las toses recidivantes sin sibilancias asociadas se emc -pediatra curan con el tiempo y que los factores de riesgo y los factores desencadenantes son distintos entre la tos inespecfica y el asma; la mayora de los nios con tos crnica no tienen inflamacin de las vas areas y, por ltimo, la broncoconstriccin y la tos estn mediadas por vas diferentes. los argumentos para relacionar la tos con el asma son una respuesta indiscutible al tratamiento antiasmtico, la presencia de dermatitis atpica, unas pruebas cutneas positivas al huevo y a los neumoalrgenos, antecedentes parentales de asma, la existencia de hiperreactividad bronquial en las pruebas funcionales respiratorias (pfr) y la presencia de una inflamacin eosinoflica de las vas respiratorias (expectoracin o lavado broncoalveolar) [4, 5] .  focos recidivantes. en los nios que presentan bronquitis recidivantes, no es raro que las radiografas muestren focos pulmonares recidivantes o persistentes. el territorio que se afecta con ms frecuencia es el lbulo medio, con un borramiento del borde derecho del corazn. cuando se realiza una fibroendoscopia bronquial, muestra un orificio lobular medio libre o que simplemente presenta inflamacin y secreciones.  manifestaciones de esfuerzo. la aparicin de molestias durante el esfuerzo tambin es un motivo frecuente de consulta. el asma inducida por el ejercicio (aie) se caracteriza por disnea, tos, opresin respiratoria y sibilancias, que suelen aparecer 5-10 minutos despus de interrumpir un ejercicio fsico intenso. en ocasiones, slo existe tos. aunque, por lo general, el aie se produce tras la interrupcin del ejercicio, tambin puede observarse durante el ejercicio fsico. el aie es distinto a la disnea debida a la falta de forma fsica, aunque no siempre son fciles de distinguir. el aie no se debe confundir con la anafilaxia inducida por el ejercicio, tanto si depende de una sensibilizacin alimentaria como si no. en caso de duda, el diagnstico se basa en la realizacin de una prueba de esfuerzo, que muestra una disminucin de al menos un 15% del volumen espiratorio mximo en un segundo (vems) despus del esfuerzo.hay tres pruebas indispensables durante la evaluacin inicial: radiografas de trax, evaluacin de las caractersticas de atopia y pfr.radiografa de trax. en las radiografas en inspiracin y espiracin forzada se buscan los signos de asma grave (deformacin y distensin torcica, mal vaciamiento espiratorio), pero sobre todo sirven para el diagnstico diferencial (cf infra).evaluacin de las caractersticas de atopia. los estudios epidemiolgicos muestran que cerca del 80% de los nios con asma estn sensibilizados al menos a un alrgeno. la evaluacin alergolgica se basa en la confrontacin y la coherencia entre la anamnesis y las pruebas cutneas. son datos orientativos el antecedente de atopia en la familia (asma, polinosis, eccema atpico en los progenitores y/o hermanos), as como el antecedente o la presencia de una dermatitis atpica en el nio. en los nios mayores, los alrgenos responsables en la mayora de los casos son los caros, seguidos por los epitelios de animales (sobre todo del gato), los plenes de gramneas y despus las cucarachas y los mohos. las alergias alimentarias se asocian a exacerbaciones ms graves y globalmente a un asma ms difcil de controlar. las pruebas de puncin cutnea son el mtodo de referencia. la tcnica es simple, rpida e indolora, pero exige un gran rigor a la hora de realizarla. se efecta cuando el nio se encuentra estable, despus de haber suspendido los antihistamnicos h 1 . una prueba cutnea se considera positiva si el dimetro de la induracin es de al menos 3 mm y mayor del 50% del control positivo.la eosinofilia sangunea ( 400/mm 3 ) y la elevacin de la inmunoglobulina e (ige) srica tambin son argumentos a favor de la existencia de atopia. el lmite superior de los valores normales de las ige totales puede estimarse arbitrariamente en 20 u/ml por ao de edad, hasta los 12 aos. las pruebas multialergnicas pueden ser tiles para detectar una alergia ante una semiologa respiratoria atpica o cuando las pruebas cutneas no pueden realizarse o son ininterpretables (tratamiento antihistamnico activo, dermografismo, dermatosis extensa). las ige especficas son tiles cuando existe una discordancia entre la clnica y las pruebas cutneas. los resultados correlacionan bien con las pruebas cutneas, sobre todo para los neumoalrgenos. la determinacin de las ige especficas frente a un panel de alrgenos (inmunocap isac) permite un anlisis simultneo de protenas alergnicas en el mismo soporte. sus principales limitaciones son el coste y la ausencia de reembolso, el carcter semicuantitativo de los resultados y la existencia de fuentes alergnicas insuficientemente representadas o ausentes (moho, por ejemplo). pfr. las pfr tienen poca utilidad durante una exacerbacin. confirmaran el sndrome obstructivo y la distensin torcica. en cambio, son indispensables en el perodo intercrtico, donde presentan inters tanto diagnstico como teraputico para la vigilancia del control del asma, as como tambin pronstico. desde el punto de vista diagnstico, las pfr pueden poner de manifiesto un sndrome obstructivo en el estado basal, reversible tras el uso de broncodilatadores, o mostrar una hiperreactividad bronquial inespecfica (prueba de metacolina).la pfr permite apreciar objetivamente el estado respiratorio. en los nios sin tratamiento y asintomticos, unas pfr normales permiten proponer el tratamiento slo de forma puntual. por el contrario, una obstruccin intercrtica, incluso en ausencia de percepcin clnica, motiva la administracin de un tratamiento de fondo. las pfr permiten medir la eficacia real de los tratamientos prescritos y adaptar su posologa. esta vigilancia debe aplicarse a todos los nios asmticos, anualmente en caso de asma bien controlada, y de forma tri o cuatrimestral durante la adaptacin de un tratamiento de fondo.desde el punto de vista prctico, los nios a partir de 6 aos son capaces de realizar una espirometra y las curvas flujo-volumen (fig. 4) . entre los 3-4 aos y los 6 aos, se realizan las mediciones de resistencias, bien mediante pletismografa, bien por medicin de las interrupciones de flujo, o bien por oscilaciones forzadas, dependiendo del material disponible y de la colaboracin del nio. salvo que exista una indicacin precisa, las pfr deben realizarse con el tratamiento habitual del nio y han de constar sistemticamente de una respuesta a los broncodilatadores. se considera significativa una mejora del vems de al menos el 12% respecto al valor basal o una disminucin de al menos el 30% de las resistencias en pletismografa. las pfr permiten tambin detectar una distensin con aumento de la capacidad residual funcional (crf) y un aumento de la relacin volumen residual/capacidad pulmonar total (vr/cpt).la medicin del flujo espiratorio mximo (fem) es un complemento muy til en la consulta o en el domicilio para la determinacin de la obstruccin bronquial. el valor expresado (en l/min) correlaciona con la talla del nio. un aumento del fem de al menos un 20% tras la inhalacin de broncodilatador tiene un valor diagnstico excelente. unas variaciones circadianas superiores al 20% del fem indican un asma inestable. la importancia de sndrome de hiperventilacin la disminucin del fem durante una exacerbacin y la evaluacin de la respuesta tras la administracin de un 2-adrenrgico mejoran el tratamiento domiciliario.no se puede hablar de asma sin citar las otras causas de tos crnica y de disnea obstructiva (cuadro 3). algunas de ellas pueden coexistir con el asma o acompaarse de una hiperreactividad bronquial. esta lista de diagnsticos diferenciales muestra la importancia de la exploracin fsica completa, del estudio de los antecedentes, incluidos los neonatales (carnet de salud), de la curva de crecimiento ponderoestatural y de las exploraciones complementarias realizadas anteriormente, en particular las radiografas de trax.  la demostracin de un atrapamiento espiratorio localizado hace sospechar en primer lugar un obstculo (sobre todo un cuerpo extrao) y obliga a realizar una endoscopia bronquial. en ausencia de cuerpo extrao, hay que buscar las secuelas de una neumopata viral de tipo bronquiolitis obliterante.  la presencia de acropaquias indica en la mayora de los casos una insuficiencia respiratoria crnica. se puede observar en el asma grave pero, sobre todo, obliga a buscar la presencia de bronquiectasias graves de cualquier causa.  una poliposis nasal obliga a sospechar una mucoviscidosis y una discinesia ciliar primaria, una intolerancia a la aspirina en adolescentes.  una desviacin evidente de la curva de crecimiento obliga a buscar una enfermedad ms grave, respiratoria, digestiva o endocrina que simule o se aada al asma. tambin hay que buscar una corticoterapia por va sistmica no referida por el paciente.  la discinesia de las cuerdas vocales (o discinesia larngea transitoria) puede simular una exacerbacin de asma grave (tos y disnea intensa, en ocasiones sibilancias y tiraje intercostal). este sndrome, ms frecuente en adolescentes, se debe a la aduccin paradjica de las cuerdas vocales que se produce exclusiva o principalmente durante la inspiracin. durante una exacerbacin, no resulta fcil demostrar mediante laringoscopia el cierre paradjico de los dos tercios anteriores de la glotis y/o un aplanamiento de la curva inspiratoria en la curva flujo-volumen. en estos casos, llama la atencin un desencadenante emocional de las exacerbaciones, su gravedad aparente que contrasta con una sao 2 normal y una ausencia de distensin en las radiografas de trax, la variabilidad inexplicable de la funcin respiratoria y, sobre todo, la resistencia a los tratamientos antiasmticos de fondo y de la exacerbacin. la coexistencia frecuente, en la poblacin neumoalergolgica peditrica, de una disfuncin de las cuerdas vocales y de asma, puede provocar un hipertratamiento no justificado y en ocasiones peligroso.  el diagnstico de sndrome de hiperventilacin pulmonar es difcil en ocasiones, porque los sntomas pueden asociarse a un asma autntica. el diagnstico se basa esencialmente en la anamnesis, complementada con un cuestionario estandarizado. hay que buscar otros sntomas, como ansiedad, dificultad para dormir, dolor variable, distensin abdominal o prurito [6] . en ocasiones, se requiere una prueba de hiperventilacin voluntaria para reproducir los signos atpicos.se basa en la inhalacin de bdac. la posologa es de 1-el establecimiento de un plan de accin por escrito y explicado debe permitir a los progenitores reconocer y tratar los prdromos en funcin de la gravedad. el tratamiento farmacolgico inicial se resume a continuacin.  las nebulizaciones de bdac se administran con oxgeno, con un flujo de 6-8 l/min y vigilando la pulsioximetra (spo 2 ) con la siguiente posologa: para el salbutamol (dosis de 1,25 mg, 2,5 mg y 5 mg/2,5 ml): 2,5 mg si el peso es menor de 16 kg y 5 mg si el peso es superior a 16 kg (o 0,15 mg/kg, mnimo 1,25 mg, mximo 5 mg);  para la terbutalina: 0,1-0,2 mg/kg o 1-2 gotas por kilogramo (mnimo 10 gotas, mximo 5 mg, es decir, una dosis de 2 ml).  las nebulizaciones se repiten cada 20 minutos, con un mnimo de tres nebulizaciones en una hora. la administracin de bdac en ad acoplados a una cmara espaciadora, en dosis de una pulverizacin por cada 2-4 kg de peso, sin pasar de 10 pulverizaciones, con la misma eficacia en las exacerbaciones moderadas.  las nebulizaciones de ipratropio, 0,25 mg (hasta 6 aos) o 0,5 mg (en mayores de 6 aos), se reservan a las exacerbaciones graves, asociadas a los bdac.  los bdac inyectables son la terbutalina por va subcutnea (a partir de 2 aos) en la posologa de 10 g/kg o el salbutamol por va intravenosa con una dosis de carga de 1,5-5 g/kg en tres minutos.  la corticoterapia que debe utilizarse es la prednisona o la prednisolona (1-2 mg/kg sin superar los 40 mg/da) o la betametasona (0,15-0,3 mg/kg) en una toma diaria durante 3-5 das. la metilprednisolona por va intravenosa (2 mg/kg y despus 0,5 mg/kg/6 h) slo se utiliza en caso de vmitos o de agotamiento.  los antibiticos suelen carecer de utilidad.posologa de los corticoides inhalados segn la edad (de [3] ).intermedia alta el tratamiento de un nio asmtico tiene como objetivos limitar las exacerbaciones, los sntomas intercrticos y las necesidades de 2-adrenrgicos de rescate, permitir al nio participar en las actividades familiares, escolares, deportivas y sociales, normalizar y mantener las funciones respiratorias normales y disminuir las variaciones circadianas del fem [3, 7] .los corticoides inhalados (ci) son la primera lnea de tratamiento de fondo del asma. su eficacia sobre la mortalidad por asma, los sntomas de asma y la funcin respiratoria se ha demostrado ampliamente.las posologas recomendadas de ci se resumen en el cuadro 4. con las dosis habituales, la tolerabilidad es excelente. los efectos beneficiosos esenciales de los ci se obtienen en dosis de 100, 200, e incluso 400 g/da de equivalente de budesonida. por encima de esas dosis, se pueden obtener algunos beneficios funcionales, en particular sobre el aie, pero la probabilidad de efectos secundarios aumenta. las dianas potenciales de los ci son el crecimiento, la funcin suprarrenal y el metabolismo seo [8, 9] :  crecimiento: los estudios a largo plazo durante varios aos muestran que los ci se acompaan de una reduccin de la velocidad de crecimiento de 0,48 cm/ao desde el primer ao. esto parece ser mximo durante el primer ao de tratamiento y menos pronunciado a continuacin. este efecto parece ser dependiente de la molcula [10] ;  eje corticosuprarrenal: los ci pueden provocar una inhibicin del eje corticosuprarrenal, medido por el rea bajo la curva del cortisol plasmtico o el cortisol libre urinario de 24 horas. esta inhibicin es dependiente de la dosis. para las dosis menores o iguales a 400 g/da de budesonida o equivalente, la exploracin de la funcin suprarrenal parece carecer de utilidad. en cambio, para posologa superiores, sobre todo si son prolongadas, hay que ser prudente. se han descrito casos de insuficiencia suprarrenal aguda en nios que han recibido dosis elevadas de ci durante perodos prolongados;  metabolismo seo: los resultados sobre el recambio y la mineralizacin sea que hacen temer una osteoporosis a largo plazo son discordantes. la mayora de los parmetros de densitometra sea por absorciometra bifotnica muestran unos resultados normales con tratamientos de hasta 400 g/da, pero otros estudios han descrito un enlentecimiento del metabolismo seo;  el riesgo de candidiasis bucal, de disfona o de agravamiento de la voz se estima en el 10% de los casos, y el de cataratas o de atrofia cutnea es excepcional en la infancia. la prevencin de estos efectos secundarios, aunque son infrecuentes con las dosis utilizadas habitualmente, se basa en la utilizacin de una cmara espaciadora en caso de aerosol, el enjuague de la boca tras el uso, pero sobre todo en la bsqueda sistemtica de la dosis mnima eficaz.se dispone de dos molculas, el salmeterol y el formoterol. el formoterol presenta el inters de su rapidez de accin, con una broncodilatacin en 1-3 minutos. los bdap tienen una accin sinrgica con los ci. los corticoides permiten tambin prevenir una posible desensibilizacin de los receptores 2-mimticos (taquifilaxia). los bdap se utilizan a largo plazo y siempre en asociacin con los ci, dependiendo del control del asma, y en menos ocasiones (y de forma puntual) en la prevencin del aie. en francia, por ejemplo, se comercializan las siguientes combinaciones: fluticasona (100, 250 g) + salmeterol. presenta el inters de estar disponible en inhalador de polvo (dosis de 100 y 250 g de fluticasona, 50 g/dosis de salmeterol) pero tambin en ad (dosis de 50, 125 y 250 g de fluticasona, y 25 g/dosis de salmeterol). por tanto, puede administrarse mediante cmara espaciadora. esto hace que sea el nico tratamiento combinado que puede utilizarse en nios de 4-7 aos;  budesonida + formoterol. slo est disponible como inhalador de polvo (dosis de 100, 200, 400 g de budesonida, 6 y 12 g/dosis de formoterol). puede utilizarse a partir de los 6 aos. la utilidad de esta combinacin se debe a la rapidez de accin del formoterol, lo que ha permitido una nueva estrategia teraputica en la que se utiliza esta asociacin tanto para el tratamiento de fondo como para el de las exacerbaciones. esta estrategia teraputica an no est autorizada para menores de 18 aos;  formoterol (5 g/dosis) + fluticasona (50, 125 y 250 g) a partir de los 12 aos; beclometasona (100 g) + formoterol (6 g/dosis) a partir de 18 aos.en francia, slo est disponible el montelukast, que es un inhibidor de los receptores de leucotrienos. presenta la ventaja de una nica toma diaria (por la noche) por va oral. est autorizado a partir de los 6 meses. en los nios a partir de 6 aos, est indicado en el asma inducida por el esfuerzo y en el asma persistente leve a moderada, o en asociacin con los ci en los nios con un control insuficiente mediante ci, o bien en monoterapia en caso de incapacidad de cumplir un tratamiento con ci. la posologa por va oral es de 5 mg/da entre los 6 y los 14 aos y de 10 mg/da a partir de los 14 aos. los estudios en los que se ha comparado directamente la eficacia del montelukast respecto a los ci muestran globalmente una superioridad de estos ltimos [11, 12] . sin embargo existen indiscutiblemente grupos de poblacin respondedores a los antileucotrienos [13] , cuya mejor respuesta depende al menos en parte de polimorfismos de genes que codifican enzimas implicadas en el metabolismo del cido araquidnico [14] . la utilizacin del montelukast a demanda en las exacerbaciones [15] o poco antes de iniciar la escolarizacin [16] ha demostrado ser poco eficaz.se puede utilizar asociada a los ci en caso de asma persistente grave no controlada. en la prctica, su prescripcin se ha vuelto excepcional debido a la necesidad de controlar las concentraciones sricas para evitar las sobredosis. la posologa inicial es de 12-14 mg/kg/da, sin superar los 300 mg/da. el objetivo es mantener una teofilinemia de entre 10 y 20 g/ml las 24 horas del da. por encima de 20 g/ml, pueden aparecer efectos secundarios. el riesgo de efectos txicos potencialmente mortales aumenta progresivamente por encima de una concentracin srica de 30 g/ml.los anticuerpos anti-ige son una nueva clase teraputica que inaugura la era de las terapias dirigidas. el omalizumab es un anticuerpo monoclonal humanizado de origen murino que se une a las ige circulantes, impidiendo su fijacin a sus receptores celulares. se administra por va subcutnea cada 2-4 semanas en una posologa dependiente del peso y de la concentracin inicial de ige. su tolerabilidad es buena, incluso en la infancia. la eficacia es ptima cuando el asma es grave y polialrgica, con una reduccin de la tasa de exacerbaciones, una disminucin del consumo de corticoides orales, una reduccin del uso de tratamientos de urgencia y una mejora de la calidad de vida [17, 18] . el omalizumab est autorizado en nios mayores de 6 aos y su indicacin es el tratamiento del asma alrgica grave despus del fracaso de los tratamientos antiasmticos convencionales.la evaluacin del control del asma consta de dos dominios; por una parte, la evaluacin del control diario en las cuatro ltimas semanas y, por otra parte, el riesgo de evolucin desfavorable tanto en lo que respecta al riesgo de exacerbacin como al de una alteracin de la funcin respiratoria [3] . el control diario se evala en funcin de cuatro tems: frecuencia de las manifestaciones diurnas (> 2/semana o no), despertares nocturnos (s/no), sntomas con el esfuerzo (s/no) y uso de bdac (> 2/semana o no). el control debe evaluarse en cada consulta. un nico criterio anormal basta para hablar de asma parcialmente no controlada, y a partir de tres criterios el asma no est controlada. se pueden utilizar cuestionarios como el asthma control test, que est disponible para los tramos de edad de 4-11 aos y a partir de 11 aos. evala el control en las cuatro ltimas semanas.  los factores de riesgo de exacerbaciones futuras son: los sntomas no controlados, un uso excesivo de broncodilatadores (al menos un ad/mes), un defecto de tratamiento con los ci, un vems inferior al 60%, problemas psicosociales o econmicos, tabaquismo pasivo o activo, persistencia de alrgenos, enfermedades concurrentes (obesidad, rinosinusitis, alergia ali-recomendaciones teraputicas para la instauracin de un tratamiento contra el asma infantil segn la semiologa (de [3] ). mentaria), existencia de una exacerbacin grave en el ao previo y un antecedente de intubacin por asma aguda grave.  los factores de riesgo de obstruccin fija son el defecto de tratamiento con ci, la exposicin al tabaco y a vapores qumicos nocivos, un vems inicial bajo, un asma hipersecretora, as como la eosinofilia sangunea o en la expectoracin inducida. la existencia de uno o varios de estos factores aumenta el riesgo de exacerbaciones graves aunque estos sntomas estn bien controlados.la gravedad se debe a la carga teraputica necesaria para obtener el control de los sntomas y las exacerbaciones. se distingue el asma leve (escalones 1 y 2 de tratamiento o dosis baja de ci), el asma moderada (escaln 3, asociacin bdap dosis baja de ci) y el asma grave (escalones 4 y 5, asociacin bdap y ci en dosis intermedia o alta  montelukast, o asma no controlada pese a estos tratamientos) (fig. 5) .en un paciente nuevo, el inicio del tratamiento depende del control y del riesgo futuro. las recomendaciones para la instauracin de un primer tratamiento se resumen en el cuadro 5 para los nios mayores de 6 aos.el tratamiento se adapta a continuacin al control clnico y a la funcin respiratoria [3, 19] . en un nio con asma no controlada a pesar de un tratamiento con ci en dosis baja/intermedia, la medida de eleccin es asociar un bdap, y las alternativas son la posibilidad de duplicar la dosis de ci o asociar un antileucotrieno [20] . si el asma est bien controlada clnica y funcionalmente desde hace 2-3 meses, se propone disminuir los ci por escalones del 25-50% en funcin de la posologa inicial, con el objetivo de mantener el control local del asma con la dosis mnima eficaz. durante la disminucin, se puede pasar a una toma nica diaria para favorecer la observancia.cuando parece haber un control insuficiente del asma, antes de reforzar el tratamiento se debe buscar un defecto de observancia, una tcnica de inhalacin defectuosa o un mal control ambiental (cf infra). mes precedente -bdac < 2 -despertar = 0 -exa en el ao = 0 -riesgo de exa = 0 figura 5. enfoque teraputico por escalones a partir de 6 aos (segn [3] ). ci: corticoides inhalados; co: corticoides orales; alt: antileucotrienos; bdac: broncodilatadores de accin corta; bdap: broncodilatadores de accin prolongada; exa: exacerbacin.la clnica y las pfr son la referencia para el seguimiento de los nios asmticos. las pfr deben realizarse con regularidad. en caso de asma bien controlada en un nio que reciba dosis bajas de ci, este control puede ser anual. en los dems casos, debe ser bi o trianual. slo las pfr permiten detectar la aparicin de una obstruccin intercrtica no percibida por el paciente.se han estudiado estrategias de vigilancia de la inflamacin bronquial para ayudar a adaptar el tratamiento de fondo. los principales parmetros propuestos son la vigilancia del no exhalado, de la eosinofilia en la expectoracin inducida y de la hiperreactividad bronquial. la hiperreactividad bronquial es un parmetro interesante, relacionado con la gravedad y el riesgo de persistencia del asma. la utilizacin del no como parmetro del control o marcador predictivo de la aparicin de exacerbaciones an es motivo de controversia [21] . en la actualidad, se dispone de aparatos porttiles de medicin del no, pero su utilizacin en la prctica corriente an es motivo de debate. en lo que respecta a la eosinofilia de la expectoracin inducida, an est restringida a ciertos centros y en la mayora de los casos al marco de protocolos clnicos.el control ambiental es un elemento fundamental del tratamiento, porque participa en gran medida en la lucha contra la inflamacin bronquial. los factores alrgicos ocupan un lugar importante no slo en el desencadenamiento de las exacerbaciones, sino tambin en la perpetuacin de la inflamacin bronquial. la reduccin de la carga alergnica (de caros en particular) permite reducir la semiologa, el consumo de frmacos y la hiperreactividad bronquial.se han propuesto muchas tcnicas para reducir la exposicin a los neumoalrgenos [22] :  para los caros: disminucin de la humedad relativa (aireacin, abertura de las ventanas en climas templados, deshumidificacin y climatizacin en regiones clidas y hmedas),  utilizacin de ropa de cama sinttica,  utilizacin de fundas anticaros,  supresin de las alfombras, cortinas y moquetas, o su limpieza frecuente con acaricidas, e incluso utilizacin de productos textiles que incorporen un acaricida,  lavado frecuente de las sbanas a una temperatura superior a 55  c y utilizacin de aspiradores provistos de filtros especiales; el control ambiental consta tambin de: la lucha contra las cucarachas, que es difcil de aplicar porque, en la mayora de los casos, la contaminacin de las casas proviene de las otras casas, lo que requiere un tratamiento de todo el inmueble,  la limitacin de los contactos alergnicos exteriores, en particular los plenes,  la exclusin de los animales domsticos a los que el nio es alrgico,  la lucha contra los mohos, cuya multiplicacin se ve favorecida por el ambiente hmedo (y los humidificadores),  la lucha contra el tabaquismo pasivo.la inmunoterapia especfica (ite) tiene como finalidad reducir en un nio sensibilizado los sntomas provocados durante una nueva exposicin al alrgeno. en el asma, est indicada en caso de asma persistente leve o moderada, estabilizada con tratamiento. la inmunoterapia por va sublingual (itsl) sustituye en la actualidad a la ite por va inyectable y puede comenzarse desde los 3 aos [23] . la duracin del tratamiento es de 3-5 aos. los alrgenos implicados son esencialmente los caros y los plenes (gramneas, compuestas, betulceas, cupresceas, fagceas). la prescripcin debe basarse en la identificacin precisa y una demostracin de los alrgenos, cuyo nmero debe ser limitado (si es posible, no ms de dos), tras el fracaso o la imposibilidad de la exclusin y la eficacia insuficiente del tratamiento farmacolgico clsico.si se confirma que la ite reduce la aparicin de nuevas sensibilizaciones y/o el riesgo de evolucin de la rinitis alrgica hacia el asma, sera en la actualidad el nico tratamiento susceptible de poder modificar la historia natural de la enfermedad alrgica.los estudios de cohortes [24] [25] [26] [27] [28] [29] [30] [31] [32] con un seguimiento prolongado muestran que los factores pronsticos de persistencia del asma desde la infancia a la edad adulta han permitido identificar los factores siguientes:  la atopia, tanto familiar como personal;  la gravedad clnica del asma;  la persistencia de una obstruccin bronquial intercrtica;  la persistencia de una hiperreactividad bronquial; el sobrepeso y la pubertad precoz;  el tabaquismo tanto pasivo como activo.el asma de los nios pequeos es el que aparece en la edad preescolar, antes de los 5-6 aos [3, 33] . en la actualidad, esta forma engloba tanto el asma del lactante (antes de los 36 meses, como el de los nios de 3-5 aos, que es parecido al de los nios mayores. el perodo del nacimiento hasta los 5 aos es un perodo de transicin en la instauracin de la enfermedad. todos los estudios muestran que la mayora de los cuadros de asma comienzan en la primera infancia. simultneamente, los estudios de cohortes prospectivas han demostrado la heterogeneidad fenotpica del asma preescolar.antes de los 3 aos, se considera como asma cualquier episodio disneico con sibilancias que se repita al menos 3 veces antes de los 2 aos, con independencia de la edad de inicio, de la existencia o no de estigmas de atopia y de la causa aparentemente desencadenante [34] . esta definicin puede parecer amplia, pues slo una parte estos lactantes continuarn teniendo exacerbaciones, mientras que los dems tendrn manifestaciones transitorias. sin embargo, ante la ausencia de criterios predictivos fiables, el diagnstico del asma favorece la instauracin de tratamientos dirigidos.la mayora de las exacerbaciones estn inducidas por virus y adoptan el carcter de una bronquiolitis viral aguda. comienza por una rinitis o rinofaringitis banal, que precede en 2-3 das a la aparicin de una tos seca, en quintas, con polipnea, retracciones/tiraje y sibilancias. la importancia de las retracciones/tiraje y de la polipnea, as como la tolerancia de los sntomas (desde los puntos de vista digestivo y respiratorio) y la saturacin de o 2 (normal > 95%) son ndices de gravedad. el cuadro evoluciona a la curacin en unos das. los agentes infecciosos principales en el perodo de otoo-invierno son el virus respiratorio sincitial, los rinovirus, los virus parainfluenza, el metaneumovirus y el virus de la gripe.otros cuadros clnicos:  sibilancias continuas con persistencia de los signos de obstruccin bronquiolar, cuya importancia vara en funcin de los episodios infecciosos otorrinolaringolgicos (orl) y de la actividad del nio; los sntomas aumentan durante la agitacin, las comidas y el esfuerzo, pero disminuyen en reposo y durante el sueo. estos bebs sibilantes mantienen un desarrollo ponderoestatural y una actividad normales (sibilantes felices);  episodios de disnea moderada con sibilancias, tos espasmdica con sibilancias al final de la tos, que se producen sin cuadros de viriasis, sobre todo por la noche, al rer o durante episodios de agitacin;  exacerbaciones graves que pueden causar un cuadro de asma aguda grave, en ocasiones con ingreso en reanimacin. se han descrito varios fenotipos [27, 33] :  segn los factores desencadenantes, que permiten distinguir aqullos en los que las manifestaciones se desencadenan slo por las infecciones virales de los que tienen mltiples factores desencadenantes como el ejercicio, la excitacin o la risa;  segn la existencia o no de atopia;  segn la evolucin: sibilantes transitorios cuyas manifestaciones no perdurarn despus de los 3 aos, sibilantes persistentes cuyas manifestaciones persistirn a los 6 aos y sibilantes tardos cunas manifestaciones aparecern entre los 3 y los 6 aos.en los lactantes, cualquier afeccin obstructiva que dificulte la evacuacin de las secreciones provoca una inflamacin bronquial y sibilancias (figs. 6 y 7) .varias patologas orgnicas causantes de obstruccin pueden presentarse como un asma del lactante, e incluso asociarse a figura 6. tomografa computarizada en un paciente con displasia broncopulmonar que muestra reas de hiperclaridad, bandas de atelectasia, invaginaciones pleurales y bullas subpleurales. ella (cuadro 3). por tanto, en el momento del diagnstico es indispensable la confrontacin de los datos de los antecedentes (antecedentes de prematuridad, dificultad respiratoria neonatal, viriasis grave, antecedentes atpicos personales y familiares, signos de reflujo gastroesofgico), de la historia de la enfermedad (frecuencia e intensidad de los sntomas de asma, estado respiratorio entre los episodios, factores desencadenantes, respuesta a los tratamientos recibidos), de la exploracin fsica (signos respiratorios: sibilancias, tos, disnea, retracciones/tiraje, distensin, cianosis, etc., crecimiento, eccema, signos atpicos) y de las radiografas de trax [34] .antes de los 3 aos, la evaluacin alergolgica debe reservarse a los nios con sntomas respiratorios persistentes, recidivantes, que requieran un tratamiento continuo o que se asocien a sntomas extrarrespiratorios compatibles con un origen alrgico. las pruebas de puncin cutnea se recomiendan como primera eleccin en la evaluacin alergolgica. si no se pueden realizar como primera eleccin, se recomienda realizar una prueba multialergnica. si estas pruebas son positivas, se debe continuar la evaluacin alergolgica. la determinacin de la concentracin srica de ige total o especfica como primera eleccin no se recomienda en la prctica corriente.las pfr pueden realizarse sin sedacin a partir de los 3 aos, con medicin de las resistencias pulmonares por pletismografa (resistencias especficas de las vas areas), interrupcin de los flujos u oscilaciones forzadas (resistencias totales). antes de los 2 aos, requieren sedacin y un material que slo est disponible en los laboratorios especializados, por lo que no se realizan de rutina.a favor del diagnstico de asma, pueden citarse [3] :  la secuencia rinitis-tos-sibilancia durante las infecciones de las vas areas superiores que desencadenan las exacerbaciones;  la presencia de tos seca recidivante o persistente, que aumenta por la noche, favorecida por el ejercicio, la risa, el llanto y la exposicin al tabaco, y que se produce fuera de las infecciones de las vas areas superiores;  la presencia de sibilancias recidivantes o de dificultad respiratoria con los mismos factores desencadenantes que los de la tos, incluido por la noche;  la existencia de datos de atopia personal o familiar: dermatitis atpica, rinitis alrgica;  una buena respuesta clnica a los broncodilatadores de forma aguda; la mejora clnica despus de 2-3 meses de ci y la recidiva al suspenderlos;  pruebas cutneas positivas para los neumoalrgenos y/o los alrgenos alimentarios (leche, huevo). castro rodrguez ha propuesto un ndice predictivo de persistencia de las manifestaciones. este ndice es positivo cuando existe un criterio mayor o dos criterios menores [35] :  criterios mayores: diagnstico de asma en uno de los progenitores, diagnstico confirmado mdicamente de dermatitis atpica, sensibilizacin al menos a un neumoalrgeno;  criterios menores: sibilancias sin infeccin respiratoria, eosinofilia sangunea mayor del 4%, sensibilizacin con un trofoalrgeno (leche, huevo, cacahuete). se debe sospechar otro diagnstico en caso de:  presencia de signos atpicos: estancamiento o reduccin ponderal,c d figura 7. tomografa computarizada con contraste, con cortes axiales (a, c) y reconstrucciones 3d (b, d) en un nio que tiene un doble cayado artico. persistencia de signos respiratorios intercrticos o manifestaciones desde el nacimiento: estridor, cornaje, disnea en las dos fases respiratorias, polipnea, sibilancias, tiraje, broncorrea, tos productiva matinal,  ausencia de correlacin con las infecciones de las vas areas superiores,  deformacin torcica, cianosis, acropaquias,  signos extrarrespiratorios asociados: trastornos deglutorios, diarrea crnica, soplo cardaco, disnea de esfuerzo, dolor abdominal, vmitos excesivos;  radiografa de trax anormal;  caractersticas particulares: prematuridad, antecedentes de reanimacin neonatal prolongada, displasia broncopulmonar, antecedentes de cardiopata congnita con cortocircuito izquierda-derecha;  no mal control a pesar de dosis moderadas de ci mediante ad con cmara de inhalacin. en tal caso, es indispensable completar las exploraciones (endoscopia bronquial, tomografa computarizada [tc] de trax, estudio de la motilidad ciliar, estudio inmunitario, prueba del sudor, etc.) en un medio especializado [34] (fig. 8 ).los objetivos del tratamiento son la normalizacin de la exploracin fsica, la ausencia de sntomas diarios (diurnos y nocturnos), el mantenimiento de una actividad fsica normal para la edad y la normalizacin del crecimiento ponderal cuando est alterado. al igual que en los nios mayores, la clasificacin basada en la gravedad inicial debe sustituirse en la actualidad por un tratamiento adaptado al control.los ci utilizados son la fluticasona (ad 50 g/dosis, autorizada a partir de 1 ao), la budesonida (formas de suspensin nebulizadas de 0,5 y 1 mg), la beclometasona en ad 50 y 250 g y nebulizada (formas en suspensin de 0,4 y 0,8 mg). se recomiendan dos modalidades de administracin: ad con cmara espaciadora adaptada (y mascarilla facial) y nebulizacin con un generador neumtico. la tolerabilidad de los ci en dosis bajas (cuadro 4) e intermedias es buena. las presentaciones intravenosas de corticoides no deben utilizarse en nebulizacin en el tratamiento del asma grave.los bdac se utilizan esencialmente para el tratamiento de los sntomas. sin embargo, pueden usarse como tratamiento de fondo, asociados con los ci. los bdap slo estn autorizados a partir de los 4 aos. el montelukast (grnulos de 4 mg) est autorizado a partir de los 6 meses, asociado con los ci y a partir de los 2 aos con las mismas indicaciones que en los nios mayores.al igual que en los nios mayores, la evaluacin y la estrategia teraputica en los nios preescolares se basan esencialmente en la frecuencia de los sntomas intercrticos y la evaluacin de los factores de riesgo. los sntomas intercrticos son los mismos: frecuencia de las manifestaciones diurnas, de los despertares nocturnos, de los sntomas con el esfuerzo y uso de bdac. sin embargo, la tolerancia de los sntomas es ms rigurosa, pues el umbral es de 1/semana en lugar de 2/semana en los nios mayores. por otra parte, los factores de riesgo de aparicin de exacerbacin son: sntomas no controlados, al menos una exacerbacin grave en el ao previo, la persistencia de tabaquismo pasivo o activo, de contaminacin o de un ambiente alergnico, un mal cumplimiento y problemas psicosociales importantes. el riesgo de evolucin hacia una obstruccin fija se relaciona con la frecuencia de hospitalizaciones anteriores. los algoritmos de tratamiento se resumen en la figura 9. se distinguen cuatro escalones: escaln 1: en caso de sibilancias inducidas por virus poco frecuentes y pocos sntomas intercrticos: ausencia de tratamiento de fondo; [34] [3] ). ci: corticoides inhalados; alt: antileucotrienos; bdac: broncodilatadores de accin corta. escaln 4: en ausencia de control con el escaln anterior, se aconseja despus de haber verificado la tcnica, la observancia y la exposicin, remitir al nio a un medio especializado para plantear el diagnstico y el uso de ci en nebulizacin. en todos los casos, se deben evaluar con frecuencia la eficacia o el fracaso del tratamiento. despus de la estabilizacin del asma, se trata de reducir la posologa progresivamente hasta obtener la posologa mnima eficaz. en la mayora de los lactantes, se puede interrumpir el tratamiento con corticoides durante el perodo estival.de forma general, se observan los mismos factores que los que se asocian a la persistencia del asma desde la infancia a la edad adulta: la gravedad y la frecuencia de las manifestaciones iniciales;  la existencia de atopia; sensibilizacin alergnica precoz (antes de los 3 aos) y persistente a los neumoalrgenos domsticos (caros, gato, perro) [37, 38] ,  sensibilizacin a los trofoalrgenos,  atopia parental; bajo peso al nacer, sexo masculino; tabaquismo materno durante la gestacin y/o tabaquismo pasivo en la primera infancia;  presencia de una obstruccin bronquial en las pfr y una hiperreactividad bronquial persistente. se han realizado varios ensayos para evaluar la hiptesis de que una corticoterapia inhalada precoz era susceptible de modificar la historia natural del lactante. los resultados han sido decepcionantes, al mostrar que los ci slo tenan una accin suspensoria, con retorno al estado anterior tras su interrupcin [39] .el asma grave supone alrededor del 5% de los casos de asma infantil y plantea problemas teraputicos importantes. los criterios de asma grave son:  la necesidad de un tratamiento diario mediante una asociacin de ci (al menos 800 g/da de equivalente de budesonida) y de un bdap o de un antileucotrieno;  y la persistencia de sntomas (sntomas al menos 3 veces por semana desde hace al menos 3 meses o exacerbaciones en el ao previo con al menos un ingreso en una unidad de cuidados intensivos, al menos dos hospitalizaciones por asma aguda grave, al menos dos tratamientos orales de corticoides), o la presencia de un sndrome obstructivo con puntuacin z posbroncodilatadores inferior a -1,96 [40] . por tanto, el asma grave es un grupo heterogneo de situaciones y se pueden observar varios fenotipos [41] : persistencia de sntomas varias veces a la semana o exacerbaciones frecuentes en un nio cuyas funciones respiratorias son normales;  persistencia de sntomas asociada a un sndrome obstructivo intercrtico fijo, no reversible despus de una prueba con corticoides;  presencia de un sndrome obstructivo intercrtico fijo en un nio poco o nada sintomtico. esta definicin implica tambin tres conceptos: la ausencia de otro diagnstico, un tratamiento correcto de los factores precipitantes y una buena adherencia al tratamiento.la exploracin del asma difcil debe tratar de responder cinco preguntas.los principales diagnsticos diferenciales deben descartarse (cuadro 3).los defectos de observancia teraputica, una tcnica defectuosa, un entorno inadecuado y los factores psicosociales constituyen los problemas ms frecuentes de asma falsamente grave.los principales factores agravantes que deben buscarse son el reflujo gastroesofgico, las patologas de la regin orl, la persistencia de exposiciones alrgicas, la existencia de alrgenos alimentarios ocultos, as como el tabaquismo tanto pasivo como activo en los nios mayores [42] . tambin hay que identificar en un autntico cuadro de asma qu parte corresponde a una discinesia de las cuerdas vocales y cul a un sndrome de hiperventilacin.si se trata de un asma grave autntica, qu parte corresponde a la alergia y cul a la funcin respiratoria?los anlisis de cohortes han demostrado claramente que la alergia, tanto en trminos de rganos afectados como de nmero de polisensibilizaciones, es un factor de asma grave. asimismo, la existencia precoz de una obstruccin bronquial intercrtica se asocia a un asma ms grave.esta evaluacin, reciente, es el aspecto ms innovador del manejo del asma difcil [43] [44] [45] . para llevarla a cabo se utilizan mtodos directos invasivos, lavado broncoalveolar y biopsias bronquiales o mtodos indirectos, no invasivos: medicin del no exhalado, esputo inducido, condensado exhalado, tomografa de trax.la evaluacin directa se basa en el anlisis del lquido de lavado broncoalveolar y, sobre todo, en las biopsias endobronquiales que se realizan durante la endoscopia. los principales resultados de las biopsias muestran que los fenmenos inflamatorios (aumento del nmero de polimorfonucleares eosinfilos y neutrfilos intraepiteliales, aumento del nmero de los mastocitos submucosos y en el interior de los msculos lisos) correlacionan con los sntomas, mientras que, salvo el engrosamiento de la membrana basal, las anomalas estructurales de remodelacin (es decir, la hipertrofia/hiperplasia del msculo liso, la hiperplasia miofibroblstica, la hipertrofia de las glndulas mucosas y la angiognesis) correlacionan ms con el grado de obstruccin bronquial [46, 47] . los datos recientes muestran que esta remodelacin aparece precozmente y en ocasiones es visible antes de los 2 aos [48] .hay varias tcnicas que estn en fase de evaluacin: correlacin entre el no espirado e inflamacin/remodelacin [49] , medicin de diferentes marcadores en el esputo inducido o el condensado exhalado, evaluacin de las remodelaciones estructurales asociadas al asma mediante tc [50] .el asma grave requiere en un primer momento un manejo educativo especfico (autovigilancia del fem en el domicilio, plan de accin de las exacerbaciones, coordinacin entre la familia, el mdico responsable, el pediatra, etc.). se estn desarrollando nuevas aplicaciones de internet y de telfonos inteligentes para mejorar la observancia y las relaciones con el paciente y su familia, el tratamiento apropiado de los factores agravantes y la optimizacin de los tratamientos farmacolgicos. stos se basan hasta el momento en la asociacin de dosis elevadas de ci (800-1.000 g/da de equivalente de budesonida) y de bdap [3] . este tratamiento optimizado permite el control de la mayora de los cuadros de asma considerados difciles.sin embargo, algunos nios siguen estando sintomticos o conservan una obstruccin bronquial intercrtica y representan los autnticos cuadros de asma grave, difciles o refractarios [51] . aunque es tentador aumentar la posologa diaria de ci, el riesgo potencial de efectos secundarios puede superar a los beneficios esperados. basndose en esto, en la actualidad se propone realizar una prueba con corticoides (2 mg/kg/da durante 7-10 das).una prueba positiva (control de los sntomas, mejora del vems  15%) incita a reforzar, al menos temporalmente, el tratamiento antiinflamatorio y broncodilatador. una prueba negativa, con persistencia de los sntomas clnicos o la ausencia de respuesta funcional respiratoria, incita a realizar una evaluacin ms completa en un medio especializado. la identificacin de subgrupos basados en los datos histopatolgicos podra tener implicaciones teraputicas. por ejemplo, la ausencia de infiltracin eosinoflica o neutroflica asociada a la presencia de signos importantes de remodelacin motivaran una reduccin de la dosis de ci, mientras que una infiltracin inflamatoria importante de eosinfilos motivara un incremento, al menos temporal, de la dosis de ci. sin embargo, se han realizado demasiado pocos estudios prospectivos hasta el momento para validar esta distincin y, debido a la diversidad y a la interrelacin de los fenmenos inflamatorios implicados, es ms que probable que detrs de esta clasificacin simple existan fenotipos muy diferentes.las indicaciones de los tratamientos alternativos dirigidos a reducir o evitar los corticoides orales, tanto las inmunoglobulinas intravenosas como la ciclosporina, nunca se han evaluado mediante estudios con doble anonimato con un tamao de muestra suficiente, o han sido negativos. la mejor comprensin de los mecanismos implicados en la fisiopatogenia del asma ha permitido el desarrollo de nuevas molculas. entre ellas, los anti-ige han permitido en los nios con asma alrgica persistente grave prescindir de los corticoides, as como reducir el nmero de exacerbaciones [17, 18] . otras molculas dirigidas estn en fase de desarrollo [52] : anticuerpos monoclonales antiinterleucina 5 (anti-il-5) (mepolizumab, reslizumab) para el asma hipereosinoflica, anti-il-4, anti-il-13 (lebrikizumab), anti-il-17, etctera. estas nuevas molculas abren la era de un tratamiento personalizado para el que ser necesaria la identificacin de marcadores predictivos [1] .las relaciones virus/asma son complejas e implican, por una parte, al papel de los virus en la aparicin del asma y, por otra parte, el papel de los virus como factor precipitante de la exacerbacin [53] .desde el punto de vista fisiopatolgico, los virus actuaran ms como facilitadores de la expresin de una predisposicin atpica que en la induccin de novo del asma. los rinovirus estn particularmente implicados en estos fenmenos [54] .en la actualidad, las infecciones virales se consideran el factor precipitante ms frecuente de las exacerbaciones asmticas, en pacientes con asma demostrada. las tcnicas modernas de diagnstico permiten incriminar al menos a un agente infeccioso en alrededor del 80% de las exacerbaciones asmticas. los principales virus observados son los rinovirus, virus respiratorio sincitial, enterovirus, virus de la gripe, adenovirus, coronavirus, virus parainfluenza, metaneumovirus, as como chlamydia pneumoniae y mycoplasma pneumoniae. las infecciones virales presentan una recrudescencia en otoo e invierno y comienzan poco despus de la vuelta al colegio, es decir, el retorno a la colectividad. pueden ser graves, con una insensibilidad relativa a los beta-2-adrenrgicos y requerir hospitalizacin.alrededor de dos tercios de los nios con asma alrgica tienen rinitis, con ms frecuencia perenne que estacional.por tanto, en la anamnesis deben buscarse sistemticamente los sntomas de rinitis alrgica: prurito nasal, rinorrea, estornudos, obstruccin. adems, hay que evaluar la intensidad de los problemas que provoca (repercusin sobre el sueo, las actividades sociales y deportivas o la escolaridad). la rinitis puede tener una intensidad leve/moderada o grave e intermitente o persistente. se buscan tambin signos de traquetis alrgica, que provoca episodios de tos durante horas, diurna y nocturna, en los que puede aparecer una laringitis edematosa subgltica.la afectacin orl es una causa clsica de dificultades teraputicas en el asma. hay que tratar ambas afecciones, subrayando al nio y a su familia la excelente tolerabilidad de los tratamientos tpicos, incluidos los corticoides por va nasal, que son los ms activos sobre los estornudos, el prurito, la rinorrea y, sobre todo, la obstruccin nasal. el montelukast ha demostrado ser activo en algunos estudios en la rinitis alrgica.el aie es muy frecuente, e incluso casi constante en los nios asmticos, pero su nivel de aparicin vara en funcin del deporte, de las condiciones atmosfricas y del estado basal del nio. una gran parte de esta variabilidad se explica por la fisiopatologa del aie, en la que interviene esencialmente el nivel de ventilacin, de prdida de calor y de agua por el rbol respiratorio. la intervencin de los fenmenos inflamatorios y de los mediadores procedentes de las clulas epiteliales, de los mastocitos, de los eosinfilos, de los macrfagos y de las clulas neurosensoriales probablemente explique la accin beneficiosa a largo plazo de los ci. la eficacia de los 2-adrenrgicos inhalados, con fines preventivos o teraputicos, tiene un gran valor diagnstico.el aie debe incluirse en la evaluacin del control del asma. la aparicin fcil y frecuente de manifestaciones con el esfuerzo es un buen signo de ausencia de control, en tal caso, la reduccin de la inflamacin es prioritaria, esencialmente mediante la corticoterapia inhalada. en menos ocasiones, la aparicin de sntomas con el esfuerzo es la nica manifestacin de asma. por ltimo, en algunos nios que parecen tener un asma bien controlada clnica y funcionalmente, el aie (en ocasiones grave) es la manifestacin ms preocupante del nio. en estos casos, la adicin de un tratamiento antileucotrieno parece eficaz.el ejercicio fsico es una necesidad somtica psicolgica y sociocultural en los nios asmticos. a excepcin del submarinismo con botellas, los pacientes asmticos pueden realizar cualquier deporte, una vez comprobado que el control del asma es adecuado y que no ha habido exacerbaciones recientes. por tanto, los nios asmticos no deben excluirse de las actividades deportivas, en particular en el medio escolar. se debe hacer todo lo posible para sacar al nio asmtico del crculo vicioso de la mala forma fsica. el reentrenamiento del esfuerzo debe formar parte de la estrategia teraputica en los nios asmticos.la escolaridad y, por tanto, el futuro socioprofesional de los nios asmticos, puede verse alterada a varios niveles. cualquier sntoma de asma, incluso modesto e inicial, debe tratarse de inmediato, lo que justifica que el nio asmtico debe tener siempre a mano su broncodilatador inhalado. el proyecto de acogida individualizada, diseado para favorecer la integracin de los nios asmticos, debe permitir una buena integracin del nio asmtico en el medio escolar. algunas circunstancias y perodos son ms propicios para la aparicin de exacerbaciones, como la vuelta al colegio o la educacin fsica. es necesario que el nio asmtico pueda inhalar su beta2-adrenrgico antes de la clase de educacin fsica y deportiva.lo esencial en el tratamiento del asma es la regularidad teraputica. son los progenitores quienes deben asegurar la observancia teraputica de su hijo. los programas de educacin teraputica para los nios asmticos y sus progenitores tienen como finalidad desarrollar en los nios asmticos, sobre todo en caso de asma moderada o grave, unas competencias que permitan una autogestin razonada de sus sntomas y mejorar la adhesin a los tratamientos. la educacin teraputica debe estar estructurada, organizada y realizarse por profesionales con formacin al respecto. debe ser accesible para los pacientes, tanto en el hospital como en el mbito de la atencin primaria.el asma se ha considerado durante mucho tiempo como la enfermedad ms psicosomtica de todas. muchos estudios han demostrado la repercusin del asma sobre la calidad de vida de los nios y de las familias, la observancia teraputica y la incidencia de las complicaciones. las dificultades psicopatolgicas observadas en los nios y su entorno se relacionan esencialmente con la gravedad del asma. el anlisis de estos datos permite apreciar una evolucin en la presentacin del asma respecto a la literatura existente. el asma se controla cada vez mejor desde el punto de vista teraputico y en la actualidad altera poco la escolaridad y la calidad de vida de los nios, salvo en caso de mal cumplimiento.el futuro a largo plazo del asma infantil es una preocupacin importante. aunque la introduccin de los ci ha transformado el tratamiento del asma infantil, la cuestin de saber si el asma persistir toda la vida o al menos hasta la adolescencia es una de las preguntas que plantean los progenitores con ms frecuencia.los escasos estudios epidemiolgicos que se han realizado durante perodos de 20-30 aos muestran que el nmero de falsas curaciones es elevado y que el concepto del asma que se cura en la pubertad es un mito. las recidivas de asma se producen no slo en los pacientes con asma grave, sino tambin en los casos de asma benigna, tanto mucho antes de los 20 aos como entre los 20 y los 30 aos. los estudios histricos de cohortes [24, 25, 32] , pero sobre todo los anlisis prospectivos de cohortes peditricas [28, 31, 55] permiten conocer menor la historia natural del asma y de la alergia.los dos puntos importantes son, por una parte, el concepto de tracking o de pasillo clnico y funcional y, por otra parte, el papel importante, e incluso preponderante, de los factores atpicos. el concepto de pasillo hace referencia al hecho de que los sntomas como el grado de obstruccin bronquial permanecen estables globalmente durante toda la infancia. dicho de otro modo, los pacientes con asma grave continuarn con este grado de enfermedad y la obstruccin bronquial aparecer de forma precoz y persistir. asimismo, las anomalas de remodelacin bronquial que reflejan la respuesta a los fenmenos inflamatorios asociados al asma pueden aparecer en una etapa muy precoz de la vida. el segundo punto importante de los anlisis de cohortes es el peso muy significativo de la atopia, tanto en la persistencia de los sntomas del lactante hasta la infancia y despus hasta la edad adulta, como en la gravedad clnica o funcional. el asma es la enfermedad crnica infantil ms frecuente. las exploraciones claves en el momento del diagnstico son las radiografas de trax y, a partir de los 3 aos, las pfr y la evaluacin alergolgica. la evaluacin alergolgica puede efectuarse antes de los 3 aos. cerca del 80% de los nios con asma estn sensibilizados al menos a un alrgeno. el objetivo del tratamiento es lograr el control diario de los sntomas y prevenir el riesgo futuro de exacerbaciones, con una funcin respiratoria normal o normalizada. aunque la mayora de los asmticos pueden controlarse con el arsenal teraputico disponible, cuya piedra angular es la corticoterapia inhalada, los problemas relacionados con la observancia y los errores tcnicos de inhalacin son las causas principales de fracasos teraputicos.  los estudios de cohortes muestran que la gravedad inicial, la importancia de la sensibilizacin y la persistencia de una obstruccin bronquial intercrtica son los factores principales de persistencia del asma.el tratamiento del asma infantil es a la vez sencillo y complejo. es sencillo porque las clases teraputicas son poco numerosas, pero eficaces para la mayora de los nios. es complejo porque el asma es multifactorial, en particular en lo que respecta a sus factores desencadenantes. de forma paradjica, an es una enfermedad que presenta un retraso diagnstico y por tanto, un retraso y una insuficiencia de tratamiento. covid-19 is a pandemic disease  the weather factor is one of the factors that triggered the spread of covid-19  the spread of covid-19 in indonesia is very fast, so the results of this study will be useful in efforts to prevent the spread of covid-19 diseasea b s t r a c t a r t i c l e i n f oworld health organization (who) reported that there have been pneumonia cases in wuhan city, hubei province, china (zhu et al., 2019) , but the etiology was unknown (sohrabi et al., 2020) . the case was developed very fast (anderson et al., 2020) , until january 7, 2020, the chinese government said that pneumonia was a new type of coronavirus or covid-19 .common signs and symptoms of covid-19 infection include symptoms of acute respiratory disorders such as fever, coughing and shortness of breath. the average incubation period is 5-6 days with the longest incubation period of 14 days. in severe cases, covid-19 can cause pneumonia, acute respiratory syndrome, kidney failure, and even death. the clinical signs and symptoms reported in the majority of cases are fever, with some cases having difficulty breathing, and xrays show extensive pneumonia infiltrates in both lungs (holshue et al., 2020; perlman, 2020) . the clinical symptoms of severe and critical patients with covid-19 are likely similar with the clinical symptoms of sars and mers (wang et al., 2020b) .in indonesia, on march 2, 2020, indonesia has reported 2 confirmed cases of covid-19. as of march 29, 2020, it has increased to 1285 cases in 30 provinces. the five highest provinces in the covid-19 cases are jakarta (675), west java (149), banten (106), east java (90), and central java (63) (kementerian kesehatan republik indonesia, 2020). the increase in the number of cases took place quite quickly and there has been a spread between countries. in response to that, who set covid-19 as a pandemic (cucinotta and vanelli, 2020) .the extreme weather conditions that accompany long-term climate change may also contribute to the spread of the west nile virus in the united states and europe (epstein, 2001) . certain climatic conditions can be considered as the top predictors of respiratory diseases such as sars. climate variables can also be a direct cause of biological interactions between sars-cov and humans. optimal temperature, humidity, and wind speed are variables that can determine the survival and transmission of the sars virus (yuan et al., 2006) . changes in weather are very significantly correlated with changes in mortality rates due to pneumonia (bull, 1980) . viruses can be transmitted by being influenced by several factors, including climatic conditions (such as temperature and humidity), and population density (dalziel et al., 2018) . research on climate change and covid-19 is still very limited so this research will contribute to efforts to prevent covid-19 disease.jakarta is the capital of the republic of indonesia. jakarta lies between 612 south latitude and 10648 east longitude. the area of jakarta consists of a land area of 662.33 km 2 and a sea area of 6977.5 km 2 . the population of jakarta in 2017 based on projections of results of the 2010 population census population was 10.374.235 (mawarni, 2019) inhabitants with the population growth rate of 0.94% per year.the computerized data set on daily covid-19 in jakarta for the period of january -march 29, 2020 were obtained from the ministry of health of republic of indonesia, while the weather data for the period of february 2020 were obtained from the meteorological department of the republic of indonesia. the data consist of temperature minimum (c), temperature maximum (c), temperature average (c), humidity (%), and amount of rainfall (mm).as data were not normally distributed, spearman rank correlation test was used to examine the relationship between weather and daily covid-19. fig. 1 shows that covid-19 that occurred in jakarta experienced a rapid increase. the first finding numbered 177 cases, the next report found 40 cases, and on 29 march 2020 the total number of covid-19 cases numbered 678. with an average of 61 cases, the weather data showed temperature minimum of 24.6c (with the highest temperature minimum of 27.5c), the lowest maximum temperature of 28.6c (with the highest maximum temperature of 31.4c), the lowest average temperature of 26.1c (with the highest average temperature of 28.6c), the lowest humidity of 75% (with the highest humidity of 93%), and the lowest rainfall of 1.1 mm (with the highest of 88 mm). table 1 shows that, among five weather variables, only temperature average (c) was significantly correlated with covid-19 (r = 0.392; p b .001), with medium level. temperature minimum, temperature maximum, humidity, and rainfall were not significantly correlated with covid-19.in this study, the pattern of climate change provides a picture of the occurrence of covid-19 e in jakarta. we found only temperature average was correlated with covid-19, with the lowest average temperature of 26.1c and the highest temperature of 28.6c. this correlation is in line with previous research that shows the relationship between weather transmission and syncytial virus respiration (rsv) (vandini et al., 2013) , sars (tan et al., 2005) . temperature is also the environmental driver of the covid-19 outbreak in china (shi et al., 2020) . the regression equation shows how temperature, relative humidity, and wind speed affected sars transmission (yuan et al., 2006) .in spite of the weather, the high covid-19 cases in jakarta is also caused by the very high mobility of the people. as the capital city of indonesia, jakarta is the main economic destination for job seekers who come from various regions in indonesia. jakarta's population density is also very high and this allows covid-19 transmission to be very fast.another cause is that jakarta is a very densely populated area. the majority of the population is residents from outside jakarta, generally they choose the location of residence in the area because of the affordable price factor (fitria and setiawan, 2014) . according to the results of the last national census, jakarta is inhabited by almost 9.6 million people, exceeding the projected population of 9.2 million for 2025. jakarta's population is 4% of the country's total population, 237.6 million people (widiarso, n.d.) . this means jakarta's population has grown 4.4% over the past 10 years, up from 8.3 million in 2000 (surjadi and surja, 2019) . with population growth like this allows covid-19 to spread rapidly (zu et al., 2020) .in china, wang et al. (2020a) found that temperature and relative humidity have a strong influence on the r value, with a significant level of 1% for both. temperature and humidity have a significant and consistent distribution of seasonal behavior of respiratory viruses (sajadi et al., 2020) . meteorological variables can predict worldwide outbreaks with high correlations (r 2 n 0.6) with real data (chen et al., 2020) . in wuhan, covid-19 transmission is very important to be associated with transmission, there is a correlation between weather and disease spread, and weather factors will suppress disease when the weather warms up (guo et al., n.d.) .meteorological factors such as humidity, visibility, and wind speed can affect environmental stability, or affect the viability of viruses. as well as air temperatures have an impact on the transmission of the epidemic. besides, absolute air temperature and humidity have been indicated to significantly affect covid-19 transmission (chen et al., 2020) . temperature and humidity variations may be important factors that influence covid-19 mortality (ma et al., 2020) . there is a correlation between the spread of covid-19 on temperature and climate latitude (poole, 2020) .despite the significant finding of the weather on covid-19, this study has limitations: first, as the disease is caused by the virus, many factors are needed to be investigated such as virus resistance, population mobility, and population endurance. second, individual health factors such as hand washing habits, personal hygiene, and use of hand sanitizers may be the other related factors of covid-19 that are necessary to be explored. however, this study is just the preliminary analysis. the strong conclusion requires time and a long data set.the weather is an important factor in determining the incidence rate of covid-19 in jakarta. temperature average was significantly correlated with covid-19. our findings can be used as an input in suppressing covid-19 disease in indonesia.the authors declared that they have no conflict of interests. world health organization (who) reported that there have been pneumonia cases in wuhan city, hubei province, china (zhu et al., 2020) , but the etiology was unknown (sohrabi et al., 2020) . the case was developed very fast (anderson et al., 2020) , until january 7, 2020, the chinese government said that pneumonia was a new type of coronavirus or covid-19 .common signs and symptoms of covid-19 infection include symptoms of acute respiratory disorders such as fever, coughing and shortness of breath. the average incubation period is 5-6 days with the longest incubation period of 14 days. in severe cases, covid-19 can cause pneumonia, acute respiratory syndrome, kidney failure, and even death. the clinical signs and symptoms reported in the majority of cases are fever, with some cases having difficulty breathing, and x-rays show extensive pneumonia infiltrates in both lungs (holshue et al., 2020; perlman, 2020) . the clinical symptoms of j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f severe and critical patients with covid-19 are likely similar with the clinical symptoms of sars and mers (wang et al., 2020b) .in indonesia, on march 2, 2020, indonesia has reported 2 confirmed cases of covid-19. as of march 29, 2020, it has increased to 1,285 cases in 30 provinces. the five highest provinces in the covid-19 cases are jakarta (675), west java (149), banten (106), east java (90), and central java (63) (kementerian kesehatan republik indonesia, 2020) . the increase in the number of cases took place quite quickly and there has been a spread between countries. in response to that, who set covid-19 as a pandemic (cucinotta and vanelli, 2020) .the extreme weather conditions that accompany long-term climate change may also contribute to the spread of the west nile virus in the united states and europe (epstein, 2001) . certain climatic conditions can be considered as the top predictors of respiratory diseases such as sars. climate variables can also be a direct cause of biological interactions between sars-cov and humans. optimal temperature, humidity, and wind speed are variables that can determine the survival and transmission of the sars virus (yuan et al., 2006) . changes in weather are very significantly correlated with changes in mortality rates due to pneumonia (bull, 1980) . viruses can be transmitted by being influenced by several factors, including climatic conditions (such as temperature and humidity), and population density (dalziel et al., 2018) . research on climate change and covid-19 is still very limited so this research will contribute to efforts to prevent covid-19 disease.j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o fjakarta is the capital of the republic of indonesia. jakarta lies between 6 12 south latitude and 106 48 east longitude. the area of jakarta consists of a land area of 662.33 km 2 and a sea area of 6,977.5 km 2 . the population of jakarta in 2017 based on projections of results of the 2010 population census population was 10.374.235 (mawarni, 2019) inhabitants with the population growth rate of 0.94 percent per year.the computerized data set on daily covid-19 in jakarta for the period of january -march 29, 2020 were obtained from the ministry of health of republic of indonesia, while the weather data for the period of february 2020 were obtained from the meteorological department of the republic of indonesia. the data consist of temperature minimum ( 0 c), temperature maximum ( 0 c), temperature average ( 0 c), humidity (%), and amount of rainfall (mm).as data were not normally distributed, spearman rank correlation test was used to examine the relationship between weather and daily covid-19. figure 1 shows that covid-19 that occurred in jakarta experienced a rapid increase. the first finding numbered 177 cases, the next report found 40 cases, and on 29 march 2020 the total number of covid-19 cases numbered 678. with an average of 61 cases, the weather data showed temperature minimum of 24.6 0 c (with the highest temperature minimum of 27.5 0 c), the lowest maximum temperature of 28.6 0 c (with the highest j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f maximum temperature of 31.4 0 c), the lowest average temperature of 26.1 0 c (with the highest average temperature of 28.6 0 c), the lowest humidity of 75% (with the highest humidity of 93%), and the lowest rainfall of 1.1 mm (with the highest of 88 mm). table 1 shows that, among five weather variables, only temperature average ( 0 c) was significantly correlated with covid-19 (r=.392; p<.001), with medium level. temperature minimum, temperature maximum, humidity, and rainfall were not significantly correlated with covid-19.in this study, the pattern of climate change provides a picture of the occurrence of covid-19 e in jakarta. we found only temperature average was correlated with covid-19, with the lowest average temperature of 26.1 0 c and the highest temperature of 28.6 0 c. this correlation is in line with previous research that shows the relationship between weather transmission and syncytial virus respiration (rsv) (vandini et al., 2013) , sars (tan et al., 2005) . temperature is also the environmental driver of the covid-19 outbreak in china (shi et al., 2020) . the regression equation shows how temperature, relative humidity, and wind speed affected sars transmission (yuan et al., 2006) .in spite of the weather, the high covid-19 cases in jakarta is also caused by the very high mobility of the people. as the capital city of indonesia, jakarta is the main economic destination for job seekers who come from various regions in indonesia.jakarta's population density is also very high and this allows covid-19 transmission to be very fast.another cause is that jakarta is a very densely populated area. the majority of the population is residents from outside jakarta, generally they choose the location of residence in the area because of the affordable price factor (fitria and setiawan, 2014) .according to the results of the last national census, jakarta is inhabited by almost 9.6 million people, exceeding the projected population of 9.2 million for 2025. jakarta's population is 4 percent of the country's total population, 237.6 million people (widiarso) .this means jakarta's population has grown 4.4 percent over the past 10 years, up from 8.3 million in 2000 (surjadi and surja, 2019) . with population growth like this allows covid-19 to spread rapidly (zu et al., 2020) .in china, wang et al. (2020a found that temperature and relative humidity have a strong influence on the r value, with a significant level of 1% for both. temperature and humidity have a significant and consistent distribution of seasonal behavior of respiratory viruses (sajadi et al., 2020) . meteorological variables can predict worldwide outbreaks with high correlations (r 2 > .6) with real data (chen et al., 2020) . in wuhan, covid-19 transmission is very important to be associated with transmission, there is a correlation between weather and disease spread, and weather factors will suppress disease when the weather warms up (guo et al.) .meteorological factors such as humidity, visibility, and wind speed can affect environmental stability, or affect the viability of viruses. as well as air temperatures have an impact on the transmission of the epidemic. besides, absolute air temperature and humidity have been indicated to significantly affect covid-19 transmission (chen et al., 2020) . temperature and humidity variations may be important factors that influence covid-19 mortality (ma et al., 2020) . there is a correlation between the spread of covid-19 on temperature and climate latitude (poole, 2020).despite the significant finding of the weather on covid-19, this study has limitations: first, as the disease is caused by the virus, many factors are needed to be investigated such as virus resistance, population mobility, and population endurance.second, individual health factors such as hand washing habits, personal hygiene, and use of hand sanitizers may be the other related factors of covid-19 that are necessary to be j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f explored. however, this study is just the preliminary analysis. the strong conclusion requires time and a long data set.the weather is an important factor in determining the incidence rate of covid-19 in jakarta. temperature average was significantly correlated with covid-19. our findings can be used as an input in suppressing covid-19 disease in indonesia.the authors declared that they have no conflict of interests.las infecciones respiratorias agudas (ira) representan la primera causa de morbilidad en el entorno familiar. se estima que en los pases desarrollados ms de la mitad de las infecciones agudas producidas por virus son de tipo respiratorio, siendo las ms incidentes el resfriado comn y la gripe. esta patologa puede afectar a todo el tracto respiratorio, desde la nasofaringe hasta los alvolos pulmonares, aunque cada virus respiratorio presenta mayor tropismo por regiones anatmicas concretas. la mayora son procesos benignos, salvo en pacientes en edades extremas de la vida (lactantes y ancianos) o inmunocomprometidos, que pueden evolucionar a cuadros graves. en los virus que no producen inmunidad protectora duradera (virus respiratorio sincitial [vrs] , virus parainfluenza, metaneumovirus) la afectacin respiratoria tiende a afectar al tracto respiratorio inferior y ser ms grave cuanto menor es la edad. por otra parte, hay otros virus como el virus del herpes simple en inmunodeprimidos y algunos enterovirus, que pueden producir cuadros respiratorios aunque no de forma habitual (tablas 1 y 2).todos los virus respiratorios se eliminan en concentraciones altas por la nasofaringe durante varios das, lo que facilita su transmisin horizontal. estos virus se propagan fcilmente por gotitas de pflgge y ncleos goticulares de wells formados al hablar, toser y estornudar. los virus se mantienen viables en el aire favorecidos por las condiciones de humedad relativa y temperatura en las estaciones fras. los virus sin envuelta tambin se pueden propagar mediante fmites y superficies recientemente contaminadas por secreciones respiratorias.casi todos ellos tienen una distribucin mundial y una marcada estacionalidad circunscrita a los meses fros del ao, desde el otoo hasta el inicio de la primavera. la coincidencia estacional de muchos de ellos (gripe, vrs, metaneumovirus, virus parainfluenza y rinovirus) unido a la diversidad de sntomas producidos por un mismo virus hace difcil el diagnstico etiolgico basado exclusivamente en el cuadro clnico (tabla 2).gripe. los gneros influenzavirus a y b son los ms importantes a nivel clnico y epidemiolgico. las variaciones en sus antgenos superficiales (hemaglutinina y neuraminidasa) son las responsables de las variaciones genticas mayores (recombinacin genmica) y menores (mutaciones puntuales) las variantes mayores son las responsables de las pandemias humanas. la morbilidad es ms elevada en nios y adolescentes, mientras que la mortalidad afecta fundamentalmente a sujetos ancianos o con patologa de base. para la profilaxis se emplean vacunas con virus inactivados.rinovirus. son los principales agentes responsables del catarro comn. hay ms de 100 serotipos diferentes y su infeccin no produce generalmente inmunidad duradera.coronavirus. son la segunda causa de catarro comn. el tipo cov es el responsable del sndrome respiratorio agudo (sars).virus respiratorio sincitial. es el principal patgeno respiratorio en nios pequeos y la primera causa de bronquiolitis aguda en lactantes.virus parainfluenza. es la causa ms frecuente de crup en nios.adenovirus. adems de cuadros respiratorios afecta tambin a mucosas. son la causa ms frecuente de faringoamigdalitis vrica.metaneumovirus humano. virus de reciente descripcin. puede afectar tanto al tracto respiratorio superior como inferior.diagnstico de laboratorio. se pueden emplear mtodos directos (cultivo, deteccin antignica o molecular), o indirectos (serologa). el diagnstico de eleccin lo constituyen los mtodos directos.terapia antivrica. se emplean dos grupos de frmacos: los que actan sobre la protena m2 (amantadina y rimantadina) y los inhibidores de la neuraminidasa (zanamivir y oseltamivir). la ribavirina se ha usado en algunas infecciones por virus respiratorio sincitial.los virus de la gripe pertenecen a la familia orthomyxoviridae, constituida por virus con simetra helicoidal y una membrana fosfolipdica en la que hay espculas glucoproteicas de hemaglutinina (ha) y neuraminidasa (na) ( fig. 1 ) los gneros influenzavirus a e influenzavirus b son los ms importantes clnica y epidemiolgicamente, mientras que el gnero influenzavirus c incluye virus con escasa trascendencia en los seres humanos 1,2 .el gnero influenzavirus a incluye todos los subtipos humanos y animales de los virus de la gripe a (variantes mayores) y las mltiples variantes menores derivadas de aquellos. los subtipos son las combinaciones de los 16 tipos de ha (h1-h16) y los 9 de la na (n1-n9), todos ellos descritos en aves ( fig. 2 la gripe b no tienen subtipos ni reservorio animal, su deriva antignica es menor y son slo responsables de brotes estacionales. en la actualidad circulan dos linajes distintos (b/hong kong y b/victoria). producen epidemias ms limitadas y benignas. los virus gripales c no causan epidemias ni pandemias, la deriva antignica es mnima y existen variantes que cocirculan [3] [4] [5] .el mecanismo de persistencia de los virus de la gripe a en la naturaleza est ligado a tres factores: un amplio reservorio aviar, fenmenos de variabilidad gentica por reordenamiento gentico y mutaciones, y posibilidad de salto interespecie 6 . la variabilidad gentica en los virus gripales puede afectar a las 10 protenas codificadas por sus 8 genes, siendo las ms importantes las de la ha 7 . las variaciones mayores (nuevo subtipo) son responsables de las pandemias y aparecen por salto directo interespecie o por mezcla de genes y reordenamiento gentico entre virus animales o humanos al infectar a un mismo husped 8 . las mutaciones puntuales a partir del subtipo circulante, como consecuencia de la presin inmune al difundir ao tras ao en la poblacin humana (presin selectiva positiva) originan las variantes menores y son la causa de las epidemias estacionales de gripe 5,9 . desde 1918 slo tres subtipos han establecido linajes estables en seres humanos siendo responsables de las 3 grandes pandemias de gripe del siglo xx (h1n1 gripe espaola, h2n2 gripe asitica y h3n2 gripe hong kong). actualmente slo circulan variantes menores de los subtipos h3n2 y h1n1 (desde 1968 y 1977 respectivamente). en el ao 2002 se identificaron subtipos h1n2 en inglaterra y egipto como consecuencia del intercambio gentico entre subtipos h3n2 y h1n1 sin trascendencia epidmica debido a la inmunidad preexistente en la poblacin 10 . los virus de la gripe humana tienen afinidad por receptores mucoproteicos de las clulas del epitelio columnar respiratorio. el virus difunde desde la faringe por contigidad, ocasionando un proceso inflamatorio con necrosis del epitelio ciliado del tracto respiratorio superior, pudiendo afectar a bronquios, bronquiolos y alvolos. la replicacin es alta en las 48-72 horas siguientes y se prolonga hasta 9 das en nios. en el proceso se produce una estimulacin de diversas citocinas e interferones que desempean un papel importante en el curso y evolucin de la infeccin gripal 10 .la ha es el principal determinante de virulencia y debe activarse para infectar a las clulas diana. la activacin proteoltica de la ha tiene lugar durante la maduracin del virus (proteolisis postraslacional) ( fig. 3 ). la elevada virulencia de algunas cepas aviares (h5 y h7) est asociada a la insercin de mltiples aminocidos bsicos prximos al sitio de escisin proteoltica de la ha. dicha caracterstica facilita la escisin por enzimas de distinta ubicuidad, dotando al virus de patogenicidad para tejidos distintos al respiratorio (rin, corazn, sistema nervioso central [snc]) lo que ayuda a explicar su mayor virulencia 11, 12 . la capacidad de franquear la barrera interespecie est ligada a la afinidad por receptores tipo neu  2,3 (virus aviares) o neu  2,6 (virus humanos) localizados respectivamente en los epitelios digestivo y respiratorio de aves y seres humanos 8 . por otra parte, la eficaz replicacin del virus en clulas de origen aviar o mamfero se asocia a la mutacin 627lys en la protena pb2 13 .los determinantes sealados son factores necesarios pero no suficientes para explicar el complejo problema de la patogenicidad de los virus gripales. en los subtipos h5n1 aviares actuales se ha observado una resistencia a los mecanismos de inmunidad innata asociada a la presencia de cido glutmico en la posicin 92 de la protena ns1 [14] [15] [16] . la patogenicidad es polignica e intervienen los ocho segmentos genmicos del virus.el sndrome gripal es el cuadro ms frecuente producido por los virus gripales a y b. el virus c produce cuadros ms banales de vas altas 4, 10 . el cuadro clnico consiste en fiebre, ce- falea, malestar general y sntomas respiratorios. la sintomatologa vara en funcin de la edad, hbitos de la persona (tabaquismo), procesos gripales previos, virulencia de las cepas y patologa subyacente. la infeccin gripal puede producir tambin infecciones subclnicas y formas leves semejantes al resfriado comn, bronquitis aguda y faringitis. las tasas de morbilidad ms elevadas se dan en nios y adolescentes, mientras que la mortalidad afecta fundamentalmente en sujetos mayores de 65 aos o personas con patologa crnica subyacente.la gripe se caracteriza por un comienzo brusco tras un perodo de incubacin de 24-72 horas que permite a menudo "identificar" la fuente de contagio entre los contactos. el enfermo comienza con sensacin distrmica y escalofros que normalmente lo obligan a encamarse. la fiebre es de 38-39'5c y en un 20% de los casos llega hasta de 40-41c. su duracin es de unos 3,5 das (rango entre 1 y 8 das), observndose a veces una curva bifsica febril tras una breve remisin. la cefalea es posterior al inicio de la fiebre y las mialgias afectan principalmente a la espalda y los miembros. la tos no es productiva y se acompaa de congestin nasal, y raramente afona o dolor retroesternal. la participacin bronquial se evidencia en el 10% de los pacientes con roncus y sibilancias. en ancianos, la fiebre es rara y se manifiesta por un cuadro catarral en el 80% de los casos acompaado de postracin e intensa astenia 17 . la afectacin digestiva aparece en el 2-3% de los casos con vmitos y estreimiento, siendo raros los dolores abdominales y la diarrea. otros sntomas son: sensacin de quemazn ocular, dolor retroorbital, lagrimeo y fotofobia. en el 10-15% de los casos se palpan adenopatas cervicales pequeas, rodaderas y blandas. el cuadro es generalmente autolimitado y dura entre 3 y 5 das, aunque la astenia y la tos pueden persistir hasta dos semanas. las cepas ms virulentas son las a (h3n2) seguidas de las b, siendo las a (h1n1) las menos virulentas.la gripe en nios y adolescentes ocasiona fiebre ms alta que en los adultos. los neonatos a menudo presentan rechazo del alimento, apnea y cuadros respiratorios semejantes al crup y la bronquiolitis. en lactantes menores de 6 meses aparecen abdominalgias, vmitos y diarrea. casi la mitad de los nios menores de 4 aos presentan somnolencia y letargia, y en el 20% de los nios hospitalizados con esta edad se observan cuadros convulsivos y una mayor incidencia de otitis media (4-5%). el sndrome sistmico gripal puede ser especialmente intenso y debilitante en nios pequeos, encontrndose la cpk elevada y la got discretamente elevada como consecuencia de la afectacin muscular.la gripe en pacientes con enfermedades de base produce descompensaciones e incremento de la mortalidad. en enfermos cardiopulmonares, la gripe aumenta el riesgo de isquemia e infarto de miocardio. en los perodos epidmicos la mortalidad en los pacientes con enfermedad pulmonar obstructiva crnica (epoc) pueden aumentar hasta un 50%. en diabticos, el riesgo de neumona asociada a gripe es 1,7 veces mayor que en la poblacin general. la combinacin de neumona gripal y diabetes es especialmente grave y produce una importante mortalidad. la infeccin gripal puede producir una reagudizacin del asma y el agravamiento de la fibrosis qustica. la gripe puede ser causa de infecciones nosocomiales en instituciones cerradas. la edad y la institucionalizacin son factores determinantes, siendo los internados en residencias geritricas un grupo especialmente vulnerable, y en menor medida los sujetos en centros de internamiento psiquitrico, hospicios y cuarteles 4, 17, 18 .los pacientes inmunodeprimidos tienen una mayor persistencia y excrecin del virus, y sufren con mayor frecuencia neumona vrica primaria. en trasplantados la mortalidad se asocia con el grado de neutropenia. no se ha demostrado un mayor riesgo de rechazo en receptores de trasplante de rgano slido. en pacientes con sida o infeccin por el virus de la inmunodeficiencia humana (vih) avanzada se ha comunicado una mayor duracin del proceso, afectacin respiratoria ms llamativa y curso ms prolongado. en embarazadas se ha comprobado una mayor incidencia de complicaciones entre el segundo y el tercer trimestre de la gestacin, pero no se ha asociado con malformaciones congnitas. complicaciones de la gripe las complicaciones de la gripe se presentan en todas las edades, pero son ms frecuentes en personas con patologas crnicas subyacentes, inmunosupresin o edad avanzada. algunas, como el sndrome de reye, se presentan exclusivamente en nios y jvenes. las complicaciones ms frecuentes son las respiratorias; entre las no respiratorias se incluyen manifestaciones cardiovasculares, musculares, nerviosas, renales, endocrinas, gastrointestinales y hemticas. en nios las complicaciones ms frecuentes son: otitis media, laringotraqueitis, traqueobronquitis y bronquiolitis 18, 19 .neumona. la neumona es la complicacin respiratoria ms frecuente y est asociada a pacientes naive para el virus gripal y edad avanzada. la neumona puede presentarse como neumona gripal primaria, neumona bacteriana secundaria o neumona mixta, vrica y bacteriana. la ms grave es la neumona primaria vrica, ms frecuente con los virus a. la radiografa de trax muestra infiltrados bilaterales difusos de localizacin peribronquial sin consolidacin. el deterioro de la funcin pulmonar y del enfermo es rpido, y la mortalidad muy elevada, con una media de supervivencia inferior a la semana. la neumona secundaria bacteriana se debe a la sobreinfeccin por streptococcus pneumoniae, haemophilus influenzae o staphylococcus aureus y ocurre tras una aparente remisin de la sintomatologa, de 11-14 das despus del inicio del sndrome gripal. la forma bronconeumnica es la ms frecuente y grave, y ha sido responsable de ms del 80% de las muertes ocurridas durante las pandemias. a veces se producen neumonas mixtas vricas y bacterianas, generalmente en pacientes con patologa crnica. se han descrito cuadros de empiema, absceso pulmonar, neumotrax y enfisemas secundarios a gripe con una incidencia inferior al 0,1%.complicaciones cardacas. las complicaciones cardacas transitorias (24 horas) como alteraciones del electrocardiograma (ecg) (inversin de t, elevacin de st, ritmo nodal) se han documentado hasta en un 80% de los casos hospitalizados por gripe y un 40% en el resto. ocasionalmente pueden persistir meses o aos, y unidas a alteraciones previas subyacentes ser causa de arritmia grave o cardiomiopata congestiva.sndrome de reye. el sndrome de reye es una encefalopata con degeneracin heptica grasa que ocurre en la infancia (2 a 15 aos) y cursa con alta mortalidad (10-40%). asociado a diversas infecciones vricas, sobre todo varicela, se presenta como una complicacin de la gripe b y en menor medida de la gripe a. su incidencia se estima en 0,3-0,8 por 100.000 casos en menores de 18 aos, existiendo formas leves ms frecuentes. otras complicaciones raras son la encefalitis, encefalopata, sndrome de guillain-barr, miositis, fracaso renal, sndrome de coagulacin intravascular y sndrome hemofagoctico. plicados o su patogenia hacen difcil o lejana la posibilidad de disponer de una vacuna. la profilaxis de exposicin es poco eficaz, ya que resulta muy difcil evitar el contagio y la difusin de estas infecciones. no obstante, se pueden tomar ciertas medidas, principalmente en instituciones cerradas (uso de mascarillas, aislamiento areo de casos, restriccin de la circulacin de personas, etc.) que disminuyen la influencia del factor de agregacin durante las epidemias de gripe y otras viriasis respiratorias especialmente graves (sndrome agudo respiratorio grave [sarg], gripe aviar, etc.).las vacunas antigripales ms utilizadas emplean virus inactivados. stas pueden ser de virus enteros, virus fraccionados (contienen ha, na, parte de la nucleoprotena y la protena interna m) y vacunas de subunidades de ha y na (fraccionadas y purificadas). as mismo, las vacunas pueden incorporar adyuvantes (mf59) que potencian la respuesta inmune, especialmente en poblacin anciana 20 y vacunas virosomales (liposomas que asemejan la estructura del virus y en los que en su interior estn adheridas subunidades vricas). las normas internacionales establecen que la vacuna debe contener al menos 15 g de la ha de cada uno de los virus incluidos en ella 19 .las vacunas con virus atenuados constituyen una perspectiva ms prometedora, ya que pueden mejorar los resultados obtenidos con las de virus inactivados. su administracin provoca una infeccin inaparente o subclnica que induce una inmunidad semejante a la natural. la administracin por va nasal induce una inmunidad sistmica y local con produccin de iga secretora, esencial en la gripe. por ltimo, la dosis necesaria puede ser pequea y su administracin muy cmoda.la composicin de las vacunas de gripe tiene que adaptarse forzosamente a la variacin del virus. existe una red de 114 centros de gripe repartidos en 83 pases para poder anticipar de forma racional la variacin antignica de la ha; aspecto fundamental para la fabricacin de vacunas que tardan en elaborarse entre 6 y 8 meses. la aparicin de un virus pandmico con una variacin gentica importante al inicio de la onda hace que los mtodos de gentica inversa, la sustitucin de clulas por huevos y el uso de adyuvantes deban ser tenidos en cuenta para agilizar los procesos de produccin de vacuna 21 .la vacunacin anual con vacuna trivalente inactivada (ah3, ah1 y b) antes de la temporada gripal es la estrategia habitual. en el caso de una pandemia de gripe la estrategia comportara el uso de una vacuna inactivada monovalente (cepa pandmica) y una vacunacin amplia de la poblacin si se dispusiera de dosis suficientes o si no, la asuncin de prioridades basadas en criterios sanitarios y sociales. las indicaciones de vacunacin antigripal figuran en la tabla 3. recientemente, los episodios de gripe aviar y animal han aconsejado la vacunacin gripal de cuidadores y veterinarios para prevenir la gripe estacional y evitar la emergencia de subtipos nuevos por infecciones dobles.la eficacia de la vacuna depende fundamentalmente de la homologa entre las cepas vacunales y las epidmicas, la edad e inmunocompetencia de los vacunados. en adultos sanos se cifra entre el 80-90%, siendo ms variable e inferior en ancianos. la vacunacin en los grupos de riesgo reduce la hospitalizacin y complicaciones, especialmente la neumona.en adultos se recomienda una sola dosis de 0,5 ml por va intramuscular o subcutnea profunda. en la primovacunacin de nios de 6 meses a 8 aos se recomiendan 2 dosis por va intramuscular separadas por un intervalo de 4 semanas. en nios de 6 a 35 meses la dosis debe ser de 0,25 ml. se requieren tres semanas para estar protegido. las contraindicaciones son las de aplicacin general para cualquier vacuna y la hipersensibilidad a las protenas del huevo. el sndrome de guillain-barr es la nica complicacin grave tras la administracin de la vacuna antigripal.son virus de la familia picornaviridae. se replican slo a 33-34c, factor que limita su patogenia a la rinofaringe. los ms de 100 tipos antignicos no producen inmunidad cruzada entre ellos (tabla 1). por carecer de envoltura tienen cierta resistencia ambiental. la infeccin puede transmitirse por los dedos contaminados de secreciones nasales y contacto con superficies y fmites. la va nasofarngea y conjuntival requieren un inculo mnimo, mientras que para la orofarngea debe ser mayor.los rinovirus son los principales responsables del resfriado comn (15-40%), cuadro benigno, pero de gran repercusin econmica y social. la mayor afectacin se produce en lactantes y nios pequeos, aunque los adultos pueden sufrir hasta 6 episodios al ao (tablas 2 y 4). el catarro comn puede observarse durante todo el ao, pero es ms frecuente en los meses de transicin del verano al otoo (septiembre) y de la primavera al verano (mayo). el perodo de incubacin de la infeccin por rinovirus es de 1-4 das, coincidiendo el inicio de los sntomas con la eliminacin del virus. el catarro comn comienza con rinorrea, estornudos y congestin nasal. es frecuente el dolor de garganta, siendo en algunos casos el primer sntoma. son raros el malestar general, la cefalea y la fiebre. la secrecin nasal se va haciendo purulenta, no significando forzosamente un signo de infeccin bacteriana secundaria. el cuadro se resuelve espontneamente en 4-9 das sin secuelas. las complicaciones ms importantes incluyen otitis, sinusitis bacterianas secundarias o reactivacin de procesos crnicos (bronquitis, asma, etc.). ocasionalmente se pueden afectar las vas respiratorias inferiores, dando lugar a bronquitis, bronquiolitis e incluso bronconeumonas, aunque estas ltimas son muy raras en sujetos sin patologa de base.en general, circulan muchos serotipos simultneamente, sin que predominen unos sobre otros. la mayora de los adultos tienen anticuerpos neutralizantes frente a varios serotipos que no producen siempre inmunidad duradera, por lo que no es excepcional la reinfeccin por el mismo serotipo. las medidas preventivas ms eficaces para evitar la transmisin son el lavado de manos y la desinfeccin de superficies. adultos y nios con alteraciones crnicas pulmonares o cardiovasculares, incluidos nios con asmaresidentes en centros geritricos y sujetos institucionalizados con problemas mdicos crnicos adultos y nios que precisan tratamiento regular u hospitalizacin en el ao anterior por enfermedades metablicas (diabetes mellitus), disfuncin renal, hemoglobinopatas o inmunosupresin (incluida por medicamentos)nios y jvenes (6 meses a 18 aos) con tratamiento prolongado con cido acetilsaliclico y riesgo de desarrollar un sndrome de reye tras un proceso gripalpersonas que pueden transmitir la gripe a personas con alto riesgo mdicos y personal sanitario destinado a cuidados hospitalarios y ambulatorios de los pacientes, especialmente los de unidades de crticoscualquier persona que provea de cuidados a personas de alto riesgo (personal sanitario visitador, trabajadores sociales, trabajadores voluntarios)miembros del ncleo familiar (incluidos nios) que convivan con personas de alto riego coronavirus son virus de la familia coronaviridae, con una envoltura provista de proyecciones en palillo de tambor que les confiere aspecto de "corona solar". son la segunda causa de catarro comn (10-20%) tras los rinovirus. las infecciones ocurren principalmente a finales del otoo, invierno y comienzo de la primavera, cuando los rinovirus son menos frecuentes. la sintomatologa es similar a la producida por rinovirus, aunque el perodo de incubacin es ms largo y la duracin de los sntomas ms corta. causa neumona en lactantes, casos de ira en reclutas y reagudizacin de la bronquitis crnica. desde el ao 2002 se han descubierto tres nuevos tipos de coronavirus: cov asociado al sarg, cov-nl63 en 2004 y cov-hku1 en 2005 (tabla1). el sarg, definido como una neumona atpica, apareci a finales del ao 2002 en distintas regiones de china, como consecuencia del salto desde un reservorio animal en civetas. se extendi a hong kong y por viajes internacionales a vietnam, singapur y canad. el sarg comienza como un sndrome gripal con fiebre, mialgias y cefalea. posteriormente aparece tos no productiva, disnea y diarrea acuosa con sangre y moco. la disnea puede agravarse y requerir ingreso en la unidad de cuidados intensivos (uci). en nios y ancianos se produce un cuadro atpico sin fiebre. stos ltimos pueden desarrollar una neumona bacteriana secundaria. en la radiografa de trax se observa una consolidacin unilateral que progresa a mltiples lesiones. la mayora de los casos de sarg se describieron en personas adultas, con un perodo de incubacin de 2-10 das y una mortalidad global del 10% sobre ms de 8.000 casos 22 .el vrs pertenece a la familia paramyxoviridae, subfamilia pneumovirinae, gnero neumovirus, cuya replicacin da lugar a la fusin de las clulas vecinas, formndose grandes sincitios multinucleados. se han caracterizado dos subtipos: vrs a y vrs b (tabla 1). su distribucin es mundial, dando lugar a epidemias anuales que aparecen al final del otoo, en invierno y primavera. se transmite principalmente por contactos con dedos o fmites recientemente contaminados a travs de la conjuntiva y ventanas nasales, siendo la diseminacin por aerosoles al toser o estornudar menos eficiente. el virus se multiplica en las clulas epiteliales de la mucosa nasal, faringe y a veces laringe, pudiendo afectar a la trquea, bronquios, bronquiolos y alvolos.es el principal patgeno respiratorio en nios pequeos y la primera causa de bronquiolitis aguda en lactantes. en estos ltimos se observa un pico de incidencia entre los 2-3 meses de edad, sobre todo en guarderas. es responsable de entre el 25-40% de los ingresos hospitalarios por infecciones respiratorias inferiores en lactantes y nios pequeos. el espectro de infecciones respiratorias causadas por el vrs es amplio. en lactantes el 25-40% de las infecciones afectan a las vas respiratorias inferiores y consisten en neumona, bronquiolitis y traqueobronquitis (tabla 4). la infeccin respiratoria de vas altas suele preceder a la aparicin de bron- quiolitis aguda. los sntomas principales son fiebre y disnea que progresa con rapidez debido a la obstruccin de los bronquiolos, produciendo tiraje y retraccin intercostal y supraesternal al respirar, con hipoxia y cianosis asociada. el lactante se vuelve inquieto e irritable a medida que aumenta la hipoxia, debido a que el paso del aire est muy limitado y los pulmones hiperdistendidos. una complicacin frecuente es la otitis media. en el adulto, los sntomas ms habituales de la infeccin por vrs son los del catarro comn. tambin pueden exacerbarse procesos asmticos y epoc. en personas de edad avanzada o imunodeprimidos puede ser causa de neumona con importante morbimortalidad, y su diagnstico debe ser activamente sospechado y buscado 23, 24 . la rivabirina es eficaz para el tratamiento de vrslos cuatro serotipos del virus parainfluenza se clasifican dentro de la familia paramyxoviridae, subfamilia paramyxovirinae, gneros respirovirus (parainfluenza 1 y 3) y rubulavirus (2, 4a y 4b) (tabla 1). los serotipos 1 y 2 tienden a alternarse anualmente produciendo epidemias en otoo. el serotipo 3 suele ser prevalerte a lo largo de todo el ao, destacando su capacidad para producir brotes en instituciones. los serotipos 4a y 4b son menos frecuentes.la infeccin se produce precozmente en la infancia, de manera que el 90% de los nios de 7-8 aos tienen anticuerpos frente a los serotipos 1, 2 y 3. los virus parainfluenza ocupan el segundo lugar tras el vrs en la etiologa de infecciones respiratorias inferiores en nios pequeos. en adultos representa menos del 5% de las infecciones respiratorias, ocasionando cuadros generalmente leves.el virus parainfluenza 1 es la causa ms frecuente en nios de laringotraqueobronquitis o crup. el serotipo 2 produce una enfermedad similar, pero generalmente menos grave. el serotipo 3 es causa importante de bronquiolitis y neumona en el lactante (tabla 4); mientras que la enfermedad por el tipo 4 suele ser leve. los nios pueden presentar un cuadro catarral afebril, con coriza, dolor farngeo, ronquera y tos, que puede ser de tipo crup. la laringotraqueobronquitis grave cursa con fiebre persistente y empeoran los sntomas respiratorios y el dolor de garganta. aparece una tos metlica o perruna que evoluciona hasta un franco estridor. puede progresar y aparecer una obstruccin progresiva de las vas respiratorias con hipoxia. si se desarrollan bronquiolitis o neumona puede haber tos progresiva con aumento de la expectoracin acompaada de sibilancias, taquipnea y tiraje intercostal. en inmunodeprimidos, la infeccin es ms grave y prolongada. al igual que en la infeccin por otros paramyxovirus, las reinfecciones son frecuentes y su gravedad disminuye segn aumenta la edad.pertenecen a la familia adenoviridae, gnero mastadenovirus. existen grupos del a al f con 51 serotipos que tienen una considerable estabilidad ambiental lo que facilita su transmisin. los ms comunes son los serotipos del 1 al 8, 11, 21, 35, 37 y 40; pudiendo causar brotes los serotipos 3, 4, 7, 14 y 21. poseen especial afinidad por la faringe, siendo los responsables ms frecuentes de faringoamigdalitis vrica. afectan a todos los grupos de edad con una incidencia mxima entre los 6-12 meses, siendo en nios en edad escolar el 50% de las infecciones asintomticas. se presenta a lo largo de todo el ao. el perodo de incubacin es amplio (2-14 das). adems de los sntomas respiratorios producen queratoconjuntivitis, cistitis hemorrgica y gastroenteritis. causan brotes localizados de ira en invierno y primavera, y brotes de fiebre faringoconjuntival asociada a piscinas en verano (serotipos 3, 4, 5, 6, 7 y 14). tambin en su forma epidmica (tabla 4) se les ha relacionado con ira en reclutas (serotipos 4 y 7). la infeccin respiratoria superior cursa con faringitis, fiebre, amigdalitis y diarrea, sobre todo en nios pequeos. en los cuadros respiratorios inferiores aparece fiebre, afectacin de vas altas, bronquitis, bronquiolitis y neumona, que puede ser ms grave en nios que en adultos y se debe frecuentemente al serotipo 3.perteneciente a la familia paramyxoviridae, subfamilia pneumovirinae, gnero metaneumovirus. es un virus de reciente descripcin, por lo que todava no se conoce bien su patogenia, epidemiologa y los cuadros clnicos en los que est implicado. se han identificado dos linajes genticos a y b, subdividindose cada uno de ellos en dos grupos (a1-a2 y b1-b2). es un virus de distribucin mundial. casi un 100% de anticuerpos frente al metaneumovirus humano (mnvh) se detectan en los sujetos mayores de 10 aos, lo que parece indicar que este virus lleva circulando al menos 50 aos en la poblacin.el mnvh es un virus que puede causar desde una infeccin respiratoria alta inespecfica autolimitada en nios y adultos sanos, hasta cuadros de bronquiolitis y traqueobronquitis en nios de corta edad, as como bronquitis y neumona potencialmente grave en mayores de 65 aos e inmunodeprimidos. los sntomas son similares a los producidos por el vrs: tos no productiva, congestin nasal, otitis media, bronquiolitis y neumona (tabla 2). la infeccin afecta principalmente a los nios menores de 5 aos, pudiendo existir reinfecciones. se ha asociado la infeccin por mnvh con la reactividad bronquial.la gripe puede ser diagnosticada clnicamente cuando existe evidencia epidmica confirmada por el laboratorio. sin embargo, el diagnstico virolgico de un cuadro respiratorio se debe hacer extensivo para el resto de virus respiratorios, sobre todo en los casos graves o complicados, pacientes hospitalizados, sujetos inmunodeprimidos y porque en ocasiones puede haber coinfecciones. las muestras deben recogerse preferentemente en los tres primeros das tras el inicio de los sntomas (virus de la gripe). en otros virus y cuando se trate de nios pueden recogerse muestras en la primera semana. se recomiendan frotis farngeos o nasofarngeos, aspirados nasofarngeos y lavados nasales, estos ltimos de especial utilidad en nios. los lavados broncoalveolares y aspirados traqueales se realizarn preferentemente en los procesos de vas inferiores de adultos. el transporte de las muestras debe hacerse utilizando cualquier medio de calidad utilizado en virologa. los frotis pueden conservarse a 4 c hasta 24 horas en la mayora de los casos.el diagnstico de eleccin es el diagnstico directo. entre los mtodos de diagnstico directo cabe distinguir aquellos que permiten la recuperacin posterior viable del virus (cultivo) y otros que no permiten su recuperacin (deteccin antignica o molecular). una combinacin de ambos que se adapte al laboratorio y la clnica es la mejor opcin. para el aislamiento vrico se emplean el cultivo celular clsico o el cultivo rpido por centrifugacin/cultivo (shell vial). este ltimo permite el aislamiento en 24-48 horas, con ligera merma de sensibilidad. el cultivo mixto de clulas (mdck, vero, hep2) permite el crecimiento de varios virus respiratorios, ampliando el repertorio diagnstico a un coste aceptable.las tcnicas de inmunofluorescencia (if), enzimoinmunoanlisis (eia) e inmunocromatografa capilar (icc) son mtodos rpidos de diagnstico. algunos (eia, icc) permiten el diagnstico a la cabecera del enfermo y sirven para instaurar un tratamiento precoz o medidas de profilaxis urgentes. pueden constituir una primera lnea de diagnstico, pero no sustituir al cultivo. la calidad de la muestra influye decisivamente en la sensibilidad (65-80%) de los mtodos rpidos, sobre todo para la if, que precisa de clulas morfolgicamente conservadas; por ello es ms adecuado el lavado nasofarngeo que el frotis. las tcnicas de amplificacin genmica (rt-pcr) ofrecen distintas alternativas. se han ensayado pcr multiplex que permiten el diagnstico de virus gripales y otros virus respiratorios con adaptaciones a la metodologa en tiempo real 25 .es de escasa utilidad para el diagnstico y manejo de casos clnicos de gripe y viriasis respiratorias. se basa en la seroconversin (aumento de 4 veces el ttulo) entre el suero al inicio de los sntomas y 10-12 das despus. la fijacin de complemento es poco sensible, sobre todo en las seroconversiones, especialmente en lactantes menores de 4 meses. por esta razn, ttulos superiores o iguales a 1/64 pueden ser significativos en gripe y superiores a 1/128 para otros virus respiratorios. la inhibicin de la hemaglutinacin es especfica de subtipo y variante gripal y se utiliza principalmente para seroepidemiologa y respuesta vacunal. algunos eia e filaxis se emplea una sola dosis diaria. hay que ajustar la dosis en pacientes con aclaramientos de creatinina inferiores a 30 ml/min. ninguno de los ina tiene accin sobre el citocromo p450 y no hay descritas interacciones con otros antivricos. la profilaxis con antivricos puede ser una alternativa a la vacunacin en las personas con contraindicacin para vacunarse por inmunodeficiencia grave, con importantes factores de riesgo o en instituciones cerradas sin adecuada cobertura vacunal 26 . pueden ser la nica alternativa al inicio de una onda pandmica.las caractersticas que definen la aparicin de un virus de la gripe con potencial pandmico son: emergencia de un subtipo nuevo (h distinta), capacidad para infectar a humanos y transmisin eficaz y continua de persona a persona. en el salto de especie de un virus animal de la gripe a a seres humanos intervienen distintos factores. en general, los virus de linajes humanos muestran afinidad por receptores de tipo neu  2,6 mientras que los linajes aviares son neu  2,3 y su localizacin anatmica es distinta. sin embargo, por s solos no explican la aparente dificultad de salto de barrera gentica. otros genes internos del complejo polimerasa (pb1, pb2, pa) intervienen en la eficaz replicacin del virus en clulas no aviares 13 . la gripe espaola (h1n1) caus una mortalidad muy elevada en jvenes durante la primera onda epidmica, no suficientemente explicada por las caractersticas del virus, o la exagerada respuesta inflamatoria de los afectados, y dicho virus posea toda su constelacin genmica de origen aviar 3,7,13 . el peligro de aparicin de una cepa pandmica del subtipo h5n1 reside en la posible adaptacin humana del virus o el riesgo de reordenamiento por coincidencia entre casos de gripe humana y aviar en el mbito rural asitico en el que hay un contacto muy estrecho entre personas y animales 6,9 . en 1997 se produjo en hong kong un brote de gripe aviar por un subtipo de gripe a h5n1 del que se registraron 18 casos en humanos, seis de ellos mortales, saldndose aquel episodio con el sacrificio masivo de aves de corral del mercado de hong kong tras exhaustivos estudios epidemiolgicos 27 . la demostracin posterior de otros episodios por virus gripal a del subtipo h9n2 alertaron a la organizacin mundial de la salud (oms) sobre el riesgo respecto a la aparicin de una nueva pandemia de gripe. todos estos datos configuran un panorama en el que debe contemplarse la epidemiologa y ecologa de la gripe bajo una visin de conjunto debido al fuerte vnculo existente entre virus gripales humanos y animales ( fig. 2 ). desde entonces ms de once pases han referido casos h5n1 en aves domsticas y cinco de ellos han comunicado ms de 130 casos humanos con una mortalidad superior al 50% y distintas presentaciones clnicas. hasta ahora la transmisin interhumana de forma eficaz y continua no ha podido ser demostrada 28 . sin embargo, son altamente preocupantes los cambios habidos en el receptor de la ha, que posibilitan un mayor rango de huspedes susceptibles de infectarse 29 y el aumento del rango de edad en casos clnicos humanos. la demostracin de la capacidad de transmitirse a otros mamferos demuestra el potencial de salto interespecie if indirectas para otros virus (sarscov), y otros que detectan muy irregularmente la produccin de igm frente a algunos virus respiratorios no tienen un uso rutinario.en la gripe y las viriasis respiratorias altas no complicadas es suficiente el tratamiento sintomtico: administracin de antitrmicos y analgsicos, y reposo en la mayora de los casos. el cido acetil-saliclico debe evitarse en nios por su asociacin con el sndrome de reye y los antibiticos se reservan para las complicaciones bacterianas. los casos leves de crup se tratan con humidificacin del aire con vaporizadores y los casos ms graves con ventilacin. en las viriasis respiratorias bajas (bronquiolitis, bronconeumona y neumona) de nios pequeos y lactantes, el tratamiento consiste en aspiracin de las secreciones, administracin de oxgeno humidificado y broncodilatadores. los corticoides pueden precisarse en los episodios agudos de crup o laringitis estridulosa. en la hipoxia intensa pueden ser necesarias la intubacin y la ventilacin asistida. en las bronquiolitis por vrs del lactantes es eficaz el tratamiento mediante aerosol de ribavirina durante 3-6 das; la necesidad de tienda y dispositivos especiales complican su uso en la prctica clnica rutinaria.son aminas cclicas sintticas que bloquean el canal inico de la m2 ( fig. 1) de los virus gripales. slo son activas frente a los virus a, ya que los b poseen una protena distinta. la estrecha franja entre dosis teraputica y efectos secundarios explica su limitado uso teraputico. la pauta en adultos sanos es de 100 mg/12 h durante 3-5 das. en hemodializados o enfermos renales hay que ajustar las dosis en funcin del aclaramiento renal o pautar das alternos. se han descrito efectos secundarios sobre el snc y aparicin de resistencia cruzada para ambos antivricos en el curso del tratamiento.son inhibidores de la na (ina) activos frente a los virus gripales a y b, incluidos virus aviares. inhiben y bloquean especficamente los sitios activos de la na impidiendo la liberacin y difusin de nuevos virus desde la clula infectada. el zanamivir se administra por va inhalatoria dos veces al da durante 5 das. debe comenzar a administrarse en las primeras 24 horas del inicio de la sintomatologa. en profilaxis se recomienda una inhalacin diaria. dada su nula absorcin no hay necesidad de reducir la dosis en enfermos renales. su uso est indicado en adultos con buen nivel de conciencia y adolescentes mayores de 12 aos. reduce las complicaciones y la duracin de la gripe entre 1-3 das. el oseltamivir es un ina de administracin oral que tras su absorcin se metaboliza a oseltamivir-carboxilato. se elimina por filtracin glomerular y secrecin tubular, y tiene una biodisponibilidad del 80%. la pauta es de 75 mg dos veces al da durante 5 das. en pro-del subtipo h5n1. paulatinamente se ha podido observar un descenso en la tasa de la mortalidad, aunque todava es muy elevada para una difusin eficaz. si el salto se completa y el virus se adapta a la transmisin interhumana; la variabilidad puede ser muy elevada y el riesgo pandmico inminente.las repercusiones de esta nueva situacin no se han hecho esperar: la oms ha cambiado y redefinido las fases de alerta por gripe pandmica ( fig. 4 ) y ha encarecido a todos los estados a elaborar y perfeccionar planes pandmicos ante la posibilidad de disrupcin social que pudiera originarse al no disponer de vacuna en la primera onda pandmica. es posible que los casos que se han visto en el pasado y actualmente constituyan slo la punta del iceberg de todas las infecciones que se estn produciendo.la extensin epizotica actual del subtipo h5n1 junto a las ltimas noticias epidemiolgicas y virolgicas 30 apuntan a que el subtipo actual, hasta donde se conoce, parece estar siguiendo "la hoja de ruta" biolgica que han debido seguir los linajes de virus de la gripe a que han infectado durante miles de aos al hombre. es preciso un esfuerzo de concienciacin responsable ante una enfermedad que de forma abrupta nos visita cada ao sin poder explicar muy bien su perfil y su periodicidad, y ante una amenaza pandmica que tarde o temprano se producir 31 . importante  muy importante  metaanlisis  ensayo clnico controlado  epidemiologa fase 1. no deteccin de subtipos nuevos en humanos fase 2. aparicin de un subtipo en animales con peligro para humanos acute respiratory infections (aris) in south east asia cause substantial morbidity and mortality, especially in children under 5 years of age (walker et al., 2013) . pneumonia continues to be the number one cause of under 5 death despite effective treatments (wardlaw et al., 2006) . a substantial contributor to this is the largely unknown etiology of most pneumoniae, with both viral and bacterial origin. the patterns of pneumonia and other ari hospitalizations serves as a proxy for determining the transmission dynamics of viruses and bacteria contributing to these hospitalizations, and is of key importance in understanding and limiting burden of this childhood killer.in addition to informing on the relative likelihood of the potential viral etiology of a pneumonia case based on seasonally circulating pathogens, knowledge of seasonal influenza epidemiological dynamics can aid in informing optimal timing for vaccination efforts (saha et al., 2014; lambach et al., 2015) and judicious use of antivirals tanaka et al., 2014) . identification of low incidence seasons would provide a target window for vaccination, with the hope of maximizing population immunity before the onset of the influenza season. similarly, when respiratory syncytial virus (rsv) vaccination becomes available, knowledge of its seasonality will be useful to maximize benefit (drysdale et al., 2016; anderson et al., 2013) , and in the potential administration of passive immunoprophylaxis with palivizumab to reduce the number of severe outcomes associated with rsv infection among high-risk infants (committee on infectious diseases, 2009 ). finally, knowledge of seasonal patterns of virus circulation can inform the clinical use of antibiotics, again limiting use when viral circulation is traditionally high to minimize antibiotic resistance ( van nguyen et al., 2013; laxminarayan et al., 2013 laxminarayan et al., , 2016 van boeckel et al., 2014) .previous work has identified the potential etiology of pneumonia and other aris in southern central vietnam (do et al., 2011; yoshida et al., 2010) . adenovirus (aov), bocavirus (hbov), coronavirus (cov), human metapneumovirus (hmpv), human parainfluenza 1-4 viruses (hpiv1-4), human rhinovirus (hrv), influenza a and b, and rsv all contribute to the disease burden and circulate widely. information on viral transmission dynamics across seasons in vietnam is relatively under-explored. do et al. found seasonality of rsv infections and slight seasonality of hmpv infections in ho chi minh city, but no seasonality of influenza (do et al., 2011) . several studies have similarly found high variability in influenza a & b incidence over the year (nguyen et al., 2007; le et al., 2015; thai et al., 2015) . yoshida et al. found rsv occurring in the hot months, influenza a in the cool months, and year-round detection of hrv in nha trang (yoshida et al., 2010) . few other studies have examined seasonality of these common viruses across south east asia.here we examine the seasonal trends of hospitalizations and circulation of multiple viruses in nha trang, vietnam. using enhanced hospital based surveillance of childhood ari we identify seasonal patterns in hospitalizations as a proxy for transmission and explore the relationship of hospitalizations associated with virus detection with rainfall, temperature, and dew point, to try and identify contributing factors to observed seasonality.the study site is nha trang, central vietnam, where the study population has been described previously (yoshida et al., 2014 (yoshida et al., , 2010 flasche et al., 2014) . the hospital based enhanced surveillance of childhood ari is ongoing. we analyze data from january 29, 2007 to april 26, 2012 which is the only tertiary care facility located in khanh hoa province. according to the field site census survey in july 2006, the study catchment area encompassing the 16 non-touristic of the 27 communes in nha trang city, had 198,729 residents including 13,952 children less than 5 years of age. an ari case was defined as any child presenting to khgh with cough or/and difficulty in breathing. before study enrollment, informed consent was obtained from parents of children who presented with ari and lived in the study catchment area. clinical and demographic information, chest radiographs (cxr), laboratory data, and nasopharyngeal (np) samples were collected from all enrolled patients. khgh is the only hospital in nha trang, khanh hoa province and the only one accessible for residents of the catchment area. hence for incidence calculations we assume that all children with ari are eligible to be hospitalized and enrolled into the study and use the population of the catchment area as denominator. acute respiratory infection patients with normal cxr were categorized as upper respiratory tract infection (urti). patients with abnormal cxr were categorized as lower respiratory tract infection (lrti).np samples were collected at the time of admission and viral nucleic acid was extracted using qia viral rna minikit (qiagen inc., valencia, ca). four multiplex-pcr assays (1: influenza a, influenza b, rsv, hmpv; 2: piv-1, -2, -3, and -4; 3: rhinovirus, coronavirus 229e, coronavirus oc43; 4: adenovirus and bocavirus) were performed to detect 13 respiratory viruses in each np sample. a second confirmatory-pcr was performed for samples positive on the initial pcr test. samples positive for both pcr assays were defined as positive. reverse transcription-pcr (rt-pcr) assays were performed using one-step rt-pcr kit from qiagen. for the multiplex pcr and hemi-nested pcr assays, taqdna polymerase (promega, san luis obispo, ca) was used as previously described (yoshida et al., 2010) . positive templates were used in each assay for quality control.three weather variablesrainfall (inches), temperature (f ), and dew point (the temperature to which air must be cooled in order to reach saturation with water)were collected from the nha trang station (id: 488770) reported by the us national oceanic and atmospheric administration (national oceanic and atmospheric administration, 2017). we considered monthly averages of all weather variables as well as both the weather variable on the day of admission (t 0 ) as well as averaged over the previous 7 days (t 7 to t 1 ) assuming up to a week incubation period for the viral infections (see supplementary material) (lessler et al., 2009) . the weather in nha trang central vietnam is warm throughout the year (between 20 and 30 c ). in terms of temperature, december to february months are cooler (referred to here as the winter months) while june to august months are hottest months (referred to here as the summer months). september, october, november are the wettest months.for each pcr+ for virus a series of log-link poisson models were fit to assess respective seasonality with calendar month as the main predictor, log-commune population size as an offset term, monthly averaged rainfall, temperature, and dew point, and calendar year as adjusting variables. the outcome was monthly aggregate cases, with resulting coefficients as incidence rate ratios as compared to january. we excluded hospitalizations with more than one virus detected in the nasopharynx to adjust for a potential bias through inclusion of cases who by virtue of being co-infected may otherwise have been asymptomatic (althouse and scarpino, 2015) . this approach underestimates the true incidence of np carriage among ari cases but allows estimation of seasonal patterns that are not biased by other circulating viruses; although co-circulation of bacteria was not accounted for. we assessed the numbers and variety of viruses in ari hospitalizations using binomial proportion tests for each virus.to examine the relationship between monthly average rain, temperature, and dew point and incidence hospitalized childhood ari infections, we estimated the cross-wavelet transform between the z-standardized time series (we subtracted the mean of the time series and divided by the standard deviation) of weather and viral detections (cazelles et al., 2008) . the cross-wavelet transform identifies regions of high power in phase-space and identifies the relative phases of each time series, i.e., in-phase or out-of-phase (grinsted et al., 2004) . the wavelet transform can be thought of a fourier transformation over time that can identify what is the dominant frequency composing a time series as the signal changes in time. the cross-wavelet transform allows us to compare how two time signals co-vary: we can identify if the presence of a particular frequency at a given time in the time series of hospitalizations corresponds to the presence of that same frequency at the same time in a weather covariate (chaves and pascual, 2006) . additionally, we can identify the magnitude by which weather precedes or follows hospitalizations through the phase angle of the two time series. finally, we can identify the statistical significance of the identified constituent frequencies over time by comparing the observed frequencies to a red-noise process.sensitivity analyses, presented in the supplementary materials, were performed as follows: 1) case counts of less than 70 per virus over the whole study period were deemed too low for robust statistical inference; 2) alternative poisson regression models where the reference category is july; 3) logistic regression models were formulated as an alternative to the poisson regressions above with detection of a virus by pcr (yes/no) as the outcome, with month as the main predictor, adjusted for weather, commune of residence, age, sex, smoking indoors, socioeconomic status (ses), and calendar year, with weather variables on the day of admission (t 0 ) as well as averaged over the previous 7 days (t 7 to t 1 ); and 4) additional wavelet analyses of viral isolations not presented in the main text.the study enrolled 3431 children between 2007 to 2013. among those, 374 (11%) had multiple viruses detected in their np swabs, for 59 presence of viruses in the np was not determined, and were excluded from the analyses, thus the total study population was 2998. among all cases with a virus detected, hrv, rsv, and influenza a were the most frequently detected viruses, with 569 (33.5% of all viral detections), 455 (26.8%), and 282 (16.6%) detections, respectively (table 1 and figure 1 ). counts of bocavirus (hbov), coronavirus (cov), and human parainfluenza 1, 2, and 4 viruses (hpiv1-4) were less than 70 and are reported in the supplementary material.strong seasonality, as defined by at least three consecutive months with a consistently higher or lower incidence than expected (irr or or greater or less than 1, respectively) and at least one of those statistically significantly different from the baseline, was observed for influenza a, rsv, and the presence of any virus (figures 2 and 3) . rsv peaked in july through november, with august seeing a 15.69 (95% confidence interval [ci]: 3.05, 80.56) times higher risk of identifying rsv as the sole viral agent from the nasopharynx of a childhood case as compared to january. influenza a peaked in may with an irr of 6.28 (95% ci: 2.2, 17.89) as compared to january. estimates of odds ratios from the supplemental logistic regression are qualitatively similar to the poisson regression, save for hpiv3, which exhibits a consistent yet nonsignificant peak in the cool months in the primary analysis which becomes significant in the supplemental analysis (see supplemental material).weather patterns over the study period were similar to patterns before and after the study period (supplementary material, figure  s3 ). monthly average rainfall (in inches), temperature (1 f), and dew point (1 f) correlated with the seasonality of some of our endpoints. figure 4 shows the incidence rate ratios for the three weather effects from the seasonally-adjusted models. overall hospitalizations for ari were negatively associated with temperature (irr 0.92 per 1 degree increase, 95% ci: 0.87, 0.97, p = 0.003) and positively associated with dew point (irr 1.08 per 1 degree increase, 95% ci: 1.04, 1.13, p < 0.001). of the few other significant effects, influenza a and hrv had a negative associations with temperature (irr 0.85, 95% ci: 0.75, 0.9, p = 0.0116, and irr 0.86, 95% ci: 0.79, 0.94, p < 0.001, respectively), and hpiv3 and hrv were positively associated with dew point, with irrs 1.26 (95% ci: 1.04, 1.52, p = 0.0164) and 1.13 (95% ci: 1.05, 1.21, p = 0.0009), respectively. logistic regression found that rsv was positively associated with the previous week's rain, with an odds ratio of of 1.90 (95% ci: 1.21, 2.99, p = 0.0053). previous week's temperature was marginally associated with rsv (or: 1.14 (95% ci: 0.98, 1.33, p = 0.08) (see supplementary material). figure 5 shows the cross-wavelet transform of all hospitalizations and the three weather variables in the month of admission. significant bands of high power around 1 year can be seen for temperature and dew point. this indicates that hospitalizations and temperature and dew point share variability at yearly frequencies over the study period, and the phase relationship indicates that changes in weather slightly precede changes in hospitalizations (arrows point about 45 down). figure 6 shows the cross-wavelet transform of rsv and the three weather variables with similar significance bands around 1 year for temperature and dew point. the phase indicates temperature and dew point lead rsv incidence. while not significant, rsv was found to be leading rainfall by 90 (3 months) at the one year period band (see supplementary material). significant bands of power were seen between temperature and dew point with hpiv3 with an indicated phase relationship of nearly completely out-of-phase (figure 7) . similar patterns were seen (1 year significant bands between temperature and dew point and virus) for adv, hbov, cov, hpiv1,2&4, hrv, and influenza a, though the phase differences varied across these viruses; hmpv and influenza b had bands lying outside the cone of influence (ie, not statistically significant; see supplementary material). these results in general indicate strong associations between weather covariates and viral hospitalizations at a yearly timescale. here we have identified seasonal trends of several common respiratory viruses in hospitalized children in nha trang, vietnam. by fitting a series of statistical models to the observed data, we allow the data to identify salient features contributing to the seasonality of these viruses. we evaluated seasonal patterns and associations with weather of hospitalizations for several respiratory viruses using three lines of evidence: 1) poisson regression examining the relative incidence across months of virus detections adjusted for weather covariates, 2) cross-wavelet transforms of hospitalizations with viral detections, and 3) a sensitivity analysis with a logistic regression model finding odds ratio of hospitalizations with viral detections and weather variables. any viral detection showed distinct seasonality with peaks in may through september, a negative association with temperature, positive association with dew point, and crosswavelets indicating temperature and dew point leading viral detection. of commonly detected viruses, rsv, influenza a, and hpiv3 had significant seasonality. rsv peaked in july through december, was positively associated with the week's previous average rainfall. cross-wavelets showed temperature and dew point to lead rsv, rain was found to non-significantly fall behind rsv at 1 year frequencies, and precede rsv at shorter (<100 day) frequencies. finally, hpiv3 while not significant, had peaks in january and february, was positively associated with dew point, and was completely out of phase with temperature and dew points in cross-wavelet analyses. these results contribute to the growing body of knowledge on the epidemiology of respiratory pathogens in south east asia and southern central vietnam.using a cross-wavelet transform we evaluated the timedependence of virus hospitalizations with the weather covariates. we found strong yearly associations with rsv over the study period with temperature and dew point in phase with hospitalizations. this seasonality is opposite to observed seasonality in temperate climates, where rsv typically peaks in winter (tang and loh, 2014; shek and lee, 2003) . recent reviews of rsv seasonality in tropical regions highlights the uncertainty in the effects of weather on rsv transmission. studies in brazil (straliotto et al., 2002) , hawaii (reese and marchette, 1991) , india (agrawal et al., 2009) , kenya (hazlett et al., 1988) , and malaysia (chew et al., 1998; chan et al., 2002; khor et al., 2012) , have shown negative associations between temperature and rsv, while studies in hong kong (chan et al., 1999) , mexico (yusuf et al., 2007) , singapore (chew et al., 1998) , and taiwan (huang et al., 2001) have shown positive associations. we find strongly positive associations between temperature and rsv hospitalizations with a slight lead of temperature on rsv. this is evident both from the cross-wavelet transform and the regression results indicating a positive effect of the previous week's temperature on rsv.there is less uncertainty in the role of rainfall on rsv transmission in tropical areas, where the majority of work indicates that rsv generally occurs during rainy seasons (shek and lee, 2003) . colombia (bedoya et al., 1996) , the gambia (weber et al., 1998) , hong kong (chan et al., 1999) , kenya (hazlett et al., 1988) , malaysia (chan et al., 2002) , and papua new guinea (hierholzer et al., 1994) all show positive rsv associations with rainfall. omer et al. (omer et al., 2008) showed significant positive associations between rainfall and temperature in the previous 8 days and rsv incidence in lombok, indonesia. we find similar associations, with the mean rainfall and temperature over the previous 7 days having odds ratios for rsv of 1.90 and 1.14, respectively. this association is plausible as the incubation period of rsv is estimated to be between 4 and 5 days (lessler et al., 2009) . detailed contact tracing studies, coupled with climatological data could refine this association.somewhat surprisingly, the cross-wavelet transform of rsv and rain showed no significant association, though areas of high power were observed in the 1-year and 6-month bands, with phase indicating rsv leading weather. however, none of the viruses studied here showed appreciable associations with rain in the cross-wavelet transform, possibly indicating the dominance of other weather effects (temperature and dew point) on virus hospitalizations.as with previous studies examining hpiv incidence, we found a predominance of hpiv3 (72 detections) compared to 41, 13, and 3 for hpiv1, 2, and 4, respectively. typical seasonality for hpiv3 is the spring and early summer months in the temperate regions (fry et al., 2006; hall, 2001) , and has little to no observed seasonality in the tropics and subtropics (chew et al., 1998; branche and falsey, 2016) . we find evidence for winter peaks in hpiv3 hospitalizations when employing both the poisson regression model as well as the logistic regression model to estimate odds ratios, though the peaks were not statistically significant when controlling for weather.the cross-wavelet transforms reveals hpiv3 to vary significantly at 1 year periodicity with temperature and dew point across the study. it also shows that hpiv3 hospitalizations are nearly completely out of phase with temperature and dew point throughout the study period. hpiv3 has been associated with low temperature and low relative humidity (miller and artenstein, 1967) though there is in general a paucity of data on the transmission routes of hpiv3 (pica and bouvier, 2012; meissner et al., 1984) . future work could explore in more depth the epidemiological relationship between hpiv and weather variables.this study is not without limitations. first, while we have nearly 6 years of data, this is still a relatively short period to assess longterm seasonal trends, or to increase confidence in the estimates of seasonal patterns. however, the length of the analyzed time series is similar to other studies examining seasonal trends in viral respiratory pathogens in the tropics (chew et al., 1998; hall, 2001) , and gives indications for areas of future study. second, we excluded individuals with more than one virus detected. examination of changes in the seasonality of other viruses and coinfection over this period is worthy of study and is outside the scope of this paper. third, this study used hospital-based surveillance, necessarily presenting the most ill children. we take as an assumption that hospitalizations are a fraction of all transmission and severity of illness is not related to weather. finally, this study examines the influence of weather on viral hospitalizations and does not address other drivers of seasonal patterns of transmission, such as school closures (fine and clarkson, 1982) , differences in other social behavior such as contact rates (cook et al., 1990; dushoff et al., 2004) , susceptible recruitment through births (metcalf et al., 2012) , or possible seasonal changes in host immune responses (dowell et al., 2003) . future work examining these drivers in this setting is necessary.limitations aside, our study adds to the body of literature on seasonality of common respiratory patterns in tropical regions and will be of use when consideration of the epidemiology of these pathogens is necessary. for example the timing of influenza peaks in the mid-spring months (april, may, june) would indicate routine vaccination in the winter months would be of biggest impact. similarly, knowing rsv peaks in the late summer/early fall when rcp is at its lowest may help in limiting unnecessary antibiotic (laxminarayan and malani, 2007) or antiviral use (tanaka et al., 2014) . in vietnam and most of asia, most antibiotics are acquired from a pharmacist without a formal prescription ( van nguyen et al., 2013) . this fact makes results like those presented here of high importance to public health decision-makers to inform pharmacists of seasonality of respiratory infection etiologies and urge judicious prescribing practices.additional future work could include examination of the effects of contact clustering (hbert-dufresne and , coinfection hbert-dufresne et al., 2013) , and asymptomatic carriers (althouse and scarpino, 2015) on transmission of the examined viruses all of which may be influenced by weather. first study to explore the effects of meteorological factors on covid-19 mortality  a positive association is found between daily death counts of covid-19 and dtr.  absolute humidity is negatively associated with daily death counts of covid-19.a b s t r a c t a r t i c l e i n f oin december 2019, a novel coronavirus disease epidemic was reported in wuhan, china, which is caused by severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2) (gorbalenya, 2020; wu et al., 2020) . the covid-19 has been affirmed to have human-to-human transmissibility (c. , which raised high attention not only in china but internationally. the world health organization (who) reported that there are 118,319 confirmed cases and 4292 deaths globally until march 11, 2020 (who, 2020a , and evaluated as global pandemic on the same day (who, 2020b) .in retrospect studies, the outbreak of severe acute respiratory syndrome (sars) in guangdong in 2003 gradually faded with the warming weather coming, and was basically ended until july (wallis and nerlich, 2005) . it has been documented that the temperature and its variations might have affected the sars outbreak (tan, 2005) . a study in korea found that the risk of influenza incidence was significantly increased with low daily temperature and low relative humidity, a positive significant association was observed for diurnal temperature range (dtr) (park et al., 2019) . moreover, temperature (pinheiro et al., 2014) and dtr (luo et al., 2013) have been linked to the death from respiratory diseases. a study demonstrated that absolute humidity had significant correlations with influenza viral survival and transmission rates (metz and finn, 2015) . few studies reported that the covid-19 was related to the meteorological factors, which decreased with the temperature increasing (oliveiros et al., 2020; , but their effects on the mortality have not been reported. therefore, we assume that the weather conditions might also contributed to the mortality of covid-19.as the capital of hubei province and one of the largest cities in central china, wuhan is located in the middle of the yangtze river delta, which has a typical subtropical, humid, monsoon climate with cold winters and warm summers . the average annual temperature and rainfall are 15.8c-17.5c and 1050 mm-2000 mm, respectively (liu et al., 2018) . besides, wuhan owns an area of 8569 km 2 and a population over 10 million (as of 2017) (2019). as of 24 march 2020, this covid-19 has caused 16,231 deaths globally and 2524 deaths in wuhan. although the covid-19 deaths may be affected by many factors, this study is to explore the effect from meteorological parameters on covid-19 deaths using generalized additive model (gam).data from 20 january 2020 to 29 february 2020 in wuhan were compiled, including daily death numbers of corona virus disease 2019 (covid-19), meteorological and air pollutant data. daily death data of covid-19 were collected from the official website of health commission of hubei province, people's republic of china (http:// wjw.hubei.gov.cn/). daily meteorological and air pollutant data were obtained from shanghai meteorological bureau and data center of ministry of ecology and environment of the people's republic of china, respectively. meteorological variables included daily average temperature, diurnal temperature range (dtr) and relative humidity, and air pollutant data included particulate matter with aerodynamic diameter 10 m (pm 10 ), particulate matter with aerodynamic diameter 2.5 m (pm 2.5 ), nitrogen dioxide (no 2 ), and sulfur dioxide (so 2 ), carbon monoxide (co), ozone (o 3 ). therefore, there is no need to have ethical review.absolute humidity was calculated according to the previous study and was measured by vapor pressure (vp) (davis et al., 2016a (davis et al., , 2016b . the density of water vapor, or absolute humidity [ v (g/m 3 )], is the mass of moisture per total volume of air. it is associated to vp via the ideal gas law for the moist portion of the air:where e is vapor pressure (vp), r v is the gas constant for water vapor [461.53 j/(kg k)], and t is the daily ambient temperature (k). vp is a commonly used indicator of absolute humidity and is calculated from ambient temperature and relative humidity using the clausius-clapeyron relation ). briefly, we first calculated the saturation vapor pressure [e s (t) (mb)] from daily ambient temperature using the following equation:where e s (t 0 ) denotes saturation vapor pressure at a reference temperature t 0 (273.15 k) which equals to 6.11 mb. l denotes the latent heat of evaporation for water (2257 kj/kg). r v is the gas constant for water vapor [461.53 j/(kg k)]. t denotes daily ambient temperature (k). then, vp (pa) was calculated by combining the e s (t) calculated using eq.(2) with relative humidity (rh):the descriptive analysis was performed for all the data. we used gam to analyze the associations between meteorological factors (temperature, dtr, relative humidity and absolute humidity) and the daily death counts of covid-19. the core analysis was a gam with a quasi-poisson link function based on the previous studies (almeida et al., 2010; basu et al., 2008) . we first built the basic models for death outcomes without including air pollution or weather variables. we incorporated smoothed spline functions of time, which accommodate nonlinear and nonmonotonic patterns between mortality and time, thus offering a flexible modeling tool. then, we introduced the weather variables and analyzed their effects on mortality. akaike's information criterion was used as a measure of how well the model fitted the data. consistent with several recent time-series studies (cheng and kan, 2012; zeng et al., 2016) , the penalized smoothing spline function was applied to control the effects of confounding factors, such as time trends, day-of-week and air pollution. the core gam equation is:where t is the day of the observation; e(y t ) is the expected number of daily mortality for covid-19 on day t;  is the intercept;  is the regression coefficient; x t is the daily level of weather variables on day t; s() denotes the smoother based on the penalized smoothing spline. based on akaike's information criterion (aic), the 2 degrees of freedom (df) is used for time trends and 3 df for air pollutants, temperature and relative humidity; dow is a categorical variable indicating the date of the week.after establishing the core model, we considered the lag effects of weather conditions on death of covid-19, and examined the potentially lagged effects, i.e., single day lag (from lag 0 to lag 5) and multiple-day average lag (from lag 01 to lag 05) (kan et al., 2007) . the exposure and response correlation curves between weather variables and covid-19 mortality were fitted using a spline function in the gam. we also performed a sensitivity analysis by changing the df of the penalized smoothing spline function from 2 to 9 for calendar time and from 3 to 8 for temperature and humidity.all the statistical analyses were two-sided at a 5% level of significance. all analyses were conducted using r software (version 3.5.3) with the "mgcv" package (version 1.8-27). the effect estimates were expressed as the percentage changes and their 95% confidence intervals (cis) in daily death of covid-19 associated with per 1 unit increase in weather variables. table 1 showed the descriptive statistics for daily deaths of covid-19, meteorological variables and air pollutants. during the study period (january 20, 2020 to february 29, 2020), there were 2299 covid-19 deaths in wuhan. on average, there were approximately 56 deaths of covid-19 per day. temperatures ranged from 1.8c to 18.7c, and dtr ranged from 2c to 17.5c. average temperature and dtr during this period were 7.44c and 9.15c, respectively. the relative humidity and absolute humidity were 59%-97% with an average 82.24% and 4.27 g/m 3 -11.63 g/m 3 with an average 6.69 g/m 3 , respectively. the mean concentrations of pm 2.5 , pm 10 , no 2 , so 2 , o 3 , and co were 44.68 g/m 3 , 52.56 g/m 3 , 23.02 g/m 3 , 7.29 g/m 3 , 73.76 g/m 3 and 0.91 mg/m 3 , respectively. fig. 1 presented the temporal pattern of daily mortality of covid-19 and meteorological factor levels in the study period, showing the daily death number of covid-19 had a similar pattern with temperature and absolute humidity.the correlation coefficients between death counts of covid-19, meteorological measures and air pollutant concentrations were presented in table 2 . the mortality counts of covid-19 were negatively associated with relative humidity (r = 0.32), pm 2.5 (r = 0.53) and pm 10 (r = 0.45). a positive association with covid-19 daily mortality was observed for dtr (r = 0.44) and so 2 (r = 0.31).3.3. effects of temperature, humidity and dtr on covid-19 mortality fig. 2 showed the exposure-response relationship curves between meteorological factors and covid-19 mortality at the same day (lag 0). generally, the curves tended to be not associated with covid-19 mortality for dtr but were strongly positive for temperature. in addition, the curves associated with relative humidity and absolute humidity presented similar linear trends, which indicated that the higher level of humidity might cause decrease in the covid-19 mortality. to confirm these results, lag and cumulative effects were discussed in the following analysis. fig. 3 displayed the percentage changes of covid-19 mortality with per 1 unit increase in meteorological factor levels with different lag days in the models. dtr was significantly associated with the increased covid-19 mortality, while temperature and absolute humidity with the decreased covid-19 mortality, after controlling the effects of air pollution and other factors. each 1 unit increase in dtr was only associated with a 2.92% (95% ci: 0.61%, 5.28%) increase in covid-19 death counts in lag 3. however, both per 1 unit increase of temperature and absolute humidity were related to the decreased covid-19 death counts in lag 3 and lag 5, with the greatest decrease both in lag 3 [7.50% (95% ci: 10.99%, 3.88%) and  11.41% (95% ci: 19.68%, 2.29%)]. for cumulative effect, no substantial result was observed in this study.covid-19 outbreak has caused great health burden around the world. in this study, we examined the relationship between meteorological factors and covid-19. our results showed significant positive effect of dtr on the daily mortality of covid-19, and a significant negative association between covid-19 mortality and ambient temperature as well as absolute humidity. the results indicate that the effects of dtr and humidity should also be paid attention when estimating the death causes of covid-19. our study demonstrated a negative association between covid-19 mortality and temperature, while a positive association for dtr. the results are consistent with the other studies. couple of studies reported that respiratory diseases mortality increased with decreasing temperature (fallah and mayvaneh, 2016) , and was strongly associated with low temperature (dadbakhsh et al., 2017; gmez-acebo et al., 2013; macfarlane, 1977) . while another study found that both cold and heat effects might have adverse impacts on respiratory mortality (li et al., 2019) . otherwise, the study conducted in 30 east asian cities showed that increased dtr was associated with increased risk of mortality for respiratory and cardiovascular diseases (kim et al., 2016) . in the cold season, the cumulative relative risk of nonaccidental, respiratory and cardiovascular death increased at high dtr values in tabriz (sharafkhani et al., 2019) . a time-series study conducted in shanghai about the effect of dtr on daily chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (copd) mortality showed that each 1c elevation in the 4-day moving average for dtr accounted for 1.25% of increased risk of copd mortality (song et al., 2008) . a review for cold exposure and immune function reported that lower temperature may repress the immune function (shephard and shek, 1998) . in particular, our previous finding suggested that the phagocytic function of pulmonary alveolar macrophages declined under cold stress in vitro experiment (luo et al., 2017) . breathing cold air can lead to bronchial constriction, which may promote susceptibility to pulmonary infection (martens, 1998) . additionally, since sars-cov-2 is sensitive to heat, and high temperature makes it difficult to survive, not to mention the beneficial factors for virus transmission like indoor crowding and poor ventilation in cold days (bunker et al., 2016) . also, cold temperature has been discovered to be associated with the reduction of lung function and increases in exacerbations for people with copd (donaldson et al., 1999) . dtr represents a stable measure of temperature, which is an indicator of temperature variability to evaluate effects on human health, including mortality and morbidity (easterling et al., 1997) . also, abrupt temperature changes may add to the burden of cardiac and respiratory system causing cardiopulmonary events and high dtr levels may be a source of environmental stress (sharafkhani et al., 2019) . it is said that the windows of inpatient wards were asked to remain open for 24 h a day and avoid using air conditioning in wuhan hospitals due to ventilation necessity, therefore the indoor variation trend of meteorological factors could be very close to the outdoor environment. concerning about this condition and our results, it is reasonable to sustain a stable and comfortable environment for the patients during therapy.researchers confirmed that respiratory infection was enhanced during unusually cold and low humidity conditions (davis et al., 2016a (davis et al., , 2016b , indicating low humidity might also be an important risk factor for respiratory diseases. a 25-year study found that humidity was an important determinant of mortality, and low-humidity levels might cause a large increase in mortality rates, potentially by influenza-related mechanisms (barreca, 2012) , similar to a study carried out in the united states (barreca and shimshack, 2012) . consistent to these findings, our results also indicate that the risk of dying from covid-19 decreases only with absolute humidity increasing. breathing dry air could cause epithelial damage and/or reduction of mucociliary clearance, and then lead to render the host more susceptible to respiratory virus infection; the formation of droplet nuclei is essential to transmission, but exhaled respiratory droplets settle very rapidly at high humidity so that it is hard to contribute to influenza virus spread (lowen et al., 2007) . moreover, the transmission of pandemic influenza virus is efficient under cold, dry conditions (steel et al., 2011) , and influenza virus survival rate increased markedly in accordance with decreasing of absolute humidity ), which may be very similar to coronavirus. therefore, the increase of covid-19 mortality may also be related to the lower humidity in winter. however, many limitations should not be ignored. firstly, there are some other important factors that may affect the covid-19 mortality, such as government interventions, medical resources and so on. therefore, these issues should be examined in future studies. secondly, ecologic time-series study design was adopted in the study, which might have ecologic fallacy to some degree. furthermore, it is difficult to obtain the meteorological and air pollution data at the individual level, although the outdoor and indoor air environment might be similar due to the air conditioner off using and window opening for 24 h in the hospital patient wards during covid-19 therapy. nevertheless, this study showed that dtr and humidity might affect the mortality of covid-19 in wuhan, which deserves further investigation from a larger range of studying area.this is the first study to investigate the effects of temperature, dtr and humidity on the daily mortality of covid-19 in chinese population. our finding shows that the daily mortality of covid-19 is positively associated with dtr but negatively with absolute humidity. in summary, this study suggests the temperature variation and humidity may also be important factors affecting the covid-19 mortality. and our results suggest that it is reasonable to sustain a stable and comfortable environment for the patients during therapy. not applicable.the datasets used and/or analyzed during the current study are available from the websites.this work was supported by the national natural science foundation of china (4187050043) the authors declare that they have no conflict of interest.las infecciones respiratorias siguen siendo la mayor causa de morbimortalidad en pediatra, especialmente en pacientes con factores de riesgo como recin nacidos, inmunodeprimidos o portadores de enfermedades crnicas. en pases desarrollados, lactantes y preescolares presentan una media de 6 a 10 infecciones virales al ao, mientras que escolares y adolescentes alrededor de 3 a 5 (1). las infecciones de la va area superior habitualmente no constituyen una enfermedad grave, pero se traducen en prdidas de das de escolaridad y aumento en los gastos de salud. aproximadamente 6.6 millones de nios menores de 5 aos mueren anualmente, siendo la principal causa la neumona, provocando 1.3 millones de muertes (2) .el diagnstico etiolgico comienza en 1933 con el descubrimiento del virus influenza a (3), posteriormente en la dcada del 90 con el desarrollo de tcnicas de biologa molecular se produce un aumento explosivo en el conocimiento de nuevos virus. mejores pruebas de identificacin viral han ayudado a reducir el uso exagerado de antibiticos y han contribuido a disminuir las infecciones intrahospitalarias (1) .los "clsicos" virus respiratorio sincicial (vrs), influenza, parainfluenza y adenovirus (adv) son reconocidos por producir infecciones respiratorias con alto impacto en salud pblica. los rinovirus, histricamente asociados al resfro comn, actualmente son identificados como agentes de neumona y como desencadenantes de exacerbaciones asmticas.dentro de los "nuevos virus respiratorios" se encuentran metapneumovirus humano (mpvh), bocavirus (bovh) y coronavirus (covh), los cuales son el objetivo de esta revisin. hemos dejado a propsito fuera el virus influenza y sus recientes serotipos porque por si solo justifican un artculo en el futuro.es un virus rna de 150 a 600 nm de tamao, fue descubierto el ao 2001, aunque anlisis filogenticos sugieren su existencia por aproximadamente 50 aos (4) . se relaciona estrechamente con vrs por su genoma, patologa celular y presentacin clnica (3).pertenece a la familia paramyxoviridae, subfamilia pneumovirinae, gnero metapneumovirus. hay 2 genotipos, a y b, y varios subgrupos: a1, a2, b1 y b2. el subgrupo a2 a su vez se divide en a2a y a2b, la clasificacin anterior se obtiene de las variantes de dos glicoprotenas, una que es responsable de la adherencia (g) y otra involucrada en la fusin (f). algunos estudios sugieren que el genotipo a produce enfermedad ms severa que el b, otros estudios no han mostrado esta diferencia. la infeccin por un genotipo no confiere inmunidad protectora cruzada. igual que vrs, las cepas predominantes circulantes varan ao tras ao (5) .desde el punto de vista epidemiolgico, mpvh ha sido detectado en 4 a 16% de los pacientes con infecciones respiratorias agudas, tiene distribucin mundial y afecta a todos los grupos etarios (5) .los brotes ocurren principalmente en primavera e invierno. la infeccin est asociada con un nmero importante de hospitalizaciones y consultas ambulatorias en nios menores de 5 aos, especialmente durante los primeros 12 meses de vida (6) . estudios de seroprevalencia han mostrado que un alto porcentaje de los nios (90-100%) han sido infectados entre los 5 y 10 aos de edad, las reinfecciones pueden ocurrir en adultos (7).el mecanismo de transmisin es por gotitas y contacto directo con secreciones; el tiempo de incubacin habitualmente dura entre 3 y 5 das. se excreta por un perodo que vara entre 1 a 6 semanas (8).mpvh interfiere con la respuesta inmune del husped usando mecanismos especficos. el virus antagoniza la respuesta celular mediante la regulacin de patrones de reconocimiento de diferentes receptores como los receptores tipo toll. la infeccin interfiere con la actividad de clulas dendrticas y disminuye la activacin de clulas t antgeno especficas. los virus respiratorios son conocidos por modular la respuesta de citocinas; comparado con vrs e influenza, mpvh es un inductor menos eficaz de diferentes citocinas como il-2, tnf-alfa, il-6, il-1beta, il-8 e il-10. en vrs han sido identificadas 2 protenas no estructurales (ns1 y ns2) como potentes antagonistas de la va del interferon, la ausencia de estas protenas en mpvh puede ser la causa de la diferencia en el nivel de respuesta inmune innata de ambos virus. la infeccin por mpvh produce inflamacin perivascular y peribronquiolar. hasta la fecha no existe evidencia para determinar si la infeccin por mpvh se limita al tracto respiratorio o causa infeccin sistmica (5) .los adultos habitualmente presentan sntomas leves como rinitis, odinofagia y tos. en nios comnmente se observan coriza, tos, fiebre y en menor frecuencia otitis media aguda, conjuntivitis, rash, diarrea y vmitos. puede causar bronquiolitis, neumona y exacerbaciones asmticas. las sibilancias son un hallazgo comn en mltiples estudios en nios (3) (4) (5) .existen grupos de riesgo de desarrollar enfermedad severa, entre los que se encuentran lactantes (especialmente prematuros), ancianos, inmunodeprimidos, pacientes institucionalizados y con enfermedades crnicas respiratorias, cardiovasculares o neurolgicas (9-11).se ha observado que la carga viral se relaciona directamente con la severidad de la enfermedad, independiente del genotipo involucrado (12) . mediante reaccin de polimerasa en cadena (rpc) en tiempo real se ha detectado mpvh en nios asintomticos, en los cuales la carga viral fue significativamente menor que la encontrada en nios enfermos (13) . sin embargo, en un estudio de muestras de aspirados nasofarngeos de nios hospitalizados, donde tambin se us rpc en tiempo real, la carga viral elevada se asoci con algunos sntomas, pero no tuvo un impacto significativo en la gravedad de la enfermedad (14) .mencionando otro aspecto, en un modelo animal se observ que la alteracin de la respuesta de los linfocitos t cd4+ y humoral se asoci con infecciones ms graves (15) .muchos estudios han reportado coinfeccin de mpvh con otros patgenos respiratorios incluyendo vrs, bovh, rinovirus, enterovirus, virus parainfluenza, cov e influenza a y b. tambin se ha encontrado coinfeccin con bacterias como streptococcus pneumoniae, mycoplasma pneumoniae y chlamydia pneumoniae. la interaccin con estos agentes no es clara (5) . estudios in vitro y en vivo han mostrado que la infeccin por mpvh facilita la adhesin del streptococcus pneumoniae (4).el efecto de la coinfeccin vrs-mpvh en la severidad de la enfermedad an es controversial. semple y col encontraron que la infeccin conjunta de vrs-mpvh se asocia con bronquiolitis severa (16) , sin embargo otros estudios no muestran esta relacin (17) . en un meta-anlisis y revisin sistemtica reciente en nios menores de 5 aos, la coinfeccin de virus respiratorios no se asoci con mayor gravedad clnica (18) .actualmente est disponible la deteccin directa de antgenos con inmunofluorescencia, pero su sensibilidad no es ptima.en santiago de chile el ao 2003 se realiz un estudio usando rpc para detectar mpvh en aspirados nasofarngeos obtenidos de nios hospitalizados por infecciones agudas del tracto respiratorio inferior. un 5.4% de las muestras fueron positivas, porcentaje que pudo ser mayor, ya que en el estudio slo se incluyeron las muestras que haban resultado negativas mediante inmunofluorescencia indirecta para vrs, adv, virus influenza y parainfluenza (19) .la pcr es el test ms sensible para pesquisar la infeccin por mpvh. en un estudio donde se comparan test comerciales de pcr en tiempo real, la sensibilidad general para todos los virus estudiados fue 97% (20, 21) .en la actualidad no existe un tratamiento especfico ni vacunas para mpvh, el manejo de la enfermedad se basa en medidas de control de sntomas y de soporte en los casos ms severos.los frmacos antivirales se emplean en casos de enfermedad grave como ltimo recurso. la ribavirina y las inmunoglobulinas se han utilizado en algunos pacientes, pero la efectividad real de estos tratamientos no es clara (22) .a la fecha existen varias vacunas en fase de estudio, pero su seguridad y eficacia an no han sido evaluadas en la poblacin (20) . recientemente se realiz una infeccin experimental con mpvh recombinante de tipo salvaje en adultos, lo que hace ya factible la posibilidad de probar en humanos la eficacia de una vacuna para mpvh recombinante atenuada en el futuro (23) .los coronavirus (cov) pertenecen a la familia coronaviridae, son virus arn cuya envoltura est cubierta por una glicotena de superficie que le da su caracterstica apariencia de corona (24) . inicialmente las infecciones por coronavirus se hicieron conocidas por afectar animales, y su impacto en la industria veterinaria. el compromiso en seres humanos fue inicialmente subestimado, pero la mayor capacidad de diagnstico ha permitido establecer causalidad en una serie de enfermedades respiratorias y gastrointestinales de diferente severidad.el primer covh fue identificado en 1965 por tyrell y bynoe en cultivos de trquea de embriones y fue llamado b814 (24) .se conocen 4 covh endmicos del hombre que se asocian con enfermedad respiratoria leve y autolimitada: hcov-229e, hcov-oc43, hcov-nl63 y hcov-hku1; mientras que otros 2 cov causan sndrome respiratorio severo con altas tasas de mortalidad: sars-cov y mers-cov (4, 24) .los cov son endmicos en el mundo; su prevalencia, distribucin regional y patogenicidad no son claras. afectan a todos los grupos etarios, pero producen enfermedad ms severa en ancianos e inmunocomprometidos. su prevalencia en enfermedad respiratoria vara entre 3.3 y 16% (25, 26) . sobre el 70% de la poblacin tiene seroconversin para los 4 covh, con infeccin primaria en la infancia y reinfecciones a lo largo de la vida (27, 28) .la presentacin clnica de estos cov es indistinguible por sus sntomas, comnmente se manifiesta con rinorrea, odinofagia, tos y fiebre (25, 26) . habitualmente causan infecciones respiratorias de va area alta o "resfro comn", pero tambin pueden producir bronquiolitis, neumona, exacerbaciones asmticas y laringitis. las convulsiones febriles se han asociado mayormente para hcov-hku1 (4).se han reportado altas tasas de coinfeccin con otros virus respiratorios como enterovirus, rinovirus y virus para-influenza. sin embargo, la evolucin clnica de la enfermedad en pacientes que presentan coinfeccin es similar a los que tienen un solo virus identificado (4).diagnstico por rpc en tiempo real (3).manejo bsicamente sintomtico (24) ya que no existen medicamentos antivirales especficos a la fecha.en febrero del 2003 la oms report un brote de neumona atpica, en marzo del mismo ao la enfermedad fue llamada sars (severe acute respiratory syndrome) y se identific el agente causal: sars-cov, un nuevo cov que entre noviembre del 2002 y julio del 2003 infect un total de 8098 personas en 25 pases, produciendo 774 muertes (29) . actualmente existe suficiente evidencia filogentica que demuestra que el sars-cov se origin de murcilagos (24) .se transmite por contacto directo con secreciones, gotitas y en menos medida por aerosoles, pudiera haber diseminacin por deposiciones. existe transmisin del virus de persona a persona. el perodo de incubacin vara de entre 2 a 14 das, con un promedio de 4 a 6 das (8).sars produce un cuadro respiratorio febril, acompaado de calofros, cefalea y mialgias, posteriormente aparecen diarreas, vmitos y progresin grave del compromiso respiratorio (8) .sars se presenta como una neumona atpica. se produce una inflamacin hemorrgica en la mayora de los alvolos con engrosamiento y dao alveolar difuso, descamacin de neumocitos, formacin de membranas hialinas y neumocitos multinucleados con congestin capilar y microtrombosis. aproximadamente el 60% de los pacientes presentan deterioro en la segunda semana de infeccin, aparecen fiebre persistente y dificultad respiratoria progresiva. alrededor del 20 a 30% de los casos evoluciona con distress respiratorio necesitando manejo en unidades de cuidados intensivos con apoyo de ventilacin mecnica (4).durante el brote de sars el cuadro clnico fue menos severo en lactantes, ningn nio entre 1 y 12 aos necesit manejo en unidad de cuidados intensivos o ventilacin mecnica, la explicacin hasta ahora es materia de estudio (30, 31) .la tasa de mortalidad es de 10%, pero puede ser mucho mayor en ciertas poblaciones y grupos etarios como en los mayores de 65 aos donde alcanza el 50% (8, 24) .actualmente no existen opciones de tratamiento profilctico o teraputico eficaces. los pacientes que han presentado enfermedad grave han sido tratados con esteroides e interfern, a veces en combinacin con ribavirina, pero sin resultados ptimos. se han descrito frmacos que inhiben la infeccin por covh en diferentes etapas del ciclo de replicacin y algunos podran servir como opciones teraputicas en el futuro. en el rea de prevencin, se han comenzado a desarrollar vacunas que han demostrado ser protectoras en modelos animales (24) .durante el brote de sars-cov el manejo se enfoc en tratamiento de soporte y antibiticos cuando se agregaron infecciones bacterianas (4).en junio del 2012 ocurri la ms reciente emergencia de una nueva cepa de cov. mers-cov (middle east respiratory syndrome coronavirus) fue aislado de una muestra de esputo de un hombre de 60 aos que falleci por una neumona grave asociada a falla renal en arabia saudita. los primeros casos se presentaron en varios pases del medio oriente y luego se extendieron a reino unido, francia, italia y alemania; egipto y estados unidos posteriormente reportaron su primer caso confirmado por laboratorio (4).no est claro el origen de mers-cov, se ha planteado una transmisin zoontica, se cree que el virus se origin en murcilagos y luego se transmiti a camellos, posteriormente por contacto directo o consumo de leche no pasteurizada se transmiti al hombre. el contagio se produce por contacto estrecho o intrahospitalario, especialmente en pacientes con comorbilidades. la posibilidad de una pandemia es baja porque la transmisin es ineficiente y no hay evidencia suficiente de transmisin comunitaria (4).el brote de sars-cov y posteriormente mers-cov no fueron un incidente aislado, ya que cuando aumenta la diversidad de especies de cov animal, ocurre un aumento de la probabilidad de recombinacin y generacin de cov altamente patgenos para el hombre (4).la presentacin clnica es similar al sars, los sntomas ms comunes son tos, fiebre y sntomas gastrointestinales, antes de progresar a neumona y complicaciones graves como sndrome de distress respiratorio agudo y falla renal (32) (33) (34) .la tasa de mortalidad es 30%, pero es significativamente mayor en pacientes con comorbilidades e inmunosuprimidos. las complicaciones ms frecuentes que han sido reportadas en los casos fatales son hiperkalemia, taquicardia ventricular, coagulacin intravascular diseminada, pericarditis y falla multiorgnica (35) .la combinacin de interfern tipo 1 ms lopinavir/ritonavir es considerada la primera lnea de tratamiento para mers y se recomiendan 10 a 14 das de tratamiento antiviral. la terapia con plasma ha mostrado cierta eficacia entre los pacientes refractarios a los frmacos antivirales si se administra dentro de las 2 semanas del inicio de la enfermedad (35) .bovh pertenece a la familia parvoviridae, subfamilia parvovirinae, gnero bocavirus. son virus adn de hebra simple, cuya replicacin es altamente dependiente de las funciones celulares. el primer bovh fue descubierto en suecia el ao 2005 por investigadores de la universidad de karolinska y fue llamado hbov1, posteriormente durante el 2010, se descubrieron hbov2, hbov3 y hbov4 (3).las secuencias genticas y el anlisis filogentico muestran una estrecha relacin de bovh con dos miembros de la familia parvoviridae: parvovirus bovino y virus minute canino, por lo que allander y col lo llamaron bocavirus humano, "bo" de bovino y "ca" de canino (36) .hbov1 causa entre 2 a 19% de las infecciones respiratorias, su adn ha sido detectado principalmente en muestras respiratorias y de deposiciones, pero tambin en suero, amgdalas, saliva y orina (3, 4) . los otros bovh se han encontrado en el tracto gastrointestinal, hbov2 es el nico bovh entrico que se ha aislado de aspirados nasofarngeos y se ha asociado con enfermedad respiratoria (4).se ha encontrado hbov1 en todos los grupos etarios, pero predominantemente en nios pequeos. la primoinfeccin ocurre tpicamente entre los 6 a 48 meses de edad, alrededor del 94% de los adultos tiene anticuerpos positivos. las reinfecciones ocurren a lo largo de la vida (3) . la transmisin e infeccin ocurre durante todo el ao, pero predominantemente durante los meses de invierno y primavera.la presentacin clnica incluye rinorrea, tos, otitis media aguda. tambin se ha asociado con neumona, sibilancias, exacerbacin asmtica y bronquiolitis (4).usando rpc en muestras de secreciones respiratorias se ha detectado adn de hbov1 en nios asintomticos que puede persistir en la nasofaringe por varios meses; este hallazgo gener dudas en relacin al rol de este virus, pero estudios mediante serologa y rpc han aportado evidencia de que hbov1 es un verdadero patgeno respiratorio. la carga viral elevada se asocia estadsticamente con sntomas (36, 37) . las infecciones por hbov1 tienden a estar asociadas con altas tasas de coinfeccin con otros patgenos virales como rinovirus, adv y vrs y con bacterias como streptococcus spp y mycoplasma pneumoniae (38) .por las caractersticas de la persistencia y la alta frecuencia de coinfeccin, su diagnstico no es recomendable que se realice por rpc cualitativa y se recomienda que sea un estudio serolgico, o rpc cuantitativa en aspirado nasofarngeo o en suero (38) .bsicamente manejo de los sntomas y complicaciones.con el avance de las tcnicas diagnsticas actualmente conocemos "nuevos virus" respiratorios. estos agentes, exceptuando sars-cov y mers-cov, producen cuadros clnicos similares, pudiendo ir desde sntomas respiratorios leves hasta formas graves de neumonas con distress respiratorio asociado. los patrones radiolgicos son variables y no caractersticos. estos virus pueden ser detectados por pcr, sin embargo, con una pcr no cuantitativa es difcil probar que el virus encontrado es el agente causal de la enfermedad, a lo que se suma que frecuentemente se pesquisa ms de un virus en una muestra, lo que dificulta an ms el diagnstico etiolgico.sin duda, en pacientes hospitalizados y con factores de riesgo de desarrollar enfermedad ms severa, es necesario encontrar el agente causal, no slo para enfocar correctamente el manejo, sino para tambin evitar la transmisin de enfermedades y el uso excesivo de antibiticos. como siempre la medicina es un desafo diario y una oportunidad constante de aprendizaje.seasonality can be defined as increased or decreased observations that display a periodic pattern (e.g. week, month, quarter) of occurrence between years [1] . microbial pathogens tend to be defined as microorganisms that can cause disease in humans and other organisms [2] . reviews of their seasonality have been published previously [3] . seasonal drivers are already known to produce annual peaks for a number of infectious diseases, including malaria [4] , west nile virus [5] , and cholera [6] , as well as several pathogens transmissible by contact such as influenza [7] , respiratory syncytial virus [8] and meningococcal meningitis [9] . seasonality may be explained by a mixture of factors including climate, social, behavioural, agricultural, environmental, stochastic changes in immune populations, and other drivers. in addition, weather can influence vector abundance, pathogen survival and host characteristics (e.g. behaviour and immune susceptibility) [3] . the mathematical approaches to modelling have been reviewed [10] .several studies have investigated the effects of weather and climate on pathogens in england and wales. salmonella enteritidis incidence was shown to increase by 12.5% (95%ci; 11.6-13.4) for every 1c rise over a 6c threshold [11] . similarly, campylobacter prevalence was associated with temperature in the previous 2 weeks [12] while other studies found little association [13] .a systematic approach to the analysis of the potential seasonality of common pathogen serotypes and their associations with multiple weather variables is required to help narrow the focus on candidate pathogens in addition to those that have been studied in depth previously. the current analysis is well placed to address this gap given the rich data now available on a broad number of pathogens and meteorological factors. the aim of the analysis was to use several data mining techniques to identify pathogens that display a seasonal component, and describe their associations with meteorological factors as an aid to future analytical work (including forecasting) and public health planning.infectious disease data from england and wales were collected by public health england (phe) (formerly the health protection agency and before that the public health laboratory service) through a voluntary reporting system, whereby hospital laboratory records are transferred to regional epidemiology units, processed and added to the labbase2 national surveillance database [14] . to avoid duplication by organism and patient, each record has a unique identifier called the organism patient illness record (opie). if a record is sent with the same patient and organism information within 14 days (26 weeks for mycobacterium spp.), then these cases are merged to ensure a single opie for the entire duration of the episode. the second generation surveillance system (sgss-formerly labbase2) voluntary national surveillance database holds records on 12,904,446 reportable human infectious cases spanning from the 1st week in 1988 to the 2nd week in 2015 for 344 root organisms and 2014 serotypes. pathogen counts were recorded at a weekly level in the database. the analysis for individual serotypes was restricted to complete years, from 1989 to 2014, with serotypes greater than 854 cases (above quartile one, i.e. top 25% in terms of total count), as a time series model could not be automatically estimated with fewer cases (n = 277). we aggregated the data to a monthly level and linked with national meteorological data held on the medical and environmental data mash-up infrastructure project (medmi) platform [15] . the analysis was performed at a national scale due to multiple factors at a local level that act as noise to obfuscate the relationship between infectious disease and weather [16] .a range of meteorological data for the uk was downloaded from the medmi platform [15] at a 5 km by 5 km resolution for 2001-2011; full details on methods used to generate data are provided elsewhere [17] . the variables were monthly weather summaries that included: mean sunshine duration (hours per day), mean temperature (c), mean daily maximum temperature (c), mean daily minimum temperature (c), mean vapour pressure (hpa), mean sea level (msl) pressure (hpa), rain 1 mm (days), rain 10 mm (days), total rainfall (mm), mean wind speed at a height of 10 m (knots), mean relative humidity (%), snow lying over 50% of ground (days), ground frost measured as grass minimum temperature below 0c (days), and air frost measured as air minimum temperature below 0c (days) (additional file 1: figure s1 ). the data were imported into arcmap 10 (esri, redwoods, ca) and aggregated (arithmetic mean) for england and wales, which enabled linkage with the infectious disease time series data.descriptive statistics were generated for the organisms including total count, crude prevalence rate per month, peak month and plots of time-series patterns (for gastro-intestinally acquired infections and those from respiratory transmission). we applied a two stage automated analysis to: a) detect seasonality and b) identify correlations with weather variables. the first stage was the seasonality detection analysis, undertaken in rstudio (ver 0.98.507). description of the forecast package, which was used extensively in the analysis to automatically detect seasonal patterns, has been detailed elsewhere [18] . briefly, the pathogen time series data were decomposed via box cox transformations into trend, seasonal and irregular components, which were used to forecast the time series into the future [18] . the algorithm automatically selects model parameters such as trend (with or without a dampening parameter) and noise (arma (p,q) process) using model fit statistics (i.e. minimising akaike information criteria (aic)). a tbats model, as described above, was fitted for each organism serotype (with a non-zero count) using the weekly periodicity (i.e. the most granular temporal resolution available). the models were re-run with data aggregated at monthly and quarterly periodicities to investigate seasonality at different temporal aggregations [19] . each time the model would provide a logical output (i.e. true/false) as to whether the model fit improved with the inclusion of the seasonal component (i.e. consistent repeating pattern over time). this is because the algorithm fits two models, seasonal and non-seasonal, and selects the seasonal model if the aic is lower than the non-seasonal model (heuristically, it selects the model that results in the best combination of good fit and lower number of parameters). to limit the seasonality definition to those whose model fit was significantly better with the addition of the seasonal component, we calculated the difference between the seasonal and non-seasonal aic ( i = aic nonseasonal  aic seasonal ) and excluded organisms with aic difference greater than 10, as suggested as a suitable cut-off by burnham and anderson [20] . the pathogens at a monthly resolution with aic difference greater than 10 were used in subsequent analysis with weather variables.for the second stage, we aggregated the pathogen incidence data to monthly resolution so that they were able to be merged with the weather variables previously processed to monthly values by the national climate information centre. the time series' for each of the weather variables was shown to be stationary (no significant trend from year to year) by using the augmented dickey-fuller (af) test (p < 0.05) and kwiatkowski-phillips-schmidt-shin (kpss) test (p > 0.05). we tested each pathogen time series in the same way. some were found to be non-stationary and differenced (once or twice, depending on results of af and kpss tests). cross correlation coefficients were generated between cases and weather variables for the month that they were recorded and then by the meteorological values lagged by 1 month. the correlation coefficients were then used as input to the k-means clustering method. two clusters were generated in order to narrow the focus on those correlated with weather. the terminology for discussing the correlation coefficients was as follows: very weak (r = 0-0.19), weak (r = 0.20-0.39), moderate (r = 0.40-0.59), strong (0.60-0.79) and very strong (r = 0.80-1.00). seasonality and weather correlation results were summarised and discussed in terms of differences between weather variables and within the most common genus for which serotypes were available (salmonella).supplementary to the time series analysis, an rshiny app was developed to display the results and aid future hypothesis generation. the user can filter the pathogens by seasonality, prevalence and serotype. once an individual serotype is selected, a range of descriptive information is available: wikipedia description, total number of cases, time series plot, month plot of crude rate per 100,000 (england and wales population), decomposition of time series, tbats model forecast and weather scatterplot.the weekly data on 12.9 million pathogen infections in england and wales from 1989 to 2014 were examined systematically. the minimum number for an organism to be in the database during the time period was once per week. the maximum number of cases for 1 week was 4073 for chlamydia trachomatis. there was a non-normal distribution of total cases, from one case for 345 organisms to 2,094,656 for chlamydia trachomatis. the median number of total cases was 3156 (interquartile range quartile 1-quartile 3; 854-15,730). the organisms with the highest number of serotypes were salmonella (n = 890) and streptococcus (n = 60), although most of these had very low counts. figure 1 shows a heat map of z-scores of crude rates by month ( fig. 1 shows non-salmonella pathogens, and fig. 1 shows only the salmonella genus). the months with the fewest high pathogen rates for the majority of organisms were december (36.1%) and february (31.4%). the months with the highest number of high pathogen rates were more evenly spread out over the summer and autumn, with july, august, september and october being the highest months for 62.2% of the organisms. the seasonality of gastro-intestinally acquired infections (fig. 2) , and pathogens acquired through respiratory transmission (fig. 3) , differed substantially. the gastro-intestinal pathogens showed different distributions, with most bacteria having higher rates in summer, some viruses had higher rates in winter (e.g. norovirus, rotavirus) and others were more common in the summer (enteroviruses). some of the pathogens associated with travel overseas had a late summer increase (thought to reflect the period when people return from summer holidays). the respiratory pathogens predominated in the winter months (e.g. coronavirus, influenza, respiratory syncytial virus (rsv)). however, several of the bacterial pathogens were more frequent in warmer months (e.g. bordetella, coxiella, legionella).we detected significant seasonality in 91 organisms using tbats models at varying periodicities (91/277; 33%) (additional file 2: table s1 ); with varying links with weather (additional file 3: figure s2 ). two k-means clusters (identified as the optimum number of k) were generated from the cross correlation coefficients with weather variables and represented groups of pathogens that had similar correlations with weather variables (fig. 4) . the two groups were characterised by their relationship with the weather variables (additional file 4: table s2 ). group 1 had mean positive correlations with higher temperature (min, mean, max), sunshine and vapour pressure; whilst the group 2 had positive mean correlations with lower temperature variables (snow lying, ground frost, air frost), precipitation (rain days over 1 mm, rain days over 10 mm and rainfall), mean in group 2, pathogens had highest correlations with relative humidity (n = 8) and ground frost (n = 5) (additional file 5: figure s3 ). there was at least one pathogen with the highest correlation for each meteorological variable. summary information on seasonality and links with weather, by temperature cluster group are presented in table 1 .group 1 consisted of 66 organisms, of which 22 were from the salmonella genus. parvovirus b19 had a moderate correlation with sunshine (mean r = 0.54), followed by salmonella enteritidis with sunshine (r = 0.52) andsalmonella typhimurium with vapour pressure (r = 0.46). group 2 consisted of 25 pathogens of which only two genus (influenza and trychophyton) had more than one serotype. rsv had strong correlations with air frost (r = 0.69), followed by moderate correlations between human metapneumovirus (hmpv) with relative humidity (r = 0.55) and rubella virus with lying snow (r = 0.53).we were interested in how the correlation coefficients varied between the weather variables that measured the same phenomenon (e.g. min, max, mean temperature). in general, there were slight differences between the different measures of temperature. the mean difference in correlation coefficients between minimum and maximum temperature was 0.002 with standard deviation of 0.02. hmpv and rotavirus showed the largest difference between the temperature variables (comparing min temp and max temp). hmpv recorded a 0.14 higher coefficient for maximum temperature, whereas rotavirus recorded a 0.16 higher coefficient for minimum temperature. similar associations with temperature were found with vapour pressure and sunshine, although they tended to be relatively weaker when taking the mean for all of the pathogens there were also similar moderate inverse correlations with ground frost, air frost and snow lying days. for influenza a, days with lying snow had a higher correlation than the other weather variables (r = 0.32). notable differences in correlations between pathogens and the precipitation variables (comparing days with over 10 mm of rain compared to days with over 1 mm of rain), included plesiomonas shigelloides with a 0.19 higher correlation with days over 10 mm and rsv with a 0.15 higher correlation with days over 1 mm of rain.salmonella serotypes featured heavily with varying strength and pattern of seasonality detected. salmonella enteritidis and salmonella typhimurium had the strongest associations with meteorological variables. the remaining salmonella serotypes were split between being weakly correlated (n = 15) and very weakly correlated (n = 8). there is some reason to believe that the epidemiological causes of seasonality in most salmonellas is similar (24/25; 96% belong to group 1) and the association with temperature might be linked to growth in prepared foods. in addition, the strength of association in linking the seasonality or temperature to cases will be limited to the number of isolates in each serogroup. because of this the salmonellas were grouped into four groups (1. salmonellas causing enteric fever that are usually acquired overseas (s. typhi/s. paratyphi); 2. seasonal salmonellas; 3. strains showing no evidence of any seasonality and 4. the remaining strains where there are insufficient numbers to determine seasonality). the remaining strains included serotypes that had so few isolates that seasonality could not be determined. when grouped thus, the seasonality of the seasonal salmonellas (2) resembled that of the remaining strains (4), while the overall seasonality of serotypes that individually showed little evidence of seasonality were not obviously seasonal when combined (fig. 5) . the seasonality of groups 2 and 4 showed a high degree of correlation using data averaged over the 25-year period (r 2 = 0.98; fig. 5b ).we have systematically examined a large number of human infectious disease pathogens for seasonality, and detailed potential links with weather in england and wales. this was made possible by utilising time series and clustering algorithms that can detect patterns in the data without supervision. this can lead to greater research efficiency by defining a focus for further investigations. we found that 91 of the most prevalent organisms displayed seasonality, classified into two groups due to their association with 1 month lagged meteorological variables. within these groups, there were well-known seasonal pathogens such as rsv, campylobacter and salmonella, as well as other less studied organisms such as aeromonas.the limitations of the big-data approach in this analysis meant that it was not possible to undertake analysis on causative weather factors on pathogen incidence. behavioural determinants that correlate with season and weather may explain the correlations found. for example, school closures for holidays can reduce transmission and therefore cases of influenza [21] , outdoor eating, when the temperature is higher increases risk of salmonella, undercooking, raw meat contamination and recreational activities on water, are more likely to occur in summer, are associated with campylobacter [22] . in separate work we are looking at methods to separate out the weather parameters from seasonality (and the associated behavioural determinants) using local weather data linkage, as described in 'recommendations for future research' [23] . the study was limited by the temporal and spatial aggregation of the data, and therefore we were unable to investigate the effect of day-to-day weather in regions of england and wales. the results of the analysis were also dependent on the time-period used. for example, c. difficile have been reported to have a strong seasonal pattern previously using hospital episode statistics from england from 1995 to 2006 [24] ; however we did not find a strong seasonal component in our study period. in our analyses, c. difficile displayed a peak in 2006 and then reduced in prevalence and seasonality. therefore, the results are presented with a caveat that the correlation coefficients with weather were sensitive to the time-period under analysis and would be expected to differ in a pathogen-dependent manner. the surveillance methods for collecting data changed over the years, with many pathogens having separate expert surveillance datasets that are independent of this data and some periods of enhanced surveillance or poor surveillance. there have also been periods where an intervention (e.g. vaccination) had been introduced, as well as those where the surveillance had improved (e.g. fungal infections; hospital infections), although we were unable to systematically account for these changes in the current analysis. furthermore, the data were lab-confirmed and therefore do not represent milder unreported or undiagnosed cases which may display a different pattern of seasonality. finally, we could not ascertain concomitant pathogens as they were not readily extractable from the database. the analysis was limited as it only considered a 1 month lag effect and did not consider time-varying confounders. lag effects can vary for different environmental exposures. for example sunshine will induce 25-hydroxy-vitamin d production (the major circulating form of vitamin d) in human skin; 25-hydroxy-vitamin d will lag sunshine exposure by up to 2 months due to metabolism within the body [25] . also, the life-cycle of the pathogen or vector varies between organisms producing a lag between weather exposure and clinical manifestations of pathogen and subsequent laboratory diagnosis [26] , but this has not been addressed in the current study. lag effects may be more pronounced for organisms that are indirectly rather than directly associated with weather [27] , for example weather conditions that precede mosquito larvae growth do not immediately result in malaria transmission, due to development of both mosquito and pathogen being highly complex [28] . however, given that the analysis was undertaken at a monthly resolution some short-term lagged correlations would be captured.the primary strength of the analysis is the large infectious disease dataset, which is nationally representative and has information on a wide range of pathogens. we have shown how a well-known clustering algorithm (k-means) can be applied to these data to classify pathogens by their relationship with weather variables. we have utilised a number of weather parameters from the medmi database, which allowed for subtle differences in correlation to be illustrated. the use of two methods to detail seasonal patterns was also a strength of the analysis. the advantages of using a tbats model is that it automatically selects fourier terms and other aspects of the model, whilst allowing for seasonality to change over time. wavelet analysis could be used to test for the robustness of the findings in future analysis. by sub-setting the data on the basis of seasonality detected using the difference in model fit statistics between a 'seasonal' and 'non-seasonal' model, it was less likely that the correlations with climate in the following analysis were spurious. this is akin to defining an exclusion criterion in the design of an epidemiological study to reduce the effect of bias. having detailed the strengths and limitations of the current analysis, in the following sections we aim to explain the results in relation to previously published work under headings based on the explanations for seasonality outlined by grassly and fraser [3] . the data linkage was at the england and wales level which has certain advantages (reducing noise in the data), however public health applications often require predictions at a variety of smaller scales [29] . analysis at a local level would complement the results presented here by showing the context in which national level predictors hold.in addition our analyses should be undertaken in different national contexts, as some pathogens shown to be non-seasonal in this context (e.g. polio, p. vivax) will be highly seasonal in non/under-vaccinated endemic regions.in particular, between salmonella serotypes, there was a clear hierarchy of strength of correlation with weather. the high prevalence of salmonella enteritidis (n = 284,761) and salmonella typhimurium (n = 84,204) contributed to high seasonality for these serotypes and strong associations with temperature and the auto-correlated sunshine and vapour pressure. the examination of salmonella data showed some of the limitations that can constrain the comparison of weather and infectious disease data. while most salmonella serotypes were seasonal, this could not be demonstrated for most of these until they were combined together with similar serotypes showing some evidence of more cases in summer months. the serotypes that showed no evidence of seasonality may be associated with contamination from reptiles kept as pets [30] . such exposure is thought to be relatively less seasonal in its occurrence compared to foodborne salmonellosis. typhoid and paratyphoid infections in england and wales are usually associated with travel abroad, particularly to the indian subcontinent, and this is in the late spring and early autumn [31] .temperature was most often used to explain any relationship between climate and pathogens previously [1, 32] . however, there must be careful consideration of the measure of temperature used as shown in our analysis of influenza a and b. influenza a was most strongly correlated with extreme weather events (i.e. snow lying days), which may indicate specific circumstances around these events that are important for transmission of the pathogen (i.e. temperature of below 2c with moisture in the air). we also found that other temperature-related variables showed consistent associations with various pathogens. vapour pressure has been used previously in a study investigating the effect of meteorological variables on the risk of legionnaires' disease in switzerland [33] . vapour pressure may have such strong associations with several infectious diseases such as influenza [34] , because it represents a set of meteorological parameters, i.e. warm, humid and wet conditions. similar inferences were made in a study of rsv activity in the netherlands, which found that humidity and temperature combined explained more variability than these parameters individually [35] . this may be due to the dual impact of increased contact from lower temperature and increased immunosusceptibility associated with by higher relative humidity [36] . the approach here was probably not optimal for linking waterborne diseases to rainfall because of the local linkage needed, as there are significant variations by geographic region.weather can influence pathogen prevalence indirectly through exerting pressure on vector abundance. we found both dengue and plasmodium falciparum had a seasonal pattern (although for dengue it was so weak that it was excluded at stage 1) and for the latter weak correlation with max temperature. this can be explained by rising temperatures increasing mosquito distributions and causing seasonal peaks in dengue virus and plasmodium falciparum (i.e. the parasite responsible for cases of malaria) [27, 32] , in the countries where the infection was likely acquired. other native vector-borne diseases were shown to be associated with weather in the current analysis. for example, borrelia burgdoferi, which infects ticks and causes lyme disease, had a strong correlation with sunshine. borrelia burgdoferi infected tick distribution was previously shown to correlate with season and rainfall in scotland [37] .there is evidence to suggest that weather is a driver of faecal-oral infectious diseases, through the increased survival of pathogens in the environment [3] . in addition to rotavirus, which have enhanced survival at low temperature, the current analysis has identified that aeromonas (a.sp, a. hydrophilia, a. sobria), bacillus (b. cereus, b. sp), coxsackie b, cryptosporidium sp., giardia lamblia, listeria monocytogenes and shigella sonnei may flourish under higher temperatures. respiratory infections transmitted by aerosols are similarly influenced by changes in weather. the high correlations between astrovirus, hmpv, mycoplasma pneumoniae, moraxella catarrhalis, neisseria meningitidis and rsv, and weather may be due to low temperatures causing increased survival and transmission or it could be lower levels of uv in the darker winter months. further work is needed to determine if specific weather thresholds control seasonality.weather may indirectly affect pathogen prevalence through host behaviour. salmonella is highest in summer months which may in part be due to changes in food handling by humans during those months [11] . pasturella multocida, which is caused by scratches or bites from domestic animals, was shown to be highest in july in the current analysis. injuries caused by a cat or dog were shown to peak in summer in bologna, italy [38] , which may be due to more time spent outdoors. as mentioned vector abundance will create higher incidence for certain infectious diseases such as malaria, dengue fever and cholera, which are then found to be higher in other countries due to travel behaviour. for example, uk travellers returning from countries with poor sanitation, typically india and pakistan, in summer months, have an increased risk of cholera due to the seasonal effects on the pathogen growth conditions in these other countries [39] .several infectious diseases are more prevalent in immune-compromised individuals. previously it was found that patients (most of whom have medication, fluid or blood transferred using a central line catheter) were at increased risk of bloodstream infections caused by acinetobacter spp., escherichia coli, enterobacter cloacae, klebsiella spp., and pseudomonas aeruginosa during summer [40] . we found associations between higher ambient temperature and enterobactor (e. sp., e. clocae, other named, e. agglomerans (pantoea agglomerans), stenotrophomonas maltophilia, acinetobacter baumannii, psuedomonas putida and pleisiomonas shigelliodes. mechanisms for seasonality in nosocomial infections need to be examined further to highlight whether meteorological factors are responsible for the primary infection, complications, or both [40] .la bronquitis aguda es una enfermedad muy frecuente, con una mayor prevalencia en los meses de invierno, que se caracteriza por la inflamacin de la mucosa bronquial. en adultos sanos y en nios la etiologa ms frecuente es la viral (rinovirus, coronavirus, adenovirus, virus de la gripe, virus sincitial respiratorio [vsr], metaneumovirus). una pequea proporcin estn causadas por bacterias y entre las ms frecuentes encontramos mycoplasma pneumoniae y chlamydophila pneumoniae. el cuadro clnico es el de una infeccin respiratoria aguda donde el sntoma principal es la tos, de curso autolimitado y buena evolucin. si los pacientes no tienen comorbilidad y se han excluido otras enfermedades que presentan tos, se recomienda un tratamiento sintomtico con analgesia y antiinflamatorios. no hay estudios que demuestren la eficacia del tratamiento antibitico en estos casos1.la enfermedad pulmonar obstructiva crnica (epoc) es una de las mayores causas de morbilidad y de mortalidad en los pases desarrollados, con un gran impacto socioeconmico. se trata de una limitacin al flujo areo que no es totalmente reversible, usualmente progresiva y donde se produce una respuesta inflamatoria pulmonar por la exposicin de partculas txicas. la clasificacin se realiza mediante la espirometra que valora la limitacin del flujo areo2.hasta el ao 2000 los datos sobre la prevalencia, el impacto social y los costes econmicos de la epoc eran escasos. en la actualidad, es la cuarta causa de muerte en los pases desarrollados, con cifras en aumento, estimndose segn la organizacin mundial de la salud (oms) que pasar a ocupar el tercer puesto en el ao 20202. por esta razn, en los ltimos diez aos, han aparecido iniciativas para el estudio y conocimiento de la importancia real de esta enfermedad. entre ellas el gold guidelines of global initiative for copd2 y el estudio iberpoc (estudio epidemiolgico de la epoc en espaa). en espaa los datos de prevalencia de la enfermedad en la poblacin adulta eran del 9% en 1997 y los ltimos datos muestran una prevalencia del 4,5%3. puntos clave agudizacin de la epoc. la prevalencia de epoc es del 4,5-9% y la complicacin ms frecuente es la agudizacin, cada paciente presentar de 1 a 4 al ao que contribuirn al deterioro de la funcin respiratoria.la causa principal de las agudizaciones son las infecciones respiratorias producidas por bacterias y virus y las coinfecciones por estos organismos. neumona. la incidencia de neumona comunitaria es del 5-11% en la poblacin adulta. la neumona es ms prevalente en nios, ancianos, pacientes con comorbilidad o enfermedad pulmonar previa, malnutricin y consumo de alcohol y tabaco. criterios de gravedad e ingreso. la evaluacin inicial de la gravedad puede realizarse con los criterios curb-65 o un modelo pronstico como el ndice de gravedad de la neumona (psi) de fine. son de mucha utilidad para decidir el lugar de tratamiento en cada paciente. neumona neumoccica. streptococcus pneumoniae es el microorganismo ms frecuente en la neumona comunitaria, y en los ltimos aos ha cambiado su patrn de sensibilidad mostrando resistencia a la penicilina y los macrlidos.el cuadro clnico de tos, expectoracin purulenta, fiebre y dolor pleurtico es tpico en adultos y puede estar ausente en ancianos o en las neumonas llamadas atpicas. estudio microbiolgico. en pacientes sanos no es necesario el estudio sistemtico de la etiologa de la neumona, y en los que ingresan se solicita esputo, antgenos bacterianos en orina y hemocultivos. neumona relacionada con atencin sanitaria y nosocomial. la neumona relacionada con la atencin sanitaria est causada por microorganismos similares a los nosocomiales y la evolucin es ms trpida con una mayor mortalidad.las infecciones del tracto respiratorio inferior son la causa ms frecuente de consultas en los servicios de urgencias, con una alta tasa de morbimortalidad. una de las complicaciones de esta enfermedad son las agudizaciones, y cada paciente puede presentar entre 1 y 4 episodios al ao. el diagnstico clnico se realiza cuando existe un aumento de la disnea habitual, tos y/o cambios en las caractersticas del esputo, que incluyen los criterios de anthonisen, estos criterios se han ampliado e incluyen el concepto de empeoramiento sostenido, de comienzo agudo y con necesidad de un cambio en el tratamiento habitual4. la causa principal de las agudizaciones son las infecciones respiratorias producidas por bacterias y virus, pero otros factores como la polucin ambiental tambin contribuye, aunque en menor medida.las causas bacterianas de las agudizaciones en la epoc son bien conocidas y estn ampliamente documentadas. el 4% de la poblacin sana est colonizado por bacterias en la va area, el 29% de los adultos con epoc estable y el 54% con agudizacin5. se ha demostrado que la adquisicin de una nueva cepa de haemophilus influenzae, streptococcus pneumoniae, moraxella catarrhalis o pseudomonas aeruginosa desempea un papel central en las agudizacin5., 6..entre los virus ms frecuentemente implicados est el rinovirus y el virus de la influenza, que a su vez es responsable de la mayor parte de los cuadros graves6., 7.. el vsr causa el 10% de las hospitalizaciones por neumona y 11,4% por agudizacin de la epoc8. en los ltimos aos metapneumovirus se ha visto implicado en la infeccin respiratoria tanto en neumona como en bronquitis8., 9.. en relacin con la pandemia de gripe a (h1n1), los pacientes con epoc y mala evolucin representan entre el 6 y el 8%10. la coinfeccin de virus y bacterias se asocia a la presencia de cuadros clnicos ms graves11.a todos los pacientes se les realizar un hemograma, bioqumica bsica, gasometra y electrocardiograma. se solicitar una radiografa de trax en pacientes con fiebre para descartar neumona y en los casos de cuadros graves para descartar neumotrax.en los pacientes con epoc conocida es importante remitirse al estadio en funcin de la clasificacin espiromtrica12 para valorar la gravedad de la epoc (tabla 1 ).el cultivo de esputo y la tincin de gram son tiles en la epoc avanzada (estadios 3 y 4) con riesgo de infeccin de microorganismos como pseudomonas spp. u otras enterobacterias, en pacientes con tratamientos antibiticos previos, en aquellos con mala respuesta al tratamiento y frente a la sospecha de tuberculosis.la decisin de comenzar un tratamiento antibitico se basa en la presencia de al menos dos de los criterios de anthonisen (aumento del volumen del esputo, purulencia y aumento de la disnea). la eleccin del antibitico se realizar segn la gravedad de la enfermedad aguda, la resistencia a los antibiticos estimada y la presencia o no de factores de riesgo para la infeccin por pseudomonas aeruginosa (tabla 2 )13. pacientes con enfermedad pulmonar obstructiva crnica leve o moderada y sin comorbilidad. se comienza con una cobertura para los microorganismos habituales con amoxicilina-cido clavulnico en dosis de 2 g por va intravenosa (i.v.) cada 12 horas o 875 mg por va oral (v.o.) cada 8 horas. los tratamientos alternativos son: cefditoren 400 mg cada 12 horas, azitromicina 500 mg v.o. cada 24 horas, levofloxacino 500 mg cada 24 horas, moxifloxacino 400 mg cada 24 horas. pacientes con comorbilidad. en aquellos que presentan comorbilidad y se piense que puede estar implicado adems una enterobacteria se comienza con levofloxacino o moxifloxacino y como alternativa amoxicilina-cido clavulnico o cefalosporina de tercera generacin. pacientes con riego de infeccin por pseudomonas spp. se puede indicar cualquiera de las fluoroquinolonas, ciprofloxacino, levofloxacino o moxifloxacino y ajustar el tratamiento segn los resultados de los cultivos. si el paciente presenta mala evolucin clnica se pueden utilizar otros antibiticos intravenosos activos frente a este microorganismo como piperacilina-tazobactam, cefepima, ceftacidima o carbapenemas14. la duracin del tratamiento es de 710 das, excepto si se emplea azitromicina que es de 35 das.otras medidas teraputicas son los broncodilatadores beta 2 (salbutamol, terbutalina) con o sin bromuro de ipratropio, oxigenoterapia, corticoides sistmicos en los casos indicados.los pacientes que requieren ingreso hospitalario son aquellos que presentan factores predictivos de mala evolucin, los mayores de 65 aos, los que presentan estadios avanzados de la enfermedad, la utilizacin habitual de esteroides o la presencia de enfermedad cardiopulmonar y aquellos con cuadros clnicos que impresionan por su gravedad, as como los pacientes que carecen de apoyo en el hogar y no es posible tratarlos en su domicilio.cuando adems presentan acidosis respiratoria (ph menor de 7,35 y presin parcial de co2 [pco2] mayor de 55 mm hg), existe un grupo de pacientes en los que est indicada la utilizacin de ventilacin mecnica no invasiva. esta forma de ventilacin mejora el cuadro clnico, eleva el ph, evita la intubacin endotraqueal y disminuye la estancia hospitalaria y la mortalidad2.alrededor de un 30% de los pacientes no responden al tratamiento, en estos casos se realizar una nueva valoracin del paciente, teniendo presente otras enfermedades que conforman el diagnstico diferencial como la embolia de pulmn, neumona, insuficiencia cardiaca, neumotrax, derrame pleural o arritmias.es la infeccin del parnquima pulmonar como consecuencia de la proliferacin de microorganismos en el interior de los alvolos que provocan una respuesta inflamatoria y lesin de los tejidos.el pulmn est expuesto de forma constante a una mezcla de gases, partculas y microorganismos que forman el aire inspirado. sin embargo, las vas respiratorias inferiores suelen permanecer estriles debido a los mecanismos de defensa. la alteracin de estos mecanismos de defensa, la capacidad de virulencia del microorganismo o una carga bacteriana alta son los causantes de la infeccin aguda. los mecanismos de defensa los constituyen barreras anatmicas y mecnicas de la va area superior, el filtro que ejercen las narinas y los cornetes, el atrapamiento de partculas se produce por la presencia de secrecin mucosa nasal y farngea, el aparato mucociliar del rbol traqueobronquial y el reflejo tusgeno, por otro lado, existen mecanismos inmunolgicos como la secrecin de inmunoglobulina a que tiene actividad antibacteriana y antiviral, el lquido de revestimiento alveolar (surfactante, inmunoglobulinas y complemento), los macrfagos alveolares y el complemento, entre otros. los microorganismos producen una infeccin pulmonar por tres vas, la principal es la aspiracin de secreciones orofarngeas, la segunda es por inhalacin y la tercera y menos frecuente es la va hematgena15.existen varios factores que interfieren con los mecanismos de defensas, entre los que se encuentran: disminucin del nivel de conciencia (convulsiones, intoxicaciones, abuso de alcohol), aspiracin de la flora orofarngea al tracto respiratorio inferior, el tabaquismo que interrumpe la funcin mucociliar y la actividad de los macrfagos. el alcohol daa los reflejos de la tos y el epigltico, aumenta la colonizacin por microorganismos gramnegativos, disminuye la movilidad de los neutrfilos y altera la quimiotaxis16. pacientes con asplenia, anemia de clulas falciformes o esplenectoma estn predispuestos a infecciones bacterianas por streptococcus pneumoniae. tambin los pacientes infectados por el virus de la inmunodeficiencia humana (vih) tienen mayor riesgo de neumona neumoccica bacterimica17. las infecciones vricas alteran las defensas y producen dao epitelial. las manipulaciones iatrognicas como tubos endotraqueales, sondas nasogstricas o ventilacin mecnica predisponen a la infeccin.la neumona se presenta fundamentalmente en nios y ancianos, en el sexo masculino, en los malnutridos y en los pacientes con enfermedades pulmonares previas como son los pacientes con epoc18.la neumona se clasifica de acuerdo a su adquisicin en: a) neumona nosocomial, es la que se presenta despus de 48 horas del ingreso al hospital y que no estaba en perodo de incubacin al ingreso; b) neumona asociada a ventilacin mecnica, la que aparece 48 horas despus de la intubacin; c) neumona relacionada con la atencin sanitaria, la que se presenta en los pacientes incluidos en una de las siguientes situaciones19: hospitalizacin por ms de 2 das en un hospital de agudos en los ltimos 90 das; vivir en un centro de larga estancia o residencia; tratamiento antibitico, quimioterapia o cuidados de heridas en los ltimos 30 das; estar en dilisis; hospitalizacin a domicilio y d) neumona comunitaria, la que se presenta fuera del hospital y no cumple ninguno de los criterios anteriores.la neumona adquirida en la comunidad (nac) constituye una causa muy importante de morbilidad y mortalidad. en estados unidos, la nac representa la primera causa de muerte de origen infeccioso y la sexta en cuanto a mortalidad global. la prevalencia entre la poblacin adulta se sita entre el 5 y el 11%20. en espaa, en pacientes adultos la incidencia es de 210 casos por 1.000 habitantes y ao y en los mayores de 70 aos asciende a 2530 casos por 1.000 habitantes y ao21. streptococcus pneumoniae es el agente causal ms frecuente en la neumona comunitaria22. en la mitad de los casos el microorganismo causal de la nac es desconocido. en la serie de marriet et al23, donde se estudian 500 pacientes del medio comunitario se llega al diagnstico en el 50% y los microorganismos ms frecuentes fueron: mycoplasma pneumoniae 15%, clamydophila pneumoniae 12%, streptococcus pneumoniae 5,9% y haemophilus influenzae 4,9%.cuando la causa es un virus, el ms frecuente es el virus influenza, seguido del sincitial respiratorio, parainfluenza, adenovirus y metaneumovirus. y entre las neumonas llamadas atpicas adems de mycoplasma pneumoniae y clamydophila pneumoniae se encuentra legionella spp.en los casos de neumona grave con criterios de ingreso en una unidad de cuidados intensivos (uci), los microorganismos encontrados con ms frecuencia son streptococcus pneumoniae, legionella spp., haemophilus influenzae, bacilos gramnegativos y staphylococcus aureus 22. streptococcus pneumoniae resistente a penicilina y a macrlidos. desde la dcada de los noventa se han publicado cifras de neumococo resistente a penicilina de hasta el 42,5%24 utilizando los siguientes puntos de corte:  0,06 g/ml para los sensibles, 0,1-1 g/ml resistencia intermedia y  2 g/ml resistencia de alto nivel. en este estudio se pudo observar que los pacientes menores de 10 aos, inmunodeprimidos, que haban recibido tratamiento antibitico previo y con enfermedades graves con un pronstico de muerte en los siguientes meses constituan los factores de riesgo para infeccin por neumococo resistentes. los datos de resistencia frente a eritromicina eran del 15% y se aislaban con ms frecuencia en los menores de 5 aos y en los pacientes con infeccin de adquisicin nosocomial25. en la actualidad, y tomando en cuenta los mismos puntos de corte, el 42% de los neumococos son resistentes a penicilina (intermedia y alta) y el 35% a eritromicina26.a todos los pacientes se les realizar una historia clnica detallada con una anamnesis dirigida al entorno en el que se ha producido la infeccin y las posibles exposiciones especficas (contacto con animales, viajes, aerosoles, zonas endmicas). las manifestaciones clnicas ms frecuentes son tos, fiebre, expectoracin mucopurulenta, dolor torcico de tipo pleurtico y malestar general. en los pacientes ancianos los sntomas suelen ser inespecficos, muchas veces sin fiebre y con cuadros de deterioro del estado general o neurolgicos como confusin. en el caso de neumona neumoccica el comienzo es brusco con fiebre, escalofros y expectoracin herrumbrosa27, y la bacteriemia est presente en el 25% de los casos. en la radiografa de trax aparece un infiltrado alveolar lobar o segmentario con signos de consolidacin y broncograma areo, en el 15% de los casos puede ser multisegmentaria y en el 10% bilateral.la infeccin por mycoplasma pneumoniae se produce en pacientes jvenes y sanos, la evolucin es buena y la mortalidad muy baja. chlamydophila pneumoniae presenta mayor prevalencia en pacientes de 65-79 aos. producen neumona atpica que suele presentarse como un cuadro subagudo, tos seca y predominio de manifestaciones extrapulmonares como cefalea, mialgia, artralgia con disociacin clinicorradiolgica e infiltrado subsegmentario28.en los servicios de urgencias se realizar a todos los pacientes una radiografa de trax, hemograma y bioqumica, y se medir la saturacin de oxgeno para valorar la indicacin de gasometra arterial cuando sea igual o inferior al 93% o presente una frecuencia respiratoria superior a 20 por minuto14. cuando est disponible y en los pacientes con signos de sepsis se determinar la protena c reactiva (pcr) que es una protena liberada por las clulas hepticas en respuesta a mediadores inflamatorios como las interleucinas y valores por encima de 20 mg/dl se observan en procesos bacterianos y sepsis.una vez realizado el diagnstico de neumona, el siguiente paso es decidir en funcin de la situacin clnica y el caso concreto, el mbito de tratamiento del paciente, si es necesario el ingreso hospitalario y, en ese caso, en qu rea del hospital. para ello se han diseado escalas de valoracin de la gravedad o riesgo del paciente. indice de gravedad de la neumona de fine. el ndice de gravedad de la neumona de fine29 (psi [pneumonia severity index]) permite estratificar a los pacientes en cinco grupos segn la mortalidad a los 30 das. para el clculo se utilizan 20 variables que suman datos demogrficos, comorbilidad, signos vitales y parmetros analticos y radiolgicos (tabla 3 ). se dividen segn la puntuacin en: grupo i < 51 puntos, grupo ii  70, grupo iii 71-90, grupo iv 91-130 y grupo v > 130 y la mortalidad es de 0,1; 0,6; 2,8; 8,2, y 29,2% respectivamente. curb-65. un sistema ms sencillo por tener menos variables es el curb-65, esta escala fue modificada por lim et al30 que incorporaron la edad. el clculo se realiza sumando un punto por cada una de las siguientes variables: c es confusin, u urea plasmtica > 44 mg/dl, r frecuencia respiratoria  30 rpm, b tensin arterial sistlica < 90 mm hg o tensin arterial diastlica  60 mm hg y 65 es la edad  a 65 aos. la suma de los mismos clasifica a los pacientes en grupo 0, 1, 2, 3 y 4 cuya mortalidad a los 30 das es 0,7; 2,1; 9,2; 14,5 y > 40% respectivamente.utilizando estas escalas podemos tambin decidir qu pacientes necesitarn ingreso hospitalario. el grupo i y ii de fine y el 0 y 1 de curb65 podran tratarse de forma ambulatoria. el iii de fine y el 2 de curb65 requieren observacin 24-48 horas o ingreso en una unidad de corta estancia, los grupos iv y v de fine y 3 y 4 de curb65 requieren ingreso hospitalario y algunos de esos pacientes precisarn ingreso en la uci. esta valoracin est supeditada al criterio de cada mdico. por ejemplo, hay casos de pacientes que podran tratarse ambulatoriamente, pero que por otras razones requieren ingresos, son aquellos que presentan: a) complicaciones de la neumona; b) exacerbacin de enfermedades subyacentes; c) incapacidad de tomar frmacos orales y d) otros factores de riesgo que no estn incluidos en las escalas31.un porcentaje de pacientes (9-10%) necesitar ingreso en la uci, los criterios definidos en las guas clnicas de estados unidos ats/idsa32 consideran que con un criterio mayor o tres menores los pacientes deben admitirse en una unidad de vigilancia de alto nivel (tabla 4 ).en los casos de neumona comunitaria que no requiere ingreso hospitalario y en pacientes con escasa comorbilidad y que sern atendidos de forma ambulatoria no est indicado el estudio sistemtico de la etiologa. en caso de poder realizar una tincin de gram del esputo, esta muestra nos confirma la presencia de microorganismos y, por ejemplo, cuando se observan diplococos grampositivos nos sugiere una neumona neumoccica. en los pacientes que ingresan en el hospital, adems de la analtica de sangre con hemograma, bioqumica y gasometra arterial, se recogern 3 hemocultivos, antgenos microbianos en orina tanto para neumococo como para legionella spp. y cultivo de esputo. el esputo debe ser de buena calidad, esto quiere decir que los esputos compuestos por saliva y clulas epiteliales se desecharn y se procesarn aquellos que tengan menos de 10 clulas epiteliales por campo y ms de 25 neutrfilos por campo de 100 aumentos. es recomendable que el esputo se recoja en un recipiente de boca ancha y no se demore ms de 1 hora en su llegada al laboratorio, de no poder enviarlo rpidamente la muestra debe conservarse a + 2-8 grados28.en los pacientes ingresados las guas idsa32 recomiendan una muestra de esputo en las siguientes circunstancias: a) ingreso en la uci; b) fracaso en el tratamiento antibitico; c) lesiones cavitadas; d) pacientes alcohlicos; e) enfermedad pulmonar; f) derrame pleural y g) antgenos positivo para neumococo o legionella spp.con respecto a los antgenos urinarios, el antgeno neumoccico detecta el polisacrido capsular, presenta un especificidad del 96% y un valor predictivo positivo entre el 88-96%. es de gran utilidad para reducir el espectro antibitico y optimizar los tratamientos33. en el caso de legionella spp. se ha convertido en el mejor mtodo diagnstico, con una sensibilidad del 80% y una especificidad del 100%.otra muestra de inters es el derrame pleural para descartar empiema y tambin realizar una tincin de gram y cultivo.en casos de sospecha razonable de tuberculosis se solicitar tincin de ziehl-nielsen.cuando se sospecha neumona por m. pneumoniae y c. pneumoniae se solicitan serologas, anticuerpos igm en la fase aguda o seroconversin en la convalecencia (ttulos de igg en la primera consulta y a las dos semanas). estos ttulos deben elevarse cuatro veces.la tcnica de reaccin en cadena de la polimerasa est indicada en infecciones graves, o en procesos con mala evolucin clnica y cultivos microbiolgicos negativos. en el estudio de virus, se recoge una muestra de exudado nasofarngeo y concomitantemente se puede solicitar cultivo. neumona por legionella spp. la infeccin por legionella pneumophila se produce por la inhalacin de aerosoles contaminados provenientes de los sistemas de agua como duchas, torres de fro, etc.es una causa creciente de neumona comunitaria y hospitalaria que adems afecta a un grupo de pacientes inmunodeprimidos como los que tienen cncer, estn trasplantados de rganos slidos o siguen un tratamiento con corticoides y antagonistas del factor de necrosis tumoral alfa (tnf). la forma de presentacin ms caracterstica es la fiebre alta, tos no productiva, hiponatremia, plaquetopenia y altos niveles de lactato-dehidrogenasa (ldh). puede presentar un comienzo subagudo con cefalea, diarrea, bradicardia o como una neumona atpica. el diagnstico se realiza mediante la deteccin de antgeno en orina de legionella pneumophila serogrupo 1 y la confirmacin con cultivos. menos sensible es la inmunofluorescencia directa en esputo y la serologa34. neumona aspirativa. la neumona aspirativa se produce cuando existe una alteracin de las defensas locales de la va area y un inculo capaz de tener un efecto txico directo en el pulmn. en estas situaciones se puede desarrollar una neumonitis qumica, una inflamacin por inculo bacteriano o un cuadro obstructivo. se presenta en pacientes con disminucin del nivel de conciencia, disfagia por alteraciones neurolgicas o alteraciones del tracto gastrointestinal superior. en caso de neumonitis qumica el inicio es brusco con fiebre, cianosis e hipoxemia. en las bacterianas, el cuadro puede ser subagudo con tos y expectoracin purulenta y sin tratamiento evoluciona a una necrosis pulmonar. las bacterias responsables son estreptococos y bacilos gramnegativos y anaerobios (peptostretococcus spp., fusobacterium spp., prevotella spp. y bacteroides spp.)15. neumona por staphylococcus aureus resistente a meticilina. se han descrito casos de neumonas comunitarias causadas por s. aureus resistente a meticilina (sarm) que poseen el factor de virulencia panton-valentine. en europa la incidencia es baja, se observa en pacientes jvenes y la forma de presentacin son las neumonas necrotizantes graves28. neumona que no responde al tratamiento y diagnstico diferencial. los pacientes que inicialmente no responden al tratamiento presentan una tasa de mortalidad que puede llegar al 45%. esta situacin se presenta en el 6-15% de los pacientes hospitalizados21.los pacientes hospitalizados que no responden al tratamiento en las primeras 72 horas son los que presentan una neumona progresiva con shock sptico y/o insuficiencia respiratoria y requieren ventilacin mecnica. ms all de las 72 horas existen los casos denominados de neumona persistente que son los que no alcanzan la estabilidad clnica. se considera a un paciente estable cuando cumple los siguientes criterios: temperatura  37,8 c, frecuencia cardaca  100 latidos por minuto, frecuencia respiratoria  24 respiraciones por minuto, presin arterial sistlica  90 mm hg, saturacin arterial de oxgeno  90% o po2  60 mm hg con aire ambiente, capacidad de mantener ingestin oral y nivel de conciencia normal32. cuando despus de evaluar el caso se confirma el diagnstico de neumona, se valorarn las causas ms comunes de mala evolucin: a) tratamiento emprico sin cobertura para el microorganismo responsable; b) presencia de un virus, una micobacteria o una bacteria resistente o c) sobreinfeccin de origen hospitalario. en estos casos hay que revisar los cultivos obtenidos al ingreso y recoger nuevas muestras, descartar derrame paraneumnico, empiema y abscesos. otras muestras adems de las respiratorias que deben estudiarse son los catteres intravasculares, las urinarias, heridas y cualquier sitio de sospecha, ya que el paciente puede presentar una sobreinfeccin extrapulmonar.entre las pruebas de imagen se puede solicitar: tomografa computadorizada de trax para descartar otras patologas como embolia pulmonar, derrame pleural o abscesos. si es necesario se puede realizar una broncoscopia con lavado broncoalveolar y biopsia transbronquial que adems de ser til para el cultivo microbiolgico (bacterias, micobacterias, virus, hongos oportunistas) puede diagnosticar hemorragia pulmonar, neumona eosinfila o cncer de pulmn.las enfermedades inflamatorias como las vasculitis tambin pueden presentar fiebre, disnea e infiltrados pulmonares como en el caso de la hemorragia alveolar y la granulomatosis de wegener. otras enfermedades como proteinosis alveolar, neumona intersticial y sarcoidosis conforman la larga lista del diagnstico diferencial15., 28., 32..la prevalencia de mmr, as como la morbimortalidad se incrementan segn se trate de neumona comunitaria, relacionada con la atencin sanitaria o nosocomial35 en este orden. entre estos organismos se incluyen sarm y bacilos gramnegativos como klebsiella pneumoniae productor de betalactamasas de espectro extendido (blee), pseudomonas aeruginosa y acinetobacter spp. los factores de riesgo para uno u otro organismo difieren segn el contexto de la adquisicin, la microbiologa local y las variaciones individuales como la enfermedad de base o la exposicin previa a antibiticos. en un estudio prospectivo realizado por naimi et al36 entre 1.100 pacientes infectados por sarm se encontr que en la mayora de los que presentaban una infeccin respiratoria sta haba sido adquirida en relacin con la atencin sanitaria frente a la adquisicin comunitaria (22 frente a 6% p < 0,001). en el estudio de kollef et al37 (4.543 pacientes de una base de datos) la mortalidad para neumona comunitaria relacionada con la atencin sanitaria y nosocomial fue de 10, 18,8 y 19,8% respectivamente, y los paciente con neumona relacionada con la atencin sanitaria fueron los que tenan una estancia hospitalaria ms larga.los pacientes ancianos que residen en centros de larga estancia presentan microorganismos que se acercan a aquellos encontrados en las neumonas nosocomiales o asociadas a ventilacin mecnica tarda. en un estudio de 104 pacientes de ms de 75 aos con neumona grave se encontr s. aureus (29%), bacilos gramnegativos (15%), streptococcus pneumoniae (9%) y pseudomonas aeruginosa (4%)38. en otro estudio de este mismo autor39 en el que utiliza tcnicas invasoras para el diagnstico de la neumona en pacientes institucionalizados, encuentra sarm en el 33% de los casos. staphylococcus aureus es un comensal de la flora habitual de los pacientes que est presente en narinas (20-30%), la piel y las heces en una cantidad que supera las clulas eucariticas, tambin se encuentra en las manos del personal que realiza los procedimientos invasores y adems tiene un marcado potencial patgeno. produce infeccin como consecuencia de la contaminacin cruzada y cuando existen los siguientes factores predisponentes: procedimientos invasores, tratamiento antibitico previo, infeccin o colonizacin reciente por sarm y la estancia en centros sanitarios y hospitales40. en espaa representa entre el 20-30% de los staphilococcus aureus, en centros de pacientes crnicos puede alcanzar el 40-60%. en el estudio realizado en catalua en 9 centros de larga estancia se encontr que el estado de portador de sarm variaba segn los centros, con una media de 16,8% (6,7-35,8%). los factores de riesgo fueron la presencia de escaras, el uso de antibitico previo, una media del ndice de charlson inferior a 2 y centros de menos de 150 camas41.en los ltimos aos han aumentado las infecciones por cepas de e. coli productoras de blee. un estudio multicntrico nacional que analiza la prevalencia de e. coli y klebsiella pneumoniae con blee muestra que el porcentaje de aislados productores de blee actualmente es de 4 y 5%, que se ha multiplicado por 8 y por 2 desde el ao 2000 respectivamente y que este aumento se debe principalmente a cepas aisladas de pacientes no hospitalizados42.en las neumonas asociadas a ventilacin mecnica hay que considerar aquellas que se producen dentro de los cuatro primeros das o precoces en las que predominan los microorganismos de la flora endgena primaria de s. pneumoniae, h. influenzae y s. aureus meticilina sensible, las tardas estn producidas por los microorganimos del entorno hospitalario que colonizan e infectan a los pacientes, entre los que se encuentran sarm, e. coli y klebsiella pneumoniae productores de blee, pseudomonas aeruginosa y acinetobacter spp. legionella pneumophila tambin es causa de neumona nosocomial y se presenta en pacientes inmunodeprimidos, fundamentalmente trasplantados, con infeccin por el vih o con enfermedades de base como la diabetes o la insuficiencia renal.se define neumona nosocomial como la presencia de un nuevo infiltrado radiolgico y al menos dos de los siguientes sntomas: fiebre superior a 38 c, leucocitosis o leucopenia y presencia de secreciones purulentas.las muestras microbiolgicas como esputo o aspirado traqueal consisten en cultivos semicuantitativos cuyo punto de corte significativo es  105 ufc/ml, en pacientes intubados tambin se puede utilizar el lavado broncoalveolar o el catter telescopado para los que se considera recuento significativo  103 y  104 respectivamente. en estas muestras se realiza una tincin de gram para orientar el diagnstico etiolgico inicial y el cultivo. adems, en todos los pacientes se recogern hemocultivos y antgeno urinario para neumococo y legionella spp.otras enfermedades pueden presentar un cuadro clnico similar a la neumona. por lo tanto debemos considerar otras posibilidades: atelectasia, embolia pulmonar, distrs respiratorio, neoplasia, hemorragia pulmonar. en los casos de duda diagnstica se debern solicitar otras pruebas como tomografa computadorizada o broncoscopia con biopsia y cultivo para microorganismos menos frecuentes. en los pacientes que no responden al tratamiento se debe realizar una nueva valoracin con nuevos cultivos y estudios complementarios como se describi previamente para la neumona de lenta resolucin.cities have experienced a rising number of disruptions from various types of unexpected weather events due to changes in climate and the environment. the occurrence of extreme weather events such as snowstorms, typhoons, and large rainstorms has not only caused damages on properties and urban infrastructure systems, human activities can also be severely affected. for instance, human mobility is significantly affected by the shutdown of major airports and railway stations. urban activities such as tourism and sporting events can also be severely affected or cancelled in order to avoid further negative consequences. in addition, extreme weather events may lead to power outages or damage to infrastructure, which may further exacerbate the disruptions of urban functions and human activities. in fact, the damages caused by natural disasters to human society have increased substantially over the past six decades (berke, 1995; mileti, 1999; dewan, 2013) . in particular, the frequency and severity of hurricanes and typhoons has increased substantially, which has caused major damage to numerous cities along coastal areas in asia-pacific regions (smith & katz 2013) . as a result, it has become a key challenge for urban planners handling emergency response and management to understand the impact of extreme weather events on human activities, in order to allow for the development of smart, resilient, and sustainable cities. although an increasing number of studies have attempted to quantify the impacts of extreme weather events on the damages of physical infrastructure systems, such as transportation, energy, and water supplies, it remains unclear to what extent urban human activities are affected. one of the major challenges is due to the limitation of data. for instance, the traditional data source is often household surveys. despite the advantage of revealing detailed behavioral changes in human activities before and after the occurrence of a disruptive event, such data also have limitations. for instance, the cost of data collection is very high and sample sizes are generally considerably small. in addition, the data is often collected in an ad hoc manner (e.g. collected during a specific time period and/or with a specific geographic focus). as a result, the dynamic spatiotemporal evolution of human activities due to the influence of extreme weather events can hardly be captured.conversely, the wide adoption of information and communications technology (ict), such as gps-based sensors and smart phones, has facilitated the sharing and application of geospatial information considerably. in addition, a large volume of data are also generated from location-based services (lbs) at an unprecedented pace in terms of velocity, variety, and veracity through various types of social mobile apps, such as twitter, wechat, and google apps. although such data have provided new opportunities for urban analysts and planners to examine human dynamics, particularly in the context of disaster response and management (shaw et al., 2016) , there is still a lack of understanding in terms of how such data can be effectively adopted to address key issues related to urban disaster response and management.to fill this research gap, this study provides an empirical assessment of the impact of extreme weather event on urban human flows. using human mobility data collected by baidu maps, one of the biggest lbs providers in china, our study contributes to the field of geospatial big data analytics for smart cities in the following aspects:firstly, our study provides an in-depth assessment of the impact of extreme weather events on urban human flow changes through capturing dynamic evolutional patterns over time. using typhoon mangkhut in shenzhen as an example, for the first time the daily dynamics of human mobility and the impact of the disruption at a fine spatial scale (500 m  500 m) were analyzed from the period of september 11-23, 2018 that covers the days before, during, and after the storm.secondly, the spatial and functional variations in human mobility flows were examined over time using both classic gis methods and spatial flow analysis. a novel measure for comparing the spatial flow patterns over time was developed to quantify the temporal change in spatial flow structures and assess the impact of disruptions on urban flow. through a combination of flow data with point-of-interest data, our analysis provides a detailed assessment of flow volume changes by different categories of urban functions (including commercial, industrial, institutional, recreational, residential, and transport) . the assessment of urban flow variations among different urban functions enables planners to understand the impact of disruptive events on various types of human activities, which may provide evidence for land use planning and identify social and economic impacts from a new angle.thirdly, the analytical framework provides implications for urban vulnerability and resilience assessments under various unexpected events using location-based big data. in addition, the application introduced in this paper also has the potential to be utilized in the planning practice, given that such an analysis may help emergency management agencies identify vulnerable locations and time periods in consideration of human flow quantitatively. this could allow resources to be allocated more effectively in order to avoid or reduce the damage from a given disruptive event.the rest of the paper is organized as follows. section 2 identifies the research gaps through a comprehensive review of relevant literature. sections 3 and 4 present the data and methodology, respectively. section 5 discusses the analytical results, whereas section 6 summarizes and concludes.location-based service (lbs) data has been extensive applied to study human flow patterns in recent years. compared to traditional survey data, this new form can be collected much more easily (chen and schintler, 2015) . the data also includes useful information such as flow trajectories with a spatial-temporal dimension (brockmann et al., 2006 , gonzalez et al., 2008 , liang et al., 2012 , lee and holme, 2015 , calabrese et al., 2010 , oliveira et al., 2016 , rhee et al., 2011 , xu et al., 2019 , papandrea et al., 2016 , yuan et al., 2012 . the most common adoption of lbs data is to understand the spatial distribution patterns of human mobility. for instance, based on the analysis of call detail records (cdrs) of anonymized mobile phone users, gonzalez et al. (2008) revealed that the power law distribution reflects the patterns of individual mobility in normal conditions. conversely, through an assessment of the location-based data of bank notes, brockmann et al. (2006) found that human mobility follows a powerlaw with a heavy-tailed distribution. in addition, based on an analysis of more than 20 million taxi trajectories in beijing, liang et al. (2012) revealed that the movement of taxis in normal conditions followed an exponential distribution instead of a power-law; in other words, they suggested that the displacement of taxis decays exponentially in an urban environment. similarly, yuan et al. (2012) examined the regional functions of beijing utilizing similar datasets. their study found that the pattern is very similar to land-use maps and they indicated that such data enables us to understand the distributional patterns of points of interest (pois) and the intensity of human mobility in urban environments.lbs data has also been adopted to understand the linkages between land use and human mobility patterns. for instance, lee and holme (2015) showed that mobility could be predicted through a combination of land-use maps and origin-destination (od) survey data, given the fact that a strong linkage between land use and human mobility was identified. similarly, calabrese et al. (2010) predicted individual's locations based on both individual and collective behaviors using land use maps and a dataset of mobile phone locations in the boston metropolitan area. the land use maps were classified using pois data. in addition, oliveira et al. (2016) investigated the locations of gps users and its associated coverage time at given pois using various data sources, including cdrs, geolife data, and openstreetmap data. their study revealed that human mobility has a similar regularity and tends to be confined to certain areas among different cities. the movement of individuals was also analyzed by papandrea et al. (2016) using both poi data and cdr data. their study showed that an individual's mobility is primarily determined by the locations of their home and workplace. in general, the majority of human flows were found to be less than 10 km in urban areas. such a pattern possesses similar statistical features to levy walk, which is characterized by the distribution of heavy-tail flight and pause-time (rhee et al., 2011) .although many studies have attempted to examine the patterns of human mobility in normal conditions using lbs data, there is still a limited understanding of to what extent the patterns of urban human flow may differ under unexpected events, such as man-made disruptions (e.g. strikes and protests), natural disasters, and technological system failures. among a few exceptions, ahmouda et al. (2019) suggest that power-law models within the lvy walk distributional pattern provide an effective applicability to examine human mobility patterns, both in normal and abnormal conditions. similarly, wang and taylor (2016) also confirmed that individual mobility follows the power-law distribution (levy flight model) in most disaster cases.in terms of the application of different types of lbs data, table 1 summarizes a few relevant studies based on lbs data for human flowrelated disaster analysis. specifically, three types of lbs data are commonly adopted to investigate the patterns of human mobility in disaster scenarios. the first one is geotagged social media data. for instance, geotagged twitter data has been extensively adopted to examine how human mobility is affected by hurricanes (ahmouda et al., 2019; martn et al., 2017; roy et al., 2019; wang and taylor, 2014) . some studies, such as han et al. (2019) and yabe et al. (2019a) , examined this issue with a particular focus on evacuation and returning behaviors after disasters. spatial statistical analysis and spatiotemporal comparative analysis are the most common approaches for their assessments.the second most widely-adopted lbs data is mobile phone tower data, which is also known as cellular signaling data. the data, such as call detail records, is generated through the communication between cell phones and cellular tower stations. these data have also been frequently adopted to estimate human mobility and evacuation behaviors before disasters (bengtsson et al., 2011; khaefi et al., 2018, lu et al., z. chen, et al. computers, environment and urban systems 83 (2020) 101520 to what extent the evacuation behavior is affected by earthquakes?mobile data from smartphones: yahoo japan corporation spatial analysis and cross-comparative analysis source: authors' summary.z. chen, et al. computers, environment and urban systems 83 (2020) 101520 2012). in terms of research methods, while spatiotemporal estimations and comparisons have generally been used, new methods such as machine learning have also been adopted for the prediction of mobility patterns using this type of data. the third one is location-based service data, or mobile data collected from smartphones. the data can be collected based on either gps, wi-fi signals, or cellular signals. various types of lbs data have been adopted for disaster related human mobility analysis. for instance, joo et al. (2019) studied the factors that affect evacuation behaviors during floods using one of the major types of lbs data, based in japan, called agoop. similarly, yabe et al. (2019b) investigated evacuation behaviors after earthquakes using the lbs data of yahoo in japan. their study revealed that the probability of an individual's evacuation is strongly dependent on the seismic intensity they experience. another lbs data called tencent was applied to examine the collective human activities during typhoons in china. their study revealed that there are significant spatial differences in the recovery duration of human activities after typhoons.in sum, although a rising number of studies have attempted to reveal human mobility patterns both in normal conditions and disaster scenarios, the understanding of how urban human flow varies temporally and spatially (e.g. by different spatial clusters) in extreme weather events remains limited. in addition, it remains unclear to what extent human flow may vary among different urban functions, manifested by land use patterns of origins and destinations. it is also unclear how lbs data can be utilized to evaluate the vulnerability and resilience of urban systems to various unexpected circumstances, such as extreme weather events. 1 hence, this study fills these research gaps with a focus on addressing the following research questions: to what extent are urban human activities disrupted under extreme weather conditions? how does urban human flow vary spatially and functionally as a response to extreme weather conditions over time? and finally, what are the implications of lbs data for urban risk management and resilience capacity development?typhoon mangkhut was one of the major disruptive weather events and a category 5 super typhoon occurred in 2018. it is one of the most powerful tropical cyclones ever recorded in the asian-pacific region and caused widespread damage among several southeast asian countries and regions such as guam, the philippines, malaysia, vietnam, and south china. typhoon mangkhut formed on september 6, 2018 over the pacific ocean and its magnitude and power grew as it moved towards southeast asia. it approached closest to south china on september 15, 2018. the meteorological bureaus of most cities in guangdong province in china issued red alerts, which are the highest level, for typhoon mangkhu. specifically, the meteorological bureau of shenzhen issued a red alert for rainstorms on september 16, 2018.the occurrence of typhoon mangkhut also caused massive disruptions of urban human activities. for instance, it is reported that over 2.45 million people were relocated in guangdong province (liang, 2018) . the storm also caused a series of damages to the urban infrastructure system in shenzhen. for instance, power failures occurred in over 13 location, many streets flooded, and over 248 trees were uprooted, which also caused disruptions to urban roadway systems (han, 2018) .to provide a comprehensive assessment of the spatiotemporal variation of urban human flow in the city during the typhoon, three types of data were adopted in our assessment:urban flow data: the daily flow data for the study period were obtained from mobile device positioning by baidu maps, one of the largest location-based service providers in china (similar to google maps). for instance, the lbs platform of baidu maps holds the largest share (52.98%) of the lbs market in china (li, 2018) and has more than 400 million monthly active user devices on average. hence, these data provide a much broader representation of urban human mobility than other types of lbs data. the dataset includes more than 89 million flows among the location cell in shenzhen. each location is defined as a grid of 500 m  500 m cell, which is a relatively high spatial resolution at which this type of data can be provided due to the concern of data privacy. each flow record includes two types of information: the geospatial information of the centroids of its associated origin and destination (od) cells, and the number of trips made by mobile device users moving from one origin to a different destination within one day. therefore, trips made within the same grid are not included. such an assumption is reasonable as the analysis was conducted based on the data with a relative high spatial resolution. as the flow volume is measured by count, the dataset does not differentiate individual users, as it can reflect multiple trips made by one user in a single day.the data covers the period of september 10-23, 2018 (14 days). it includes seven days before the severe disruption of typhoon mangkhut (9.10-9.15), two days during the event (9.16-9.17) and five days after (9.18-9.23). the definition of the typhoon-affected period was based on typhoon alerts from the meteorological bureau of shenzhen.point-of-interest (poi) data: over 840,000 of poi data in shenzhen was also obtained from baidu maps. the data include detailed spatial information of each poi. as shown in table 2 , poi is classified as 19 categories of urban functions.population density: the data is generated based on user check-ins on baidu maps. it can be used to reflect the vitality of different districts in a city. the data is primarily used for visualization to understand the spatial distribution of human activities in cities.shenzhen, with a total area of 1992 km 2 , is one of the major subprovincial cities in guangdong province in china. the city locates in the core of the guangdong -hong kong and macau great bay area and it is considered one of the most vibrant cities in china due to its fastgrowing economy and well-developed high-tech sectors. while the cities attract millions of visitors and people every year, the city also suffers from tropical storms and typhoons during summer seasons.the temporal distribution of urban flows is summarized in fig. 1 . the average daily flow volume is around 6.4 million. however, it is quite clear that during the two days of disruption from typhoon mangkhut, the volume of urban flows decreased substantially. fig. 2 summarizes the spatial distributions of urban human activities based on various lbs data. the figure in general depicts a polycentric urban structure in shenzhen (liu et al., 2018) . specifically, fig. 2(a) and (b) reveal the distribution of population density in shenzhen. it is clear that the central (luohu, futian, and longhua) and western (nanshan and bao'an) regions have relatively higher levels of human activity, whereas the levels are generally lower in the rest of the city. such a spatial pattern is also confirmed in fig. 2(c) , which is based on poi data. in addition, fig. 2 (c) also reveals that while commercial facilities cover mostly areas with high density, industrial facilitates are generally located in the north side of the city. in addition, to provide a 1 vulnerability is generally defined as the susceptibility to perturbations, which focuses on the consequence component of risk (taylor, 2017) . conversely, resilience is a concept that reflects an ability of the economic and social system to maintain its function and/or hasten the speed of recovery after a shock from a disaster (rose, 2004) . z. chen, et al. computers, environment and urban systems 83 (2020) 101520 better visualization of the major urban flows within the city, all flows with a value greater than "50" are presented in fig. 2(d) . it is evident that while some long distance trips are sporadically scattered with linkages between the east and the west, most of the flows have relatively short trip distances. again, these activities are primarily concentrated in central and western districts where the level of human activities is generally high.the analytical framework of spatiotemporal and functional flow pattern extraction is illustrated in fig. 3 . to begin with, the poi data and flow data were processed and cleaned by removing any abnormal records, such as outliers. the cleaned data were then adopted for both gis analysis and spatial flow analysis. specifically, various spatial maps were generated based on the cleaned data in order to provide a visualization of the spatial distribution of urban functions and flow activities. next, the poi data were integrated with the flow data, based on the classification of land use type of the origin and destination of each flow. meanwhile, global flow patterns of spatial association and local flow clustering were examined and compared over time. in the end, the identified functional and spatial patterns of the flow data were combined to assess the influence of the typhoon.to examine to what extent urban flows vary by urban function, the land use information of origin and destination and flow information were connected. specifically, following previous studies such as hu et al. (2016) , liu et al. (2017) , zhang et al. (2017) , and yang et al. (2019) , the data was processed based on the following assumptions. first, we assume that the function of urban flow can be classified based on the land use type of the parcel of its origin and destination (od). second, poi data is assumed to be more relevant than the land use zoning data to reveal urban vitality given that the information tends to be updated more frequently than the traditional land use data. according to the standards of land use, urban land classification, planning, and construction, urban functions, urban function is reclassified into 6 essential categories based on information from the secondary classification of pois from baidu maps: residential, commercial, industrial, institutional, recreational, and transport. third, although poi data can be updated frequently, our assessment was conducted based on the assumption that the information of poi didn't change during the time period of this study.next, the poi data was aggregated at a block level. the block is defined by the same grid of 500 m  500 m cells that the flow data use. institution of higher learning, middle school, primary school, kindergarten, adult education, parent-child education, special education school, intermediary, research institution, training institution, library, science and technology museum, press and publication, radio and television, art group, art gallery, exhibition hall, cultural palace, general hospital, specialist hospital, clinic, pharmacy, medical examination institution, nursing home, emergency center, disease control center, central institution, governments at all level, administrative unit, public security agencies, foreign-related institution, party organization, welfare agency, political and educational institution recreational park, zoo, botanical garden, amusement park, museum, aquarium, bathing beache, heritage site, church, scenic area, island, mountain, water system transport airport, railway station, subway station, subway line, long-distance bus station, bus station, bus line, port, parking lot, refueling station, service area, toll station, bridge, charging station, roadside parking space, highway exit, highway entrance, airport exit, airport entrance, station exit, station entrance, parking lot entrance and exit source: authors' classification based on baidu map. z. chen, et al. computers, environment and urban systems 83 (2020) 101520 the major urban function of each block is defined by the land function type with the highest share in each block. for instance, assuming s n represents the aggregate number of pois of the n category of land function in a certain block. the land function with the largest number of pois is defined as = s s max high n n [1,2,..,6] . hence, the urban function can be defined by the land function with the highest percent of pois (p high ), (1) one should note that there are several caveats of such a calculation. firstly, the calculation is based on the quantity of pois instead of the actual size of land uses. secondly, the major urban function of each block is essentially determined by the function of land with the highest rate, which may not be realistically appropriate in a case where the shares of more than two types of land are equal. 2 nevertheless, such a calculation provides a straightforward approach to identify the major function of each block.then, the urban flow with information of urban function was developed by joining each spatial flow with its corresponding major urban functions of its origin and destination blocks, respectively. in the end, a matrix that summarizes functional flows by type was generated to represent the functional distribution of flows.the global flow pattern of spatial association needs to be extracted for each day of the entire period, which enables a longitudinal comparison of global spatial patterns of flow on a daily basis. to examine the global flow patterns of spatial association, the getis-ord general g statistic was adopted (getis and ord, 1992) . this general g statistic is given by eq. 2. where x i represents the flow value of a flow i; w ij is the spatial weight between flows i and j representing the spatial proximity between them. this statistic measures the global concentration of high or low flow values in the study area via the output g value and the associated zscore and p-value.to accommodate this classic statistic of high/low value clustering designed for point and areal data in the context of flow data, a formal definition of proximity for flows are crucial. we employ the neighborhood definition for flow data in tao and thill (2018) . for a target flow a, its neighbors are defined according to following rules: rule 1: flows have the same origin and same destination as a;  rule 2: flows have the same origin (destination) as a but a destination (origin) as the contiguous neighbor of a's destination (origin);  rule 3: flows have both origin and destination as the contiguous neighbors of a's origin and destination; rule 4: flows have the origin and destination different from those of a and they are also not the contiguous neighbors of a's origin and destination.as demonstrated in fig. 4 , flow a' shares the same origin and destination with flow a (rule 1). the flow labelled as b (b') shares the same origin (destination) with flow a, and has a contiguous destination (origin) with destination of flow a (rule 2). the flow c has both origin and destination contiguous to those of flow a (rule 3). neither the origin nor destination of flow d is the same or contiguous to flow a (rule 4). therefore, flow a' should be aggregated with flow a (rule 1); flow b and flow c are considered neighbors of flow a (rules 2 and 3), while flow d is not (rule 4).the global flow pattern of spatial association cannot exhibit spatial clustering of flows at the local level due to the existence of spatial heterogeneity (anselin, 1995) . it necessitates detecting the spatial concentration of flows with similar flow values at the local level, namely hot or cold spots of flows. to extract the local flow pattern for each day of the period, a robust flow clustering method, flowamoeba (tao and thill, 2018) , was adopted. flowamoeba is a data-driven and bottom-up spatial statistic method for identifying spatial flow clusters 2 there are two possibilities to address such a limitation. the first approach is to validate and update the outcomes based on other data sources, such as the land use data. the second approach is to improve the calculation formula by introducing a weight factor, such as area size of the facilities. z. chen, et al. computers, environment and urban systems 83 (2020) 101520 of high or low-value flows with irregular shapes, for the grouping of origin and destination locations. the method extends the classical spatial clustering method amoeba (aldstadt and getis, 2006) to allow areal data to work with flow data by properly defining spatial flow neighborhoods, as previously described.to identify flow clusters, the algorithm starts from an arbitrary seed flow and attempts to iteratively expand the cluster towards neighboring flows with the aim of maximizing or minimizing the local g i * statistic (getis and ord, 1992; ord and getis, 1995) , defined as follows:in this study, we set the spatial weight w ij equal to 1 if flow j neighbors flow i, and 0 otherwise. n is the total number of flows, x j is the value of flow j, and x is the mean value of all flows. with the identified flow clusters from all predetermined seeds, they are sorted by their absolute g i * values. the ones with the highest values without any spatial overlaps were preserved. finally, monte-carlo simulations were carried out to select the flow clusters that pass statistical significance tests as the final results.once the local flow clustering patterns were extracted for every day, how to compare the clustering patterns on a daily basis became a challenge. as the local flow clustering patterns for each day are represented by a set of flow clusters, with each cluster including a number of flows, it is a nontrivial task to compare the structures of two or more clustering patterns. although simple statistics of each flow clustering pattern can be generated for a preliminary comparison, such as the number of clusters, min/max flow volume for single flow clusters, and total and mean flow volume for all clusters, there is a lack of measures that compare the spatial distribution of flow clusters for clustering patterns. all existing measures of clustering comparison assume the same set of data, based on which two clustering patterns are compared (meil, 2007) . however, local flow clustering patterns extracted for different days in our study are from different data sets. specifically, denote f i, j d as the flow from location i to j for the date d (i, j  l; dd; l is the set of locations in the study area and d is the set of dates for the period in this study) and f d is the set of flows for date d. then, we have:after applying flowamoeba to f d , a set of local flow clusters p d  f d was extracted, where p d is a subset of f d . therefore, for two flow patterns p a and p b for two dates respectively, they may include the same or different set of flows, which could violate the above assumption of existing measures. to remedy this issue, a global preservation ratio (gpr) was for the first time developed to measure the general similarity of two patterns following the idea of the jaccard index (ben-hur et al., 2001) , which is known as the intersection over union of two sets of flows.where | * | =  i  j f i, j d , f i, j d  * , * is a set of flows. then, the similarity of the two patterns needed to be further examined at the individual cluster level, but only within the intersection set of the two patterns i ab = p a  p b . hence, given p a and p b , the intersection set i ab can be represented as two partitions, namely {p 1 , p 2 , , p k , } based on p a and {q 1 , q 2 , , q l , } based on p b , respectively. inspired by the variation of information (vi) measure (meil, 2007) , a local preservation ratio can be defined as:where the first item similar to vi, lpr is weighted by the local density of the overlap between any two clusters from different partitions, representing the importance of the similarity of two clusters at the local level. unlike vi, which uses an information-entropy-based distance measure as the second item, lpr measures the local similarity based on the set theory which is consistent with that of gpr. furthermore, it allows the values of gpr and lpr to be more straightforward and interpretable, as they are naturally bounded between 0 and 1. however, vi needs to be normalized to achieve this. consequently, it enables the combination of the gpr and lpr as a total preservation ratio (tpr), which can be formulated as:= tpr gpr lpr (7) table 3 shows the general g statistic as an indicator of the global flow pattern of spatial association for each day in the study period. it indicates that only six days (11th, 19th, 20th, 21st, 22nd , and 23rd of september) exhibited a significant global spatial concentration of highvolume human mobility flows. for the rest of the dates, the spatial distribution of human mobility flows seemed to follow a random pattern. for the day of disruption (16th), it does not show a distinct pattern from those of the adjacent days.as discussed before, indicators for the global pattern of spatial association cannot reflect spatial clustering at the local level. flowamoeba is applied to extract local clusters of high-volume flows for each day in the study period. the same method settings are used for consistency, such as the significance level (99%) and number of permutations (1000). fig. 5 displays daily variations of local flow clusters generated from the analysis. the visualization of flow clusters provides a straightforward approach to understanding the spatial distribution of urban flow clusters and its evolution over time. the comparison of daily flow clusters reveals that the flow clusters of human mobility on september 16th did exhibit distinct characteristics from other days, as both the number of clusters and the flow volume were reduced significantly due to the disruption from typhoon mangkhut.to further compare the spatial distribution of local flow clusters on different days, preservation ratios were computed for the local flow patterns of two consecutive days (fig. 6) to reflect the temporal z. chen, et al. computers, environment and urban systems 83 (2020) 101520 changes. two disruptions are identified in fig. 6 . the first is around the 15th and 16th, where low values of all three preservation ratios indicate a dissimilarity in patterns between the 15th and 16th and the 16th and 17th. in other words, the spatial distribution and clustering of human mobility flows on 16th is significantly different from those for the day before (15th) and the day after (17th). this can reflect a process of normal-disruption-recovery that occurred during the three consecutive days. it should be noted that among the common flows (gpr) identified in the flow clustering between two consecutive days, the local spatial clustering pattern (lpr) is less different between 15th and 16th than the 16th and 17th. this can be attributed to the fact that the 15th and 16th were the weekend and share more commonalities in term of human mobility than with 17th (monday). the second identified disruption was on the 20th, shown by the low preservation ratios between the 19th and 20th. unlike the first disruption, the local spatial flow pattern for the 20th is similar to that for the 21st, which means there is not a recovery on the day after the disruption. this disruption is unexpected, as it is just three days after the recovery from the disruption on the 16th. to further examine the validity and cause of this disruption, a pairwise comparison between the local flow patterns of each day was conducted and the results are presented in the form of a similarity matrix plot (fig. 7) . first, the disruption on the 16th caused by typhoon mangkhut is confirmed. the comparison between gpr and lpr indicates that the dissimilarity lies more in the unshared flows than the grouping of the shared set of flows into clusters. in other words, the disruption from the storm caused many flows to disappear. secondly, the disruption that began on the 20th was also confirmed and this disruption continued for the rest of the study period. it is evidenced by the inter-group pattern differences between flow patterns for the sub-period of the 20th -23rd and those z. chen, et al. computers, environment and urban systems 83 (2020) 101520 for the sub-period of the 10th -19th (excluding the 16th), and by the relatively high similarity between flow patterns within each sub-period. the fairly high similarity between patterns from the 20th -23rd is also reflected by the general g statistics in table 3 , which are more similar to days within this sub-period rather than the days outside of it. experientially, this disruption could be attributed to the fact that the mid-autumn festival was on the 24th, which is one of the most important national holidays for family reunions. to make sure they are able to return to their hometown on that day, people in china usually begin their travels several days earlier, which collectively leads to a large number of human mobility flows towards transportation stations, hubs, and ports, thus leading to distinctly different flow patterns from normal days. table 4 provides a summary of the flow change by urban function during typhoon mangkhut based on the entire observations of flow. specifically, table 4(a) summarizes the percent change of urban flow from one type of urban function to another one on the first day (sep 16, 2018) . the percent change was calculated by comparing the corresponding day of a week either before or after the typhoon event. it is clear that the occurrence of typhoon mangkhut had a substantial impact on urban flow in shenzhen, as volume was reduced by an average of 60.8% on the first day of the storm. the most affected functions include commercial, recreational, and transport-related flows. conversely, the flows with either an institutional or industrial-related origin/destination were found to have a relatively lower average reduction on the first day of the event.table 4(b) summarizes the change in urban flow by function in the second day of the typhoon event. it is evident that the level of disruption on the second day is much lower than the first day, as only 11.1% of the flows were reduced. similarly, flows that either originated or ended at recreational areas such as parks, museums, and scenic sites were found to have experienced relatively higher decreases than other function categories. conversely, flows that involve a function such as institutional and residential were found to have a much lower decrease. such results confirm that during extreme weather or disaster events, flows related to fundamental urban functions such as businesses, manufacturing, education, hospitals, and media agencies tend to experience a relatively lower level of disruption, whereas flows that involve leisure and recreational functions are more likely to experience a fig. 6 . variation of the preservation ratios, gpr, lpr, and tpr, over time. fig. 7 . correlation matrix of daily spatial cluster patterns based on preservation ratios. z. chen, et al. computers, environment and urban systems 83 (2020) 101520 to test the consistency of the research findings, table 5 summarizes urban flow change by function based on a comparison of the average flow volume before, during, and after the typhoon based on a different formula. specifically, the change in flow by function presented in table 5 (a) was calculated based on the difference of the average flow volume change between the period of "during the typhoon" (september 16-17) and "before the typhoon" (september 10-15). this calculation has the advantage of smoothing out the temporal variation caused by different days of the week. hence, the pattern is likely to be more reliable and consistent than the pattern revealed in the daily flow comparison. the overall impact of typhoon mangkhut on urban human flows was found to be 39%, suggesting that during the two days the storm was present, approximately 39% of urban flows in shenzhen were reduced.in terms of the comparison by function of flow, the results were found to be more consistent among different categories of functions. for instance, the flows with destinations at commerce and recreation-related locations, such as restaurants, hotels, shopping centers, and parks, generally experienced a reduction in average flow volume by 40%, whereas the reduction was relatively lesser for fundamental functions such as industry and residential.table 5(b) calculates the recovery of urban human flows by various functions after the typhoon event. the calculation was conducted using differences in the average flow during and after the duration of the storm. in general, the results show that 56% of urban flows were recovered during the period immediately after the typhoon's departure. again, leisure and recreation-related flows experienced the highest level of change. the flows related to commercial and transportation purposes also experienced a relatively high level of recovery (given that 59% of flows were recovered after the disruptive event). conversely, the categories of flow with fundamental functions, such as business and residence experienced a relatively low magnitude of change.the variations in urban flow by different functions was also examined with a focus on major clusters. these clusters were identified using the flowamoeba method. in total, the identified clusters account for 4.4% of the total observed flows. one should note that the understanding of the spatial-temporal variation of flow clusters have important implications, given that flow clusters generally represent spatial distributional patterns of major urban human activities. if we assume the regions or areas with the highest volume of urban flows would deserve more attention under disruptive events, the analysis outlined in this study would be helpful to identify those locations easily and thus provide with more targeted guidance for emergency response and management. following a similar approach, the change in flow clusters by different functions was calculated based on the various days of the typhoon. as shown in tables 6 (a) and 6(b), around 90% of the flow clusters were reduced on the first day of the event as compared with the corresponding day in a normal circumstance, whereas only 19% of the flow clusters were reduced on the second day of the event. although most flow clusters by different functions experience a negative change, one should note that counterintuitive outcomes, such as a positive change in certain flow clusters during the storm, were also observed. this may be partially due to the relatively small number of observations in the case of cluster calculation. such an outcome may also be due to the specific pattern of the selected reference day.in the era of smart cities, the massive adoption of sensor-based ict technology and open lbs platforms have generated a large volume and variety of spatial data at an unprecedented rapid pace. these data provide urban planners and analysts with new sources to better understand challenging issues pertaining to resilience and sustainability. this study evaluates the impact of extreme weather events on urban human flow using location-based big data from baidu map. using typhoon mangkhut as an example, the spatiotemporal and functional variations of urban human flow in shenzhen are examined using various methods, including gis and spatial flow analysis methods. to our limited knowledge, this is the first application using both flow data and poi data to examine the impact of extreme weather events on human flow changes, with a comparison of various urban functions.the study revealed that urban flows have been impacted substantially not only in volume but also in terms of their spatial and functional patterns during the typhoon event. in terms of the temporal variation, our analysis reveals that urban flows were found to have reduced by 39% during the disruption. conversely, 56% of flows increased immediately after the disruption. in terms of spatial pattern, the disruptive weather event has caused a significant change of local spatial clustering of mobility flows. in addition, one noteworthy pattern after the landfall of the typhoon was also identified. during september 20 and 23, spatial flow patterns of both global spatial association and local spatial clustering are found to be dramatically different from that of other days, which suggests that there could be a different event rather than underlying typhoon mangkhut. as discussed earlier, in this case, the pattern may reflect a different pattern of mobility which may be caused by the increased amount of family reunion trips for the mid-autumn festival (sep 24). in short, our analysis provides a novel approach to evaluate the impacts of various disruptions on urban mobility through coupling flow clustering methods (e.g., flowamoeba) with the new developed measure of pattern comparison. such an approach enables us to effectively quantify the dynamic change of spatial clustering patterns of urban mobility and other flow-based geographic phenomena, which was lacking in the existing gis toolboxes.in terms of functional variation, the assessment revealed that fundamental urban functions such as industrial (work) and institutional (education) related trips experienced less disruption, whereas recreational related trips tend to receive a relatively larger influence by the typhoon event. overall, the research findings confirm that there is a strong connection between urban flow and urban function. the result is consistent with previous studies in terms of the relationship between urban flow and urban functions (calabrese et al., 2010; lee and holme, 2015; pan et al., 2012; yang et al., 2019; yuan et al., 2012; zhang et al., 2017) . one should note that most of these previous studies attempted to reveal the linkage of human mobility with urban function in normal conditions.our study, on the contrary, extends the assessment from the literature with a focus on examining the variations of human mobility in different urban functions under abnormal condition. we believe such an extension is important as it would help us recognize to what extent the urban flow is disrupted due to unexpected events, which hence may provide important implications for planners and policy makers to enhance urban disaster resilience through a better understanding of urban vulnerability to various types of unexpected events, such as extreme weather events and contagious disease outbreaks.for instance, the lbs data and method developed in this study can be used to evaluate the effectiveness of flow mobility by different urban functions under a disruptive event, such as typhoon and flood event. the outcome of these assessments would provide evidence and support to allocate resources to restrict human activities and guarantee the safety of human mobility. in addition, the analysis will also have a potential to be applied for the evaluation and a temporary restriction of flow movement in the case of human pandemic, such as the recent outbreak of the 2019 novel coronavirus occurred in china. with the capability of lbs data and analytical framework developed in this study, human urban flow could be adopted as a gis visualization system to assist first responders to achieve dynamic monitoring, tracking and assessing the human flow capacity of the urban infrastructure systems. this may eventually facilitate the development of more targeted emergency planning strategies that will enhance urban resilience to various types of unexpected events in the future.one should note that our study also has several limitations. first, the research outcomes can be sensitive to the data used. for instance, the different results found through the comparison of the functional patterns of flow clusters to the total population suggest that it would be better to adopt a more representative lbs data, in order to reveal a more reliable calculation outcome in future analyses. in addition, the poi data used in this study is mainly pertinent to commercial activities and lacks adequate points for activities such as recreation, which may cause bias when classifying land functions, regardless of the fact that poi data is able to reflect the vitality of a city. furthermore, a lack of assigned weights on poi data could lead to biased identification of the major urban functions in each block area. hence, it would be worthwhile adopting different resources, such as both pois and urban land use maps, in order to generate a more accurate representation of urban functions by different unit areas.one should also note that the comparative framework could also be improved in several aspects in future research. for instance, the results would be more reliable if a longer-term data is adopted for a temporal comparison of flow changes. in addition, the accuracy of the analysis could be further improved if the data at hourly intervals could be utilized. this would help to separate the influences of other factors, such as weekly temporal effects or the effects of other special holiday events, which hence may provide more useful information for planning practice and emergency response.thirdly, although for a demonstration purpose, our assessment focuses on a single city of evaluation, the study could be also expanded to other cities and/or for different disruptive events. for instance, it would be interesting to compare to what extent the responses of urban flow vary among various cities with different urban spatial structure. such an assessment could be further linked to economic impact analysis for an evaluation of the effectiveness of the existing urban spatial structure under both normal and abnormal situations. these multidimensional assessments would enable us to gain a more comprehensive understanding of both social and economic impacts of disruptive events as a result of interruptions of urban flow activities.all the authors approved the final version of the manuscript to be submitted to computers, environment and urban systems.covid-19 continues to wreak more havoc globally [1] , [2] . as the number of infections keep surging high, deaths continue to increase at no small rate, active cases continue to scare the world [3] , and a possible vaccine invention seems to be several months (if not years) away from now (though we do not lack the expertise, the technology and funding for such an expedition), and its treatment the world is quite unsure, leaving us all in horrendous fear. this pandemic has touched everything and activity in this world and has sent the world experts in health and data science to work to find possible solutions to this pandemic, while the experts in economics and policy makers have concerned themselves with the alleviation of the impact of covid-19 on their nations' economy, its people and their businesses.researchers have investigated the role of pre-existing conditions such as aging, hypertension, etc. on covid-19 deaths [4] , [5] , environmental factors that influences covid-19 deaths [5] , [6] and the role of climate on covid-19 related deaths and new confirmed cases [7] , [8] .the relationships between climate and infectious diseases have long been established as seasonal variations and climate sensitivities are well known to explain some variability in many infectious diseases. statistical, process-based, and landscape models are the key categories of models for the estimation of potential climate effects on infectious diseases. these three model categories tackle very different problems. statistical models for instance, require that the relationship between the current geographic spread of the disease and actual localized climatespecific conditions be inferred empirically [9] .hitherto, there have been the confirmations that ultraviolet light has a sterilizing effect, because the radiation damages the virus's genetic material and its ability to replicate [10] , [11] . this was first put out by [10] , whose findings informed us that temperature and irradiance of covid-19 will decide the trajectory of the pandemic at warmer regions as well as whether rising temperatures will change direction and have consequences on public health policy. they also showed that case and death counts at higher temperatures (>14 c) when aligned for the epidemic stage had significantly lower rates of growth. however, according to [8] , in warmweather locations such as singapore, malaysia, and thailand, covid-19 have also proven lethal and pose wider concerns on the environmental factors. [12] studied the association between temperature and number of new infections in 122 cities in china and made some important revelations including the fact that temperature less than 3 c was positively linked to newly confirmed covid-19 cases. another work done by [13] on the "role of temperature and humidity in the modulation of the doubling time of covid-19 cases" affirms what was revealed by [12] and [10] . their conclusion was that, temperature and humidity explain a total of 18% variability in the disease doubling time while the rest (82%) may be attributed to containment initiatives, general health policies, population growth, and transport or cultural aspects.in this study, we investigate the role of climate and specific government policy of partial lockdown in determining the number of new infections or confirmed cases in ghana and to predict the future occurrences of this outbreak in the country. [14] - [16] studied the effects of lockdown on the number of new confirmed cases and/or on deaths. all of which revealed that lockdown serves an important intervention for preventing and minimizing the impact of an outbreak. searching through literature, it appears ghana at the moment does not have a statistical model that could predict future occurrences of new confirmed cases of covid-19. to that extent, this study is novel.the study covers the whole of ghana. figure 1 is a map of the study area indicating the cumulative confirmed cases in each region as of april 25, 2020. daily data on new cases of covid-19 from march 13, 2020 to april 21, 2020 were obtained from the official website of our world in data (owid) dedicated to covid-19 (https://ourworldindata.org/coronavirus-source-data).on the other hand, daily satellite climate data covering the same study period on maximum temperature, humidity, precipitation and maximum wind speed were obtained from the official website of the national aeronautics and space administration's (nasa's) prediction of worldwide energy resources (power) project (https://power.larc.nasa.gov/data-accessviewer/).to model the daily confirmed cases of covid-19 in ghana, which is a count variable, the generalized linear model (glm) framework for time series of counts by [17] was adopted. these are models whose conditional mean of the response variable depends on previous observations of covariates and on its own previous values.denote the new cases of covid-19 by {   }, and denote by {   } a timevarying -dimensional covariate vector, say =  ,1 , . . . , ,   . the conditional mean ( | 1 ) of the new cases is modeled by a process, say { :  }, such that ( | 1 ) =  . denote by  the history of the joint process { , , +1   } up to time including the covariate information at time + 1. the general form of the model of interest developed by [17] is given in equation (1).where   +   is a link function and    0   is a transformational function. the parameter vector = ( 1 ,  , )  corresponds to the effects of covariates. to allow for regression on arbitrary past observations of the response, define a set =  1 , 2 ,  ,  and integers 0 < 1 < 2  < < , with   0 . this enables regression on the lagged observations  1 ,  2 ,  ,  . parameters of the autocorrelation terms are represented by   and .the effect of government policy intervention such as the partial lockdown of the two largest cities in ghana (accra and kumasi) and their environs on the daily confirmed cases of covid-19 was analyzed using methods to test for such intervention effects developed by [18] , [19] . these methods employ an approximate score test which has asymptotically a 2 distribution, assuming some regularity conditions [19] . data analysis and model fitting was done in r [20] using the "tscount" package [21] .descriptive statistics for the daily confirmed cases of covid-19 and weather variables in ghana are presented in table 1 . as of april 21, 2020 ghana had recorded a total of 1,040 cases of covid-19 and an average of about 26.72 new cases every day. regarding the weather variables, average daily maximum temperature, precipitation, humidity and maximum wind speed were 34.4c, 2.56mm, 68.99% and 3.33m/s respectively. figure 2 shows time series of daily new cases of covid-19, maximum temperature, precipitation, humidity and maximum wind speed. the plot is an excellent way to begin comprehending the sort of process that produced the data and the relationships that exists therein. it is observed from the plot that neither the daily confirmed cases of covid-19 nor the weather variables show any trend. correlations between the weather variables and confirmed cases of covid-19 are shown in figure 3 . while the new cases of covid-19 correlated negatively with maximum temperature and humidity, it rather correlated positively with precipitation and maximum wind. this means that increasing maximum temperature and humidity results in decreasing new cases of covid-19 whereas increasing precipitation and maximum wind results in increasing new cases of covid-19. among the weather variables, weak correlations were observed.estimates of the model parameters are presented in it is observed from table 2 that the 95% confidence interval for the estimated coefficient corresponding to the first order autocorrelation (beta_1) does not contain zero, indicating a clear dependence of confirmed covid-19 cases on the number of new cases of the preceding day. it is also observed that three of the weather variables considered (maximum temperature, precipitation and relative humidity) were significant predictors of the number of new cases of covid-19. however, maximum wind speed was not a significant predictor of the confirmed cases of covid-19. the linear trend was also found to be significant. the model diagnostics are presented in figure 4 . autocorrelation function of residuals, shown in figure 4 (top left), does not exhibit any serial correlation or seasonality which has not been taken into account by the model. figure 4 (bottom left) points to a probability integral transform (pit) histogram which appears to approach uniformity. figure 4 (top right) indicates the overall behavior of the data set. figure 4 time series of the actual daily new cases of covid-19 used for model fitting and predicted cases based on the fitted model are shown in figure 5 . it is observed that the overall trend of the two curves is similar, and the values themselves are very close in some cases. this is an indication of a good model.here, we test whether there was an abrupt shift in the number of new cases of covid-19 occurring when the partial lockdown was introduced on march 30, 2020. the approximate score test was applied. with a p-value of 0.0164 (table 3) , the null hypothesis of no significant effect of the specific policy intervention of partial lockdown is rejected at a 5% significance level. hence, partial lockdown of the two largest cities and their environs in ghana significantly influenced the daily confirmed cases of covid-19. in this study, we explored the possible effects of weather and government policy intervention on the daily confirmed cases of covid-19. specifically, the study considered the policy of partial lockdown of the two major cities (accra and kumasi) and their environs. the generalized linear model (glm) framework for time series of counts by [17] was adopted for model fitting and analysis, which allows for regressing on past observations of the response variable and covariates.the results indicated that daily confirmed cases of covid-19 in ghana correlated negatively with maximum temperature and relative humidity. previous studies on sars-cov and mers-cov also highlighted temperature as an important factor in the survival and transmission of such coronaviruses [22] - [26] .recent studies have also underscored the importance of weather on the transmission of covid-19 in particular. for instance, using a modified susceptible-exposed-infectious-recovered (m-seir) model, [27] confirmed that transmission rate decreased with the increase of temperature, leading to further decrease of infection rate and outbreak scale in 31 provincial-level regions in mainland china. [28] also in a study suggested that for northern hemisphere countries, the rate of transmission of covid-19 cases would significantly decrease as a result of warmer weather. [29] in a study stated that local weather condition with low temperature, mild diurnal temperature range and low humidity likely favor the transmission of covid-19 cases in china. [30] in a study, analyzed the association between covid-19 and climate indicators in new york city, usa. the authors used a secondary published data from new york city health services and national weather service, usa. the climate indicators included in the study were average temperature, minimum temperature, maximum temperature, rainfall, average humidity, wind speed, and air quality. using kendall and spearman rank correlation tests for the data analysis, [30] suggested that that average temperature, minimum temperature, and air quality were significantly associated with covid-19. finally, using a global data on covid-19 reported cases until 29th february 2020 and climate temperature data, [31] suggested that higher average temperature was strongly associated with lower covid-19 incidence for temperatures of 1c and higher.our results further indicated the significance of maximum temperature, relative humidity and precipitation in predicting daily confirmed cases of covid-19 in ghana. this is consistent with the results of [32] , who implemented a restricted cubic spline function and generalized linear mixture model to analyze the relationships between temperature and covid-19 transmission in 429 cities in the world and suggested that to a certain extent, temperature could significantly change covid-19 transmission, and there might be a best temperature for the viral transmission, which may partly explain why it first broke out in wuhan, china. [33] also investigated the influence of air temperature and relative humidity on the transmission of covid-19 in 100 chinese cities and suggested that, under a linear regression framework, high temperature and high humidity significantly reduce the transmission of covid-19.additionally, results of the intervention analysis conducted in this study indicated that the null hypothesis of no significant effect of the specific policy intervention of partial lockdown should be rejected (p-value=0.0164) at a 5% level of significance. this finding underscores the significance of the partial lockdown of the two largest cities (accra and kumasi) and their environs in controlling the spread of the disease in ghana. a number of studies [14] - [16] have been conducted on the effects of lockdown on the number of new confirmed cases and/or on deaths. all of which reveal that lockdown serves an important intervention for preventing and minimizing the impact of an outbreak.in this paper, we investigated the effects of weather and government policy intervention on the daily confirmed cases of covid-19 in ghana. the results indicated that while daily confirmed cases of covid-19 correlated negatively with maximum temperature and humidity, it rather correlated positively with precipitation and maximum wind. also, maximum temperature, humidity and precipitation were significant predictors of daily confirmed cases of covid-19 in ghana. furthermore, results of the intervention analysis revealed that the specific government policy of partial lockdown of the two largest cities (accra and kumasi) and their surroundings significantly influenced the daily confirmed cases of covid-19, which provides useful implications for policy makers and the public. for instance, knowing that precipitation and the daily confirmed cases of covid-19 are positively correlated could help public health responses by informing key preparations as we move into the rainy season.outbreaks such as those caused by the severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus (sars cov), the influenza a(h1n1)pdm09 pandemic of 2009, and more recently the middle east respiratory syndrome coronavirus (mers-cov), ebola virus and zika virus have demonstrated the high potential risk of emerging and re-emerging infectious diseases to spread within and between countries [1] [2] [3] [4] [5] . these in turn cause increasing challenges for public health systems, including the increasing burden of infectious disease, and the need to build a surveillance and response system that is able to identify newly emerging disease rapidly, both regionally and internationally which calls for international collaboration, and the need for drug and vaccine research and production [6] [7] [8] . while the response to endemic diseases may be less urgent, the burden caused by pathogens such as influenza or malaria is high [9] [10] [11] , and due to their endemicity, many countries have long standing surveillance systems to track outbreaks and guide response, from vector control to hospital bed utilization [12] [13] [14] [15] . early warning systems aiming to predict epidemics as soon as possible can allow control methods to be carried out rapidly and increase their chance of success [16, 17] . to do so, decision makers need to be able to make accurate forecasts of incidence and to automate this forecasting process based on routinely collected notification data [18] . if accurate forecasts were available in both the near and far future, effective policies could then be targeted to the expected future needs. existing approaches to real-time forecasting include generalized linear regression, seasonal autoregressive integrated moving average (sarima) model or a simpler arima form of it, phenomenological models like the logistic growth model and richards model, and mechanistic models like the sir models [19] [20] [21] [22] [23] [24] . often such approaches involve the challenge of integrating environmental factors including temperature, humidity and rainfall, which may influence pathogen transmission directly or affect the vector activities (for vector borne diseases), especially in temperate regions [25] [26] [27] [28] [29] . for instance, influenza virus is more transmissible in low temperature and low humidity conditions [30, 31] , while the primary vector of dengue, the yellow fever mosquito aedes aegypti, favors higher temperature [32, 33] . the availability of real time data-streams on seasonal variation and climatic variability therefore holds the potential to lead to more accurate prediction algorithms, potentially improving public health response.least absolute shrinkage and selection operator (lasso) regression is a machine learning method that can find patterns within large datasets while avoiding the problem of over-fitting [34] . estimation and variable selection are simultaneously carried out using the lasso method, and as such it is commonly used in studies in fields with large numbers of explanatory variables to reduce the variable space. this algorithm trades off model accuracy with model parsimony by introducing a penalty term into the objective function (which in standard linear regression is the sum of squares of residuals). the penalty term can, for linear regression models, be made equivalent to a constraint on the sum of the absolute parameter coefficients. this constraint imposed by lasso regression has the effect of shrinking some estimated coefficients towards zero, which may help reduce biases caused by separation in some forms of regression [35] , while simultaneously producing some parameter estimates that are exactly 0, so that the covariate associated with this coefficient is not associated with the outcome variable in that model. the optimal balance between model accuracy and complexity is typically obtained through cross-validation: repeatedly partitioning the data into training and validation sets, varying the degree of penalty, optimizing the regression parameters for each penalty value, then selecting the penalty that minimizes out of sample predictive accuracy. computationally efficient methods to explore the penalty and parameter space exist [36] , making it feasible to use lasso as part of a 'real-time' forecasting pipeline for routinely collected health data such as infectious disease notifications. this computational speed allows the forecasting to adapt to changes in the underlying disease dynamics by permitting refitting of the model each time new data are reported, which may be important for diseases in which the severity changes between outbreaks, such as influenza [37] . forecasts at different time horizons can be obtained through splicing together separate lasso models, each trained on the data available at the time of the forecast, but tailored to predict at different windows into the future.the lasso method has previously been used in dengue outbreak prediction in singapore, where it is now routinely used to guide vector control policy [38] . the objective of this paper is to apply the lasso method to infectious disease forecasting and assess more generally in which situations lasso models will provide useful forecasts. unlike conventional use of the lasso method to variable selection, the primary interest of our application of the lasso-based method on infectious disease data is to make forecast of incidences in the future, rather than to identify the potential risk factors to explain the epidemics of these infectious diseases.in particular, we assess for diseases with different transmission modalities, in different climatic zones, how accurate short to medium time forecasts can be, and what data streams are necessary for accurate forecasts. we apply the method to four countries from different latitudes-japan, taiwan, thailand and singapore-to cover temperate, sub-tropical and tropical settings.four representative countries with distinct climates were selected for analysis based on kppen-geiger climate classification [39] -japan with humid continental and subtropical climate; taiwan with humid subtropical and oceanic climate; thailand with tropical wet and savannah climate and singapore with tropical rainforest climate. four representative infectious diseases were included in the study: two mosquito-borne infections (dengue and malaria) and two infections that spread from person to person (hand foot and mouth disease (hfmd) and chickenpox). for all four pathogens, a relationship has previously been found between incidence and climatic variables [40] [41] [42] or for there to be a seasonality to incidence [43] . not all four pathogens were considered for each country: some are not present in each country while others are not captured in routine infectious disease surveillance systems.the notified numbers of chickenpox, hfmd cases in japan were collected by the national institute of infectious diseases (niid) [44] . both were reported as average cases per week per sentinel reporting, to accommodate varying reporting rates. we extracted weekly data from 2001 to 2012.monthly reported cases of chickenpox, dengue, and malaria in thailand for the period 2003-2013 were obtained from the bureau of epidemiology, department of disease control, ministry of public health, thailand [45] . the number of incident cases were collected from government hospitals, public health offices and health centers by the national disease surveillance [46] and were reported online.ministry of health, singapore, actively monitors and publishes the incidence of dengue and hfmd in singapore, both being notifiable diseases. weekly number of incidences for the period 2003 and 2014 were obtained from the weekly infectious diseases bulletin [47] .weekly number of dengue cases from 2003 to 2014 were extracted from taiwan national infectious disease statistics system [48] . both indigenous and imported cases were included in the count.epidemiological week as per us centers for disease control and prevention was used in our analysis using the epiweek package in r [49] .climatic data for taiwan, thailand and singapore were obtained from the weather underground [50] which documented among other variables, historical temperature, humidity, sea level pressure, and visibility. only temperature (daily highest, average and lowest) and relative humidity (daily highest, average and lowest) were used in our models due to insufficient historical data of other climatic variables. climatic data for japan were obtained from the japan meteorological agency [51] , which provides and archives various weather information. weekly mean temperature, relative humidity and rainfall information were used in our model. for all locations, the weather data at the capital (tokyo, taipei, bangkok and singapore) was used to represent overall national weather.wavelet analyses were done to explore periodicity of all endemic diseases and climatic variables in four countries. the wavelet approach was based on a wavelet function which analyses locality in time and frequency [52] . wavelet transformation (w s ( ) t ) as the convolution of the time series x t with morlet function   ( ) 0 at scale s was conducted: least absolute shrinkage and selection operator (lasso) regression [34] is used for the prediction models. as incidence data were generally right skewed and with increased stochasticity during epidemics, we controlled for skewness and heteroscedasticity by logtransforming (after adding one to) the observed number of cases for all analyses, or mean number of cases per sentinel for japan.we build separate lasso models for each disease, in each country, and for each forecast window based on similar sets of candidate predictors (adapting the approach used in ref. [38] ). each candidate predictor appeared several times in each model, at different historical lags. to allow for contagion and typical epidemic duration, we used past incidence of up to a half year (26 weeks for japan, taiwan and singapore; 6 months for thailand) as autocovariates. we accommodated non-linearities in the relationship between past and future incidence by using the quadratic of past incidence (again, up to one half year in the past) as a potential covariate; the inclusion of additional polynomial terms did not improve the results and hence were omitted. we used climatic variables (minimum, maximum and average temperature, humidity and rainfall) of up to 4 weeks (one month for thailand). we also used a month indicator that associated each epidemiological week with a single calendar month to represent potential seasonal variation beyond those governed by the climatic data. wavelet transformations of the covariates and outcomes were not used, to ensure that only data available at the time of the forecast were used to make the forecast.for each forecast window (from = k 1 time unit to 6, for thailand (the data being monthly) or 26, for japan, taiwan and singapore (weekly)), a separate lasso model was developed which used data available at the time of the forecast only. the selection of the time window was dependent on the resolution of notification data for each disease. each lasso model is as follows:where y t is the log number of cases at time t, y t 2 the square of the log number of cases at time t, c t the climatic variable at time t, and jan t , feb t , , dec t are indicator variables for the month at time t. this was subject to the constraint the p and penalty term  have a one-to-one correspondence in lasso, which can equivalently be formulated as a constraint to the total absolute size of the parameters, or as a penalty to the log-likelihood determined by their total absolute size. the choice of the optimal p in this study was based on ten-fold cross validation for that dataset (country, disease, forecast length combination). ten-fold cross validation was carried out by partitioning the total data set into 10 approximately equal-sized subsamples. each subsample was used in turn as the validation set while the rest were used as the training set, the performance was measured through the mean squared error (of the difference between the forecast and the data) on each validation set and averaged over the ten folds. the constraint (or equivalently, penalty term) that optimized the out of sample performance was then used to refit the model and make projections. in this way, the optimal complexity of the model-from the perspective of out of sample prediction-can be determined via the constraint. we developed both (a) 'real time' forecasts, in which both the parameters and the predictions were regenerated based on available data at that time, and (b) one set of 'retrospective' forecasts, which used the last of the real time forecasts, to summarize effects of covariates.following standard practice, covariates were z-scored prior to estimation and the coefficients rescaled afterwards.as the models were built separately for each forecast window, the variables selected and their lags and parameter magnitude and sign may differ substantially.eight models with different combination of predictor types were used for each disease/country/forecast length to assess the importance of including each datastream in the predictive algorithm. details of the components in each model are shown in table 1 .to assess prediction accuracy of the models, we made out-of-sample forecasts and compared with data observed. for each time point and each prediction window, a 95% projection interval-which we define here as an interval derived from the best fitting model with random errors overlaid, but excluding parametric uncertainty-was derived and the percentage of such intervals successfully capturing the actual value was calculated.to assess if the prediction models were able to detect early signs of elevated levels of transmission-which we defined to be time windows (weeks or months) in which the number of cases is more than the 75th percentile of what has been observed in the preceding year-we calculated the fraction of predictions in which the projection correctly classified the data as being above or below that threshold. this was calculated separately for each length of forecast window. an accuracy of 75% is expected for a poorly predictive model. one-sided binomial tests were done to all prediction windows and those that significantly identify the early signs at an accuracy of more than 75% were identified.prediction accuracy was measured by the mean absolute percentage error (mape), root mean squared error (rmse), and r-squared, for each forecast window. relative prediction error as compared to the simplest incidence only model at all forecast windows was calculated to assess model complexity and accuracy. all statistical analysis were performed using r statistical software [55] .climatic and incidence patterns of the diseases are presented in fig. 1 . four representative diseases were shown in this figure (others are presented in supplementary figs. 1-4) . at further distances from the equator, temperature and humidity show more obvious annual cycles, and there is concomitantly more cyclicity in disease incidence, as indicated in the power spectra illustrated in fig. 2 . power spectra of average temperature and humidity are presented in supplementary figs. 5 and 6. temperature in all countries has a period of one year but the cyclic effect is more marked in temperate and subtropical regions, table 1 sets of predictors in different models.incidence squared incidence climatic variables monthly effect [16] [17] [18] [19] [20] [21] [22] [23] [24] [25] [26] [27] [28] [29] [30] and less so in equatorial singapore. average humidity displays one-year cycle in temperate and subtropical regions, but again not singapore, although the effect is not as obvious as with average temperature. although in temperate regions, there is an apparent synchronicity between incidence and climatic factors, in tropical regions like equatorial singapore, there was little variation in either temperature or humidity, and similarly no observed cycle of disease incidence. in addition, there was no correlation observable between cases and climate, either in incidence itself or the change in incidence (reflecting transmissibility). fig. 3 shows the actual incidences as well as forecasts at four prediction points for the four diseases presented in fig. 1 (predictions at other time points/diseases are presented in supplementary videos 1-8) using the model with all variable sets. at each time point, up to six month ahead predictions are shown in the figure, using data available at the time the prediction was made. the number of variables from each category that were selected by our lasso models are presented in supplementary fig. 7 and the effect size of each climatic variable at different lags for all forecast windows are shown in supplementary  fig. 8 . generally, the 95% projection interval of the forecast captured the actual scenario more than 80% of the time, indicating slight undercoverage. coverage rates for the full models are tabulated in table 2 . mape for full models at all prediction windows are shown in table 3 . rmse and r-squared values for full models are included in supplementary tables 1 and 2 . for most diseases, predictions made beyond 4 weeks ahead were increasingly discrepant from the actual scenario. predicted cases against actual cases at 1 week, 2 weeks, 4 weeks and 8 weeks for all prediction period for all diseases were plotted in fig. 4 . for all diseases, as the prediction window gets longer, the magnitude of the error grows, especially for the largest sizes of outbreaks where there is likely to be more stochastic variability. cumulative density functions of the observed time series of all diseases and predicted time series at various forecast windows are shown in fig. 5 : those derived from predictions are generally close to that from the observed time series. short term predictions generally performed better than longer term predictions. table 4 shows the classification accuracy of our prediction models being able to correctly classify one week/month to be an epidemic week/month. a percentage above 75% suggested that the prediction model performed better than a random guess. models that passed the binomial test of having accuracy significantly higher than 75% were marked with the asterisk. predictions for hfmd epidemic were generally accurate even at long prediction windows; for most other diseases, prediction within 5 weeks were above 75%. however, for chickenpox in japan and dengue in singapore, only predictions within 3 and 4 weeks were significantly above 75% from the binomial test. this suggests that the approach can predict the timing of periods of elevated transmission at about one month in advance but that the absolute magnitude is hard to predict accurately, given the larger errors at high levels exhibited in fig. 4 . the trade-off between model complexity and efficiency was assessed by constructing models with different groups of variables and comparing the forecasts based on these models (fig. 6 , an enlarged version is shown in supplementary figs. 9 and 10) . the prediction errors arising from each model were then compared with the simplest incidence only model. a ratio substantially less than 1 shows prediction accuracy increased by including the set(s) of variables. for some diseases like chickenpox in thailand, dropping some variables affected prediction accuracy by a large extent, indicating the importance of including monthly effect to achieve greater accuracy in predictions. for other diseases like dengue in taiwan, dropping the climatic variables had only minimal effect on the accuracy of the predictions, which suggests that the features in those sets are not necessary for routine predictions. panels in the second and fourth columns in fig. 6 showed prediction error for all diseases for different prediction windows. prediction error was quantified by the mean absolute percentage error. in line with our previous observations, as the prediction window gets longer, prediction error increases. more complicated models show less prediction error but the improvements varied by diseases and countries.applying the lasso method to data on recent incidence and climate leads to around 20% or lower prediction error for short term predictions, even for an aseasonal, tropical country like singapore in which the presence of randomness in outbreak occurrence may be strongly felt [56] . most of the variation in incidence was explained by the autoregressive terms as there was no or minimal improvement in forecast accuracy by including more variables other than autoregressive terms in the prediction model shown in fig. 6 . long term predictions were not accurate, even when we include multiple climatic variables as candidate features. we believe this reflects the difficulty in using weather data relating to current conditions to predict disease levels in several months-in contrast, most other analyses use climate data from near the time point being forecast [28, 57] , which is typically not available in real time. hence the utility of predictive analytics for infectious disease policy making is mostly for immediate response over the next few weeks rather than months.this lasso-based method we proposed for forecast provides an insight into the potential utilization of lasso regression outside its usual application in the area of variable selection, for real time forecasting. this approach can readily be automated to run on routinely collected case data, but the accuracy of the prediction is very much dependent on the timeliness at which such data become available. this calls for a comprehensive regional and country level infectious diseases surveillance system, whether using clinician/laboratory driven case notification, or mining of electronic medical records. weather data, in contrast, are widely posted to sources like the weather underground which can be mined in real-time. an example of this in practice can be found in singapore, where the national environment agency has a weekly dengue forecast, as described elsewhere [38] . the lasso model building process involves identifying the model complexity through optimal out of sample predictive performance, and as such it is naturally suited to making forecasts. by fitting separate models at each forecast window, variables whose predictive performance is expressed differently at different lags can be efficiently exploited: this might be particularly beneficial for vector borne diseases in which the effect of weather on transmission is mediated through one or more generations of vectors.in large countries, and in particular those that span multiple latitudes, we anticipate that the accuracy of the predictions will improve if regional information rather than aggregated country-level data streams are used. the aggregation averages the whole country and thus attenuates regional differences in both climate and incidence. future work could assess the impact of disaggregation for countries like japan for which prefectural level data are available.by using past disease incidence and seasonal terms, lasso has many of the characteristics of traditional time series models (e.g. the sar in sarima) which have frequently been used for prediction of infectious disease time series [20, [58] [59] [60] [61] . what is less clear is how to incorporate structural information about outbreak data, such as the typical gaussian incidence curve that is seen in both empirical data [62] and theoretical transmission dynamic models [63] , or the known impact of changing herd immunity levels [64] . this may also help predict atypical outbreaks, such as the 2009 influenza pandemic which occurred in the northern hemisphere's summer [65] , and for which extrapolating approaches like lasso may break down.there are several limitations to this study. regression models, [16] [17] [18] [19] [20] [21] [22] [23] [24] [25] [26] [27] [28] [29] [30] including those built using lasso, may be effective in providing accurate predictions, but differ from traditional epidemic models such as susceptible-infected-removed compartmental models, network models [66] or individual based simulation [67] , which seek to describe the transmission dynamics of contagious diseases, and can therefore be used to predict the effect of interventions or novel scenarios. a further limitation is that, for simplicity, only weather information from the capitals were used in the study, but for countries like japan, thailand and taiwan, there are great variation between climatic conditions in the north and the south. prediction accuracy might improve if [16] [17] [18] [19] [20] [21] [22] [23] [24] [25] [26] [27] [28] [29] [30] incidence and weather information can be collected at a finer resolution. we suspect that even the accuracy of short term forecasts may be reduced should new epidemiological conditions replace those that the model was trained on. examples of this would be the emergence of a new strain or variant, such as an influenza pandemic [68] , more virulent strain of the virus [69] , or a virus moving into a new population [70] . it would also break down in the presence of changing control efforts such as school closure [71] or novel vector control [72] . in such situations, a mechanistic modelling approach [73] may be better able to predict the epidemic dynamics until sufficient training data are available. table 4 percentage of our prediction model correctly classify a predicted future week/month being an epidemic week/month. an epidemic week/month is defined as when the number of cases is more than the 75th percentile of the level in the past year. percentage above 75% is shown bold. models that had significantly higher accuracy than 75% are marked with an asterisk.singapore taiwan regression models using lasso were built to forecast incidence for four endemic diseases in four countries. for some diseases including one set of variables may improve predictive accuracy substantially while for other diseases, the simpler models give similar results as more complex models. for all diseases, short-term prediction were generally much better than longer term predictions, which suggests that public health agencies may need the capacity to respond at short-notice to early warnings of possible infectious disease outbreaks should models based on this approach be implemented routinely.the work was partially supported by the singapore population health improvement centre (spheric), national university health system.none.supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jbi.2018.02.014.la virologa es la parte de la microbiologa cuyo desarrollo ha sido ms tardo respecto a otras reas de conocimiento microbiolgico. su desarrollo se inicia a finales del siglo xix, cuando el botnico de origen ruso dimitri iwanovski observa que la enfermedad denominada mosaico del tabaco era producida por un agente infeccioso, ya que se reproduca al utilizar el fluido que pasaba por los filtros de porcelana utilizados para retener bacterias; sin embargo, no fue posible en ese momento observar o aislar al supuesto microorganismo a partir de plantas enfermas. posteriormente, otro investigador llamado beijerink reprodujo estos experimentos denominando a los agentes infecciosos vivos capaces de atravesar los filtros bacterianos contagium vivum fluidum o virus filtrables.a partir de ese momento, se inicia la investigacin es este campo. en 1901 reed descubre el virus de la fiebre amarilla, el primer virus humano, y en 1909 landsteiner y pope el virus de la poliomielitis. en estos primeros aos del siglo xx, se desarrolla la tcnica de multiplicacin de virus animales en embriones de pollo mediante la cual se consigue cultivar en 1911 el virus del sarcoma aviar. posteriormente, en 1925, se produce la primera visualizacin de un virus al microscopio, inicindose a partir de 1935 los avances ms importantes en el estudio de la composicin y estructura de los virus. desde entonces, la virologa se desarrolla exponencialmente como ciencia1, dando finalmente origen a la moderna biologa molecular.recientemente se han descrito los viroides o presencia de arn infectivos (principalmente en vegetales) y los priones o partculas proteicas aparentemente desprovistas de material gentico capaces de producir enfermedades infectivas en mamferos.los virus son partculas de pequeo tamao formadas por una molcula de cido nucleico, arn o adn, que puede encontrarse en forma monocatenaria o bicatenaria, lineal o circular, cuya funcin es el suministro de la informacin necesara para producir la sntesis de sus propios componentes en la clula husped2. el cido nucleico del virus est cubierto por una cpside proteica de simetra icosadrica o helicoidal, determinada por la disposicin de las subunidades de la cpside o capsmeros, que adems de protegerlo facilita su entrada en la clula husped. el conjunto de cido nucleico y cpside se denomina nucleocpside. puntos clave estructura y morfologa. los virus son partculas de pequeo tamao formadas por una molcula de cido nucleico, arn o adn, cuya funcin es el suministro de la informacin necesaria para producir la sntesis de sus propios componentes en la clula husped. tratamiento. no hay tratamiento especfico para la mayora de las infecciones vricas, por lo que el tratamiento bsico ser el de soporte segn las necesidades de cada cuadro clnico concreto. poxvirus. virus de la viruela, el virus causante del molusco contagioso, el virus de orf y los virus de la vacuna. virus respiratorio sincitial. es el patgeno principal productor de enfermedad respiratoria en la edad peditrica. la transmisin nosocomial de este virus puede ser muy relevante. los cuadros clnicos fundamentales producidos por el virus respiratorio sincitial (vrs) son la bronquiolitis aguda, y la neumona. rinovirus. son la causa de un 30-50% de todas las infecciones agudas del tracto respiratorio. habitualmente produce un cuadro clnico consistente en resfriado comn, poco relevante clnicamente y autolimitado. coronavirus. son los agentes implicados en la produccin del sndrome respiratorio agudo severo o sars. adenovirus. producen fundamentalmente una patologa a nivel respiratorio, siendo causantes del 2-4% del total de las infecciones respiratorias en nios y adultos. enterovirus. se conocen ms de 70 serotipos de enterovirus que pueden ser causa de infecciones severas del sistema nervioso central y del sistema cardiaco, siendo la principal causa vrica de produccin de miopericarditis. rotavirus. es el principal causante de diarrea de origen vrico en edad peditrica, pudiendo tambin afectar a adultos e inmunodeprimidos y producir brotes epidmicos. algunos virus presentan adems una envuelta lipdica externa a la cpside consistente en una membrana lipoproteica que, en ocasiones, presenta adems espculas o proyecciones de naturaleza glucoproteica. segn la presencia o ausencia de envoltura los denominamos virus envueltos o virus desnudos, respectivamente. la disposicin de las protenas de la cpside de los virus desnudos les confieren una alta resistencia a condiciones y factores medioambientales.la clasificacin de los virus se halla en constante revisin por el comit internacional de taxonoma de virus (www.virology.net), que hasta el momento actual establece la clasificacin de los virus en base a cinco niveles jerrquicos principales: orden, familia, subfamilia, gnero y especie. el tipo de material gentico (adn/arn), la estructura de la cpside (helicoidal o icosadica) y la presencia o ausencia de envuelta son las caractersticas fundamentales de los virus que permiten agruparlos en familias. dentro de estas, las propiedades fsico-qumicas y serolgicas comunes definen los gneros. en la tabla1 se muestran las principales familias de virus.consistente, en primer lugar, en la adherencia a la clula por parte del virus a travs de la interaccin de molculas superficiales virales y celulares para, posteriormente, inyectar su material gentico en el citoplasma de la clula husped.segn la naturaleza del cido nucleico viral, en esta etapa se produce la sntesis y traduccin del arn mensajero viral y la posterior replicacin del cido nuclico viral. en los virus con genoma adn, la sntesis del arn mensajero se produce a travs de la arn polimerasa de la clula husped, mientras los virus cuyo genoma es el arn utilizan en este paso una arn polimerasa viral. en el caso especial de los retrovirus, estos emplean, en primer lugar, una enzima transcriptasa inversa viral que portan en su nucleocpside y que los transcribe al adn.en esta etapa el material gentico de los nuevos virus o viriones se rodea de nucleocpside para acabar saliendo al exterior celular, bien tras una lisis celular directa, fundamentalmente en los casos de virus desnudos, o bien mediante gemacin en el caso de los virus envueltos. una vez liberados, los nuevos virus inician su ciclo de replicacin tras la infeccin de nuevas clulas husped.a continuacin comentamos los procesos vricos fundamentales que afectan al ser humano, agrupados segn el rgano o sistema diana en el que producen patologa principalmente. no se han incluido algunos procesos y enfermedades como las exantemticas de la infancia o las producidas por virus herpes, puesto que ya se exponen en otros artculos de esta unidad temtica.la viruela es una enfermedad infecciosa conocida desde hace 5000 aos y causada por el virus variola. se considera que este virus tiene como nico hospedador el ser humano, motivo por el que fue posible llevar a cabo con xito una campaa de vacunacin masiva de la poblacin, con la subsiguiente erradicacin de la enfermedad en 1979.la transmisin del virus se realiza fundamentalmente por va inhalatoria tras el contacto directo, aunque tambin es posible que exista transmisin por inoculacin a partir de las lesiones cutneas. tras multiplicarse en las clulas epiteliales del tracto respiratorio superior e infectar a macrfagos y al sistema linftico, el virus se disemina por va hematgena afectando a diferentes rganos, incluyendo vasos pequeos de la dermis, esto, junto a la migracin de macrfagos hacia la epidermis donde infecta a clulas epiteliales, produce una necrosis celular, edema e infiltracin linfocitaria que dar lugar a las lesiones vesiculosas caractersticas de la enfermedad y que aparecen fundamentalmente tras 1214 das de incubacin y 3 de prdromos, y que se localizan principalmente en la cara y las extremidades. estas lesiones evolucionan en diferentes etapas hasta convertirse en costras y desaparecer en un plazo total aproximado de 1517 das. la infeccin produce una importante respuesta inmunolgica celular que puede ser responsable de una toxemia que lleva al paciente a la muerte en casos graves. existen, adems, otras formas de presentacin ms graves y menos frecuentes como son la viruela hemorrgica y la viruela plana con escasas lesiones cutneas pero intensa toxemia.el diagnstico de la infeccin puede realizarse a travs del examen directo de muestras procedentes de lesiones papulares o vesiculares, en este caso se observan unas inclusiones tpicas en las clulas infectadas denominadas corpsculos de guarnieri. el diagnstico se puede realizar tambin mediante cultivo celular, deteccin de antgenos o determinacin de anticuerpos tras la primera semana de presentacin de la sintomatologa4.la viruela ha sido una de las enfermedades infecciosas que ha afectado con ms gravedad al ser humano, actualmente es una enfermedad erradicada (el ltimo caso se describi en 1977), y nicamente quedan cepas virales conservadas en algunos laboratorios de alta seguridad.los programas de vacunacin frente al virus de la viruela cesaron a partir de la erradicacin de la enfermedad, entre otras cosas debido a que esta vacunacin no estaba exenta de potenciales efectos secundarios graves. por tanto, la poblacin actual menor a 2530 aos no se encuentra protegida inmunolgicamente frente a esta infeccin. en la ltima dcada, debido al surgimiento de la preocupacin por el bioterrorismo, se ha reconsiderado la posibilidad de vacunacin de determinados grupos de alto riesgo como sera el personal del ejrcito o el personal sanitario.en caso de infeccin por viruela, en la actualidad, el cidofovir es el nico antiviral que ha demostrado su eficacia frente a los poxvirus, por lo que sera el tratamiento de eleccin.se trata de un virus muy prximo al de la viruela, y que produce en algunos animales mamferos lo que se denomina viruela de las vacas. en el ser humano produce una reaccin fundamentalmente local tras la adquisicin por contacto directo de la piel -al ordear con las lesiones que presentan las vacas afectas. en ocasiones la reaccin local puede acompaarse de una generalizacin de los sntomas. la importancia de este virus radica, adems, en que ha sido el empleado inicialmente para fabricar la vacuna de la viruela humana.poxvirus que produce una enfermedad cutnea benigna que se adquiere por contacto directo con lesiones y clulas infectadas. tras una incubacin de unas 4 semanas, en la zona del contacto aparecen unas lesiones de pequeo tamao, nodulares o verrucosas, umbilicadas y no dolorosas, que no se acompaan de sintomatologa sistmica. con frecuencia se adquiere tras el contacto sexual, por lo que puede considerarse una enfermedad de transmisin sexual, en ese caso las lesiones se localizan sobre todo en la regin perineal. la resolucin es espontnea, con regresin de las lesiones en semanas o meses5.en pacientes con infeccin por el virus de la inmunodeficiencia humana (vih) en mala situacin inmunolgica, o en otro tipo de pacientes inmunodeprimidos, puede manifestarse clnicamente de forma ms generalizada afectando a una mayor superficie corporal. en estos casos pueden requerir tratamiento local.consiste en la inflamacin de las vas respiratorias inferiores, tiene lugar sobre todo en lactantes, siendo el responsable de hasta el 90% de las bronquiolitis en esta poblacin8. la presentacin clnica habitual se da con fiebre o febrcula y tos seca, para evolucionar en las siguientes 48 horas a fiebre alta, tos, taquipnea e incluso hipoxemia y cianosis. el cuadro suele tener una duracin mxima de 7 das. la afeccin puede llegar a ser muy grave en nios prematuros o inmunodeprimidos, en los que se suele requerir hospitalizacin9. en este caso, en la radiografa de trax suele observarse hiperinsuflacin con posible infiltrado intersticial, engrosamiento peribronquial y atelectasias. la aparicin de esta entidad en los primeros meses de vida est relacionada con la posterior aparicin de asma bronquial. ante un lactante con un primer episodio de broncoespasmo hay que sospechar siempre esta entidad.en este caso y mediante importantes fenmenos inmunolgicos producidos localmente en el tejido pulmonar como respuesta a la infeccin por el vrs, nos encontramos con la obstruccin de pequeas vas areas que puede llegar a ser completa, de distribucin irregular y debido al grado variable de obstruccin dando lugar a patrones no uniformes en la radiologa de trax. clnicamente, el cuadro es difcil de diferenciar de una neumona causada por otra causa viral o bacteriana, aunque quiz son ms predominantes los sntomas locales, a nivel respiratorio, y menos llamativos otros sntomas generales como mialgias, cefalea y sensacin de malestar.esta entidad tambin se presenta en la poblacin inmunodeprimida, sobre todo en receptores de trasplantes hematolgicos.el diagnstico se basa en el aislamiento del virus en un cultivo celular (fibroblastos de pulmn de embrin humano o clulas hep2 o hela) a partir de muestras clnicas, fundamentalmente: lavados nasofarngeos o aspirados nasofarngeos. el efecto citoptico caracterstico del virus es la aparicin de sincitios y clulas gigantes multinucleadas.debido a la importancia de la obtencin de un diagnstico rpido, actualmente existen diferentes tcnicas inmunoenzimticas o de inmunofluorescencia que posibilitan un diagnstico en 1020 minutos10.el tratamiento de las infecciones por el vrs es fundamentalmente sintomtico y de soporte, sobre todo en pacientes inmunocompetentes, ya que suele producir cuadros autolimitados. es importante considerar la posibilidad de infeccin bacteriana sobreaadida por si fuera necesaria la administracin de antibiticos. en casos graves o en poblacin especial, fundamentalmente pacientes trasplantados de mdula sea, se considera la administracin de ribavirina, aunque presenta una actividad in vitro frente al vrs, no est claramente demostrado su beneficio en esta patologa, en todo caso, su administracin debera ser precoz.fue descrito en 2001 por primera vez. pertenece a la familia paramyxoviridae y al gnero metapneumovirus, del que se conocen hasta el momento dos genotipos diferentes. tanto la clnica como la distribucin estacional es superponible a la del vrs, pudiendo ser adems productor de otitis media, y presentando diferencias importantes con el vrs en su genoma: el orden de los genes y la ausencia de genes no estructurales en el metaneumovirus, cuestiones ambas cuya importancia debe describirse. el metaneumovirus crece en lneas celulares produciendo un efecto citoptico similar al del vrs, pero su crecimiento es ms lento y precisa tripsina en el medio de cultivo. el espectro clnico completo de la infeccin por metaneumovirus est an pendiente de definir11.virus esfricos, arn no envueltos que pertenecen a la familia picornaviridae, gnero rhinovirus. son la causa de un 30-50% de las infecciones agudas del tracto respiratorio, tanto en adultos como en nios, siendo ms comunes en climas templados y durante los meses ms fros del ao12.la alta incidencia de la infeccin est relacionada con la existencia de un gran nmero de serotipos, conocindose en la actualidad ms de 100 serotipos diferentes.la transmisin tiene lugar por contacto directo persona a persona, a travs de secreciones respiratorias contaminadas con el virus, del contacto con objetos ambientales o de superficies contaminadas con dichas secreciones.el periodo de incubacin comienza con la eliminacin de virus en las secreciones nasales y puede ser de 1 a 4 das.la enfermedad tpica que produce la infeccin por rinovirus es el resfriado comn, caracterizado clnicamente por la presencia de tos, congestin y secrecin nasal, dolor farngeo y otros sntomas como cefalea y malestar general. en algunos casos pueden estar involucrados en otitis media aguda, sinusitis e infeccin del tracto respiratorio inferior. ultimamente estos agentes se han visto tambin implicados en exacerbaciones de asma, bronquitis crnica y fibrosis qustica. pueden causar tambin neumona en personas inmunodeprimidas y trasplantados, asocindose en estos casos a un mal pronstico.el diagnstico puede realizarse mediante el cultivo viral de muestras procedentes de secreciones respiratorias, en lneas celulares de fibroblastos o en la lnea celular hela. los mtodos serolgicos tienen una utilidad limitada, ya que es comn encontrar anticuerpos en la poblacin general que no se modifican en un cuadro infeccioso agudo. esta limitacin en la capacidad diagnstica de los rinovirus ha motivado el desarrollo de mtodos moleculares para su identificacin, que actualmente ofrecen interesantes perspectivas.el tratamiento de las infecciones por rinovirus es sobre todo sintomtico. ultimamente se han ensayado diferentes antivirales, y hasta el momento el pleconarilo es el que conseguido una disminucin de la duracin y la intensidad del cuadro clnico, por lo que ha sido aprobado por la food and drug administration (fda) como agente para el tratamiento de estas afecciones13.virus con genoma arn, envueltos y pertenecientes a la familia coronaviridae. poseen nucleocpside helicoidal y una envoltura derivada de las membranas intracelulares de las clulas husped.pueden producir infeccin tanto en los seres humanos como en los animales, provocando infecciones respiratorias y siendo los causantes de al menos un tercio de los resfriados comunes, tambin son los causantes de infecciones entricas.la importancia actual de estos virus radica en su implicacin como patgenos en el sndrome respiratorio agudo severo (sars)14 descrito en otro artculo de esta unidad temtica.la transmisin se produce por contacto directo persona a persona o a travs de objetos contaminados con el virus. en los seres humanos, el principal sitio de replicacin viral son las clulas epiteliales del tracto respiratorio.los cuadros clnicos ms frecuentes producidos por coronavirus son similares a los del resfriado por rinovirus (rinorrea, dolor de garganta, cefalea, fiebre, escalofros, etc.) con un periodo de incubacin de unos 3 das y una duracin total de 7 das. la clnica suele ser leve y autolimitada, aunque en ocasiones puede diseminarse. la respuesta inmune que se produce es limitada, por lo que puede haber reinfecciones.los coronavirus han sido tambin implicados en la produccin de otitis media, neumonas en inmunodeprimidos y miocarditis. es interesante conocer que los coronavirus experimentalmente pueden infectar clulas neurolgicas de roedores, produciendo una enfermedad desmielinizante similar a la esclerosis mltiple. sin embargo, la posible implicacin con la esclerosis en los seres humanos no ha sido bien descrita.los adenovirus son causa del 2-4% de las enfermedades respiratorias en la poblacin general, aunque en colectivos ms cerrados, con mucha mayor posibilidad de contacto respiratorio estrecho, la incidencia es muy superior (cuarteles, guarderas etc.).la adquisicin se produce, como hemos comentado, por va inhalatoria tras el contacto directo. tras un periodo de incubacin de entre 2 a 14 das, aparece la clnica que a nivel respiratorio puede tener muy diversas manifestaciones generalmente leves15: coriza, faringoamigdalitis, traqueobronquitis, neumona (cuadro que puede ser potencialmente grave). la tos persistente no productiva es bastante caracterstica de estas infecciones, llegando a producir un cuadro similar a la tos ferina denominado bordetela-like. existe otro cuadro clnico peculiar que suele ser muy agudo denominado "enfermedad respiratoria aguda", descrito sobre todo en adultos y que hasta en el 10% de los casos puede evolucionar a neumona. los serotipos ms frecuentes en los primeros aos de la vida son el 1, 2 y 5, mientras que en pocas ms tardas los ms frecuentes son el 3, 4, 7, 14 y 21. las infecciones respiratorias causadas por estos virus se dan con ms frecuencia al final del invierno y al inicio de la primavera.se suele producir en la edad peditrica y est causada por los serotipos 40 y 41, los adenovirus son causantes de aproximadamente un 10% de las diarreas infantiles de origen vrico. estas gastroenteritis pueden ser epidmicas y asociarse a una clnica respiratoria y conjuntival.se han descrito dos cuadros clnicos. por un lado tenemos la fiebre faringoconjuntival caracterizada por fiebre, faringitis y conjuntivitis inicialmente unilateral y dolorosa que suele ceder espontneamente en un plazo aproximado de una semana y puede acompaarse de sintomatologa respiratoria. por otro lado est la queratoconjuntivitis epidmica, consistente en una conjuntivitis de inicio agudo, unilateral y dolorosa, con edema local y adenopatas regionales, que suele afectar finalmente a ambos ojos y de forma caracterstica se produce una afectacin corneal. el cuadro suele ceder en unas semanas, pero es potencialmente grave. no se acompaa habitualmente de sintomatologa respiratoria16.cuadro que aparece, sobre todo, en la edad peditrica y en varones, consistente en un sndrome miccional con hematuria. asociada fundamentalmente al coxsackie virus a y echovirus, ambos son la principal causa de meningitis viral. el cuadro es ms frecuente en menores de 3 meses, en esta edad la clnica puede pasar desapercibida, ya que no hay gran afectacin del snc. en edades posteriores, la meningitis asptica es un cuadro caracterizado tpicamente por cefalea, rigidez de cuello y signos menngeos, fiebre y malestar general. el lcr suele ser claro, y en su anlisis suele detectarse pleocitosis linfoctica. la evolucin del cuadro clnico suele ser benigna producindose la recuperacin espontnea en unos das. la prevalencia es mayor en verano y otoo y puede aparecer en forma de brotes21.los enterovirus son tambin responsables de otros cuadros ms graves de afectacin del snc como la encefalitis o meningoencefalitis, siendo los causantes del 10-20% del total de encefalitis. en este caso, el mayor responsable suele ser el coxsackie virus a. la clnica puede ser variable, desde alteraciones leves hasta convulsiones y disminucin del nivel de conciencia. el anlisis del lcr es similar al de la meningitis asptica. la mayora de los pacientes se recupera totalmente, pero puede ocurrir una mala evolucin del cuadro con infeccin diseminada y afectacin muy grave del snc que a veces termina produciendo secuelas neurolgicas e incluso la muerte.los enterovirus pueden ser tambin causantes de cuadros de mielitis (o poliomielitis like) y sndrome de guillain barr.el coxsackie virus a fundamentalmente puede causar fiebre con lesiones ppulo-vesiculosas que evolucionan a lceras dolorosas en el paladar y la lengua, llegando incluso a producir disfagia. es un cuadro benigno que suele ocurrir en menores de 2 aos y remite espontneamente en pocos das.exantema causado fundamentalmente por el coxsackie virus tipo a16. los sntomas incluyen fiebre y ampollas en las manos, el paladar y los pies. tambin remite en unos das sin requerir un tratamiento especfico. en ocasiones se asocia a una meningitis asptica. suele afectar a nios menores de 10 aos. los enterovirus son la primera causa viral de afectacin del msculo cardiaco. fundamentalmente causada por virus coxsackie b. la miopericarditis viral puede tener lugar a cualquier edad, aunque es ms frecuente en la edad peditrica y en la adolescencia, afectando sobre todo a varones (proporcin 2:1). la clnica de presentacin del cuadro se caracteriza por fiebre, cuadro catarral y posteriormente disnea, pudindose auscultar roce pericrdico en la exploracin hasta en el 80% de los casos, la afectacin puede ser ms grave, producindose arritmias e incluso fallo cardiaco.la evolucin es benigna en ms del 90% de los casos, aunque la mortalidad llega al 5% y existen pacientes el los que se perpetan los trastornos del ritmo o las alteraciones ecocardiogrficas.en la fase aguda, la administracin de gammaglobulina humana polivalente puede tener un papel inmunomodulador.en trminos generales, el tratamiento de las infecciones causadas por enterovirus es sintomtico y de soporte. la administracin de gammaglobulina polivalente humana se reserva para pacientes inmunodeprimidos o en casos de miopericarditis. el antiviral pleconarilo ha demostrado su eficacia en meningoencefalitis, siempre y cuando su administracin sea precoz22.virus de la familia reoviridae identificados por microscopa electrnica en 1973 a partir de biopsias duodenales. son virus no envueltos, con cpside icosadrica cuyo genoma es de arn de doble cadena. existen seis grupos diferentes (del a al f) basndose en la antigenicidad (cada grupo comparte antgenos comunes) y la motilidad electrofortica de los segmentos de arn. los grupos d, e y f no han sido encontrados en los seres humanos. los rotavirus del grupo a son los que se han descrito como principales agentes patgenos en los seres humanos, fundamentalmente productores de gastroenteritis en nios e inmunodeprimidos. el grupo b ha sido asociado con brotes de gastroenteritis en adultos en china23.la adquisicin ocurre fundamentalmente por contacto persona a persona, por transmisin orofecal o a travs de fmites, pudiendo ser un patgeno causante de brotes nosocomiales. tambin es posible el contagio mediante agua y alimentos. el periodo de incubacin es de 4 das aproximadamente. las clulas husped afectadas son enterocitos maduros que cubren las terminaciones medias y distales de las vellosidades intestinales. el virus se replica en el citoplasma de la clula husped, eliminndose grandes cantidades de partculas virales en las deposiciones diarreicas.el cuadro clnico fundamental es la produccin de gastroenteritis aguda en edad peditrica, manifestada como diarrea acuosa, fiebre alta, nuseas y vmitos de 310 das de duracin. la resolucin es habitualmente espontnea, aunque en ocasiones, en pacientes inmunodeprimidos o desnutridos, el cuadro puede persistir ms tiempo, pudindose producir enterocolitis necrotizante, gastroenteritis hemorrgica y deshidratacin fundamentalmente en neonatos, siendo el causante de ms de medio milln de muertes en nios lactantes en pases en desarrollo24. las infecciones asintomticas son tambin comunes, sobre todo en adultos. tras la infeccin pueden persistir cuadros de malabsorcin, intolerancia a la lactosa por dao en las vellosidades y diarrea crnica.el diagnstico puede realizarse de forma rpida mediante la deteccin de antgenos en heces o mediante la pcr en tiempo real25. tambin es posible el cultivo en lneas celulares.el tratamiento es de soporte con atencin especial a la hidratacin, ya que no hay antivirales efectivos.es muy importante la realizacin de una adecuada prevencin de diseminacin de esta infeccin, sobre todo en los centros hospitalarios26, mediante un adecuado lavado de manos, una desinfeccin correcta de las superficies, etc.existen adems dos vacunas de administracin oral que han mostrado eficacia en diversos ensayos clnicos. segn datos recientes, la eficacia de la prevencin de diarreas por rotavirus tras la administracin de la vacuna oscila entre el 50-79% segn las reas geogrficas, adems se ha demostrado que la administracin de la vacuna reduce en un 30% la incidencia de diarreas por cualquier causa, siendo una medida con coste-efectividad demostrada27., 28., 29., 30..se trata de un virus arn no envuelto de cadena sencilla, aislado por primera vez en 1972 en ohio. la transmisin suele tener lugar por va oro-fecal tras el contacto directo con heces contaminadas, tambin es posible que se produzca una transmisin a travs de alimentos o aguas en mal estado. puede producir brotes epidmicos en grupos o poblaciones.tras un periodo corto de incubacin, generalmente de no ms de 24 horas, se produce un cuadro clnico de gastroenteritis consistente en nuseas, vmitos, dolores abdominales tipo retortijn y diarrea acuosa acompaada de cefalea, fiebre y malestar general. la duracin total del cuadro suele ser inferior a 3 das.el diagnstico es clnico, aunque pueden realizarse tcnicas de cultivo o examen con microscopa electrnica.virus arn no envuelto de cadena sencilla aislado en 1976. la superficie viral tiene 32 depresiones en forma de copa, aspecto del que deriva su nombre. se han descrito 5 tipos antignicos en los seres humanos denominados uk del 1 al 4, y el tipo japn/sapporo. es un virus de distribucin mundial.la transmisin es fecal-oral, mediante la contaminacin de alimentos y de persona a persona. han sido descritos brotes relacionados con el consumo de alimentos contaminados como las ostras.tras un periodo de incubacin que va de 12 horas a 4 das puede producirse un cuadro de gastroenteritis, generalmente leve, consistente en diarrea moderada y fiebre, que hasta en un tercio de los casos se asocia a una sintomatologa respiratoria tipo coriza o resfriado, aunque la mayora de las infecciones son asintomticas.como enfermedad experimentada, el resfriado comn se caracteriza por congestin nasal y secrecin, estornudos, dolor o molestias en la garganta, tos y malestar general8. la tos no siempre se presenta y tiende a ocurrir en las etapas avanzadas de la enfermedad, y a veces dura semanas despus de que se han resuelto otros sntomas. la gravedad de los sntomas es muy variable, desde apenas notoria hasta verdaderamente invalidante9. aunque la fiebre verdadera no es tpica, son comunes las sensaciones de fiebre y los escalofros10.como patologa infecciosa, la ira viral se caracteriza por la replicacin de virus en el epitelio oral, nasal y respiratorio alto11 y por la activacin de la respuesta inmunitaria local y general12., 13., 14.. la replicacin viral en las clulas epiteliales desencadena reacciones inflamatorias locales mediadas por citocinas, as como el reclutamiento de leucocitos. las vas neurales parasimpticas activan y coordinan respuestas locales. los vasos sanguneos se dilatan y los capilares experimentan filtracin, ocasionando edema de los tejidos en las vas nasales15. las glndulas mucosas se activan, lo que origina una secrecin abundante en algunas personas. los cambios inflamatorios en el epitelio respiratorio persisten de das a semanas despus de que ha cedido la eliminacin de los virus. no obstante, es posible cultivar virus de huspedes ocasionales semanas o incluso meses despus de la infeccin inicial. la activacin de los mecanismos inflamatorios hace de la ira viral la causa ms importante de exacerbacin del asma16.los rinovirus representan el agente etiolgico individual ms frecuente pero contribuyen a menos de la mitad de todos los casos de ira17., 18., 19.. otros virus causales son adenovirus, coronavirus, enterovirus, virus de la gripe, virus parainfluenza y virus respiratorio sincitial 20 , 21. en tiempos recientes se ha descubierto el metaneumovirus y se ha aadido a la lista22. puede haber otros an no descubiertos, ya que incluso los mejores laboratorios de investigacin no logran identificar un agente etiolgico hasta en una cuarta parte de las personas con resfriados evidentes. algunas bacterias, como streptococcus y haemophilus influenzae, producen enfermedades con sntomas similares a los del resfriado comn.los virus respiratorios siguen pautas estacionales. el virus de la gripe y el respiratorio sincitial slo ocurren durante los meses de invierno. las ira por rinovirus tienden a aparecer durante el otoo y la primavera. los adenovirus se presentan durante todo el ao. las miniepidemias de parainfluenza son episdicas; los brotes epidmicos de agentes atpicos, como la bacteria de la tos ferina (bordetella pertussis), complican ms el cuadro.el espectro de la enfermedad es muy variable, tanto por un mismo agente como entre los diversos agentes causales. la gripe produce la enfermedad ms grave y de ah que a menudo se clasifique por separado de otras ira virales. no obstante, la mayora de los episodios de enfermedad ocasionados por la gripe son indistinguibles de los que producen otros virus, y una proporcin importante de las personas infectadas con el virus gripal y que lo eliminan no refieren sntomas ni signos. slo algunos sujetos presentan los sntomas tpicos de inicio rpido, fiebre, tos, cefalea y mialgia. a diferencia de la mayora de los virus que producen ira, la gripe puede llevar a una prdida sustancial de epitelio respiratorio. pese a un sistema coordinado para obtener una vacuna gripal (vacunas para la gripe) cada otoo, la gripe interviene en hasta 20.000 muertes por ao.la mayora de los ensayos clnicos utilizaron productos estandarizados con 4 o 5 mg de andrograflido. una pauta posolgica razonable sera un comprimido de 400 mg, tres veces al da, durante los primeros das de un resfriado.en las mujeres embarazadas y en los nios parece prudente no recomendar su uso en virtud de que hay escasos datos en relacin con estos grupos y puede haber un riesgo de dao.2 a 6 g al da.los efectos secundarios son infrecuentes. puede ocurrir inmunosupresin a dosis de ms de 28 g.aunque no hay pruebas satisfactorias, una taza o dos de manzanilla como tratamiento de apoyo en el resfriado comn ciertamente es segura y puede resultar til.si bien no se conocen reacciones adversas dependientes de la dosis, se ha comunicado sensibilidad alrgica, lo que incluye varios casos de anafilaxia54.los ensayos positivos han utilizado diferentes formulaciones y las preparaciones ms ampliamente utilizadas se elaboran a partir de hierba y flor de e. purpurea. sin embargo, pruebas recientes indican que las alquilamidas de las races de e. purpurea y e. angustifolia son las que tienen ms biodisponibilidad e inmunoactividad85., 86., 87.. aunque no hay un consenso sobre los criterios de estandarizacin, la mayora de los expertos coinciden en que deben utilizarse extractos de equincea lo ms pronto posible durante la evolucin de un resfriado, con mltiples dosis al da durante los primeros das de sntomas. una formulacin lquida comn (echinagard) se administra a una dosis de 20 gotas cada 2 h durante el primer da de sntomas y luego tres veces al da durante un mximo de 3 das.nuestra opinin es que el empleo en los nios no es recomendable, ya que el nico eac peditrico no demostr efectos positivos pero s comunic un leve aumento en la aparicin de exantemas en los nios que recibieron de forma aleatoria equincea88. si bien se dispone de un estudio de casos y controles moderados en el que no se encontraron efectos adversos durante el embarazo89, no recomiendo su empleo debido a que los riesgos tericos son importantes. mi recomendacin es utilizar ajo fresco para cocinar en la medida y la frecuencia deseadas, teniendo en cuenta las expectativas positivas sobre los beneficios cardiovasculares y de prevencin de los resfriados.comprar una raz de jengibre en la herboristera, pelarla y luego cortar la raz en lminas utilizando un cuchillo afilado y teniendo cuidado de no cortarse. se deja hervir durante 5 min, luego se aade miel y limn al gusto. tmelo lentamente y sienta la eficacia del jengibre.el componente fitoqumico berberina tiene actividad farmacolgica y la sobredosis puede ocasionar toxicidad, lo que incluye arritmias cardacas y muerte98. est contraindicado durante el embarazo y la lactancia.originario de la india, el limonero en la actualidad se cultiva en todo el mundo, se utiliza como alimento, potenciador del sabor o remedio botnico. sus aplicaciones medicinales incluyen la prevencin o el tratamiento del escorbuto. el limn tambin se utiliza para el paludismo, la artritis reumtica, la fiebre y otras mltiples indicaciones. el jugo de limn y el t de limn se utilizan para prevenir y tratar resfriados comunes, accesos de tos y gripe. aunque se carece de datos rigurosos sobre su eficacia, en general se reconocen la seguridad y el valor nutricional del limn como fuente de vitamina c (cido ascrbico), lo que hace de l una buena opcin en quienes obtienen un alivio sintomtico.la menta y otros miembros de la familia de la menta se utilizan ampliamente para diversos fines medicinales, lo que incluye accesos de tos y resfriados, as como con fines gastrointestinales. para tratar los resfriados se toman t e infusiones de menta; los aceites de menta se aplican de forma tpica; el aceite de menta consta principalmente de mentol, mentona y acetato de mentilo. el mentol en concreto se ha extrado e incluido en diversos remedios tpicos para el resfriado que podramos clasificar como friegas de mentol. aunque ni el t de menta ni las friegas de mentol se han sometido a eac rigurosos en el resfriado comn, las aplicaciones de ambos parecen razonables desde una perspectiva de coste, riesgo y beneficio potencial, por lo menos en adultos. los preparados ms concentrados, como el aceite de menta, no deben aplicarse en la mucosa de lactantes o de nios pequeos, ya que pueden ocasionar toxicidad inflamatoria directa. raras veces se ha comunicado broncoespasmo, edema de la lengua o paro respiratorio98 , 99.el caldo de pollo es representativo de los remedios tradicionales para el resfriado y sin duda podra ser respaldado por muchos testimonios personales. el caldo de pollo como remedio para el resfriado tambin es apoyado en parte por al menos dos estudios en humanos, uno en el que se comunic inhibicin de la quimiotaxis de neutrfilos100 y otro que indic un aumento en la velocidad de la mucosidad nasal y disminucin en la resistencia al flujo de aire nasal101. no se dispone de eac en los que se hayan utilizado variables orientadas al paciente. en lo personal, me entusiasmara ms si la industria avcola adoptase una normativa sanitaria, ambiental y de bienestar de los animales ms responsable. mientras tanto, habr que utilizar el caldo elaborado con pollos de corral y pueden aadirse cantidades sustanciales de vegetales orgnicos integrales.un remedio para el resfriado tradicional generalizado son los vahos, a menudo con un fitofrmaco u otro complemento. segn se ha mencionado, en un ensayo clnico se comunicaron los beneficios de la inhalacin de vahos de manzanilla53. asimismo, se dispone de al menos dos eac que indican un beneficio significativo de la inhalacin de vaho no adulterado102 , 103. sin embargo, en dos ensayos subsiguientes no se encontr ningn beneficio104 , 105. aunque parece eminentemente razonable recomendar la humidificacin cuando el aire est seco y tal vez recomendar la inhalacin de vahos cuando resulta confortable, cabe hacer notar que el agua hierve alrededor de los 100 c y que la inhalacin de vahos cercanos a esta temperatura puede ocasionar lesin trmica importante. tenga cuidado!recomiendo elaborar una solucin de agua salada no concentrada con agua corriente tibia y con sal suficiente para que tenga el sabor de las lgrimas (media cucharadita de sal en 180 ml de agua tibia). para instilarla, se inclinan la cabeza y el cuello hasta quedar casi en horizontal, con la nariz sobre un lavamanos. utilizando una vasija de neti (vasija de t pequea) o una jeringa de perilla, se vierte suavemente la solucin salina en la fosa nasal ms alta. los lquidos calmantes y de limpieza fluirn a travs de la cavidad nasal y llegarn a la otra fosa nasal y a la garganta. se desecha cualquier lquido remanente en la boca y se suena con suavidad la nariz con un pauelo o toallita desechable. se repite el proceso inclinando la cabeza hacia el otro lado. recomiendo como tratamiento aplicaciones dos veces al da durante los primeros das de un resfriado.las pruebas apoyan una eficacia preventiva moderada a dosis de 200 a 500 mg al da. las ventajas de dosis ms elevadas como prevencin o como tratamiento de resfriados recientes son apoyadas por algunos ensayos y revisiones sistemticas114, pero no por otros115. en virtud de la seguridad del cido ascrbico generalmente aceptada a dosis de hasta varios gramos al da durante perodos breves, parece razonable apoyar su uso con cautela, sobre todo en las personas con experiencias y expectativas favorables. (dosis muy elevadas, como los 18 g/da que supuestamente linus pauling tomaba al morir a la edad de 93 aos en 1994, no se han analizado en estudios y por tanto no se pueden recomendar.) el consumo regular de alimentos y zumos ricos en vitamina c puede recomendarse con entusiasmo, por cuanto la ingestin de frutas y legumbres frescas no conlleva riesgos conocidos y se ha acompaado de muchos beneficios para la salud en mltiples estudios de observacin a gran escala.los efectos secundarios gastrointestinales como nuseas, pirosis, clicos y diarrea son ms habituales a dosis ms elevadas.gluconato de cinc, 9 a 24 mg de cinc elemental cada 2 h mientras el paciente muestra sntomas.al igual que prcticamente en todas las enfermedades, el resfriado comn incluye elementos tanto psicolgicos como fisiolgicos y est sujeto a la influencia de diversos factores sociales. mltiples estudios epidemiolgicos transversales y prospectivos han demostrado resultados uniformes3., 4., 5.. los resfriados son ms frecuentes entre los nios y en los que tienen contacto con ellos. los preescolares que van a las guarderas padecen ms resfriados que los que no, pero tienen menos resfriados durante sus aos escolares subsiguientes, tal vez gracias a los mayores niveles de inmunidad especfica128 , 129. si bien el ejercicio moderado con regularidad protege contra la infeccin, la actividad excesiva como correr una maratn aumenta el riesgo temporalmente7 , 130 , 131. el estrs, tanto agudo como crnico, aumenta el riesgo132., 133., 134.. en una serie de estudios revolucionarios, cohen y cols. demostraron que una serie de variables psicosociales permitan predecir si los voluntarios se infectaran al exponerse a rinovirus. factores como estatus socioeconmico durante la infancia135, nmero y calidad de las relaciones sociales136, estrs agudo y crnico137 y determinados atributos psicolgicos138 , 139 medidos antes de la exposicin al rinovirus, vaticinaron la infeccin subsiguiente y la eliminacin viral, as como la gravedad y la duracin de los sntomas de resfriado. en conjunto, estas observaciones indican que el mantenimiento de la salud psicolgica y social (actitud positiva, relaciones saludables) es tan importante como el mantenimiento de la salud fsica (ejercicio, nutricin) para prevenir los resfriados y moderar los sntomas.en los ltimos aos, en que he analizado los centenares de ensayos, revisiones sistemticas y otros informes de investigaciones sobre el resfriado, cada vez me convenzo ms de la importancia de los efectos mente-cuerpo, por lo dems descritos como placebo o efectos de intencin140., 141., 142.. las ideas positivas, la sugestin, la esperanza y la confianza en la utilidad teraputica de un determinado remedio constituyen una fuerza curativa poderosa. aunque la prctica regular de ejercicio, la nutricin equilibrada y el cese del tabaquismo sin duda se relacionan con episodios de enfermedad menos frecuentes y menos graves, tambin los atributos de salud mental positivos se asocian a un perfil psicolgico favorable y relaciones sociales saludables. las investigaciones de sheldon cohen han demostrado que los atributos sociales y psicolgicos permiten predecir no slo la gravedad y la duracin de los sntomas, sino tambin la resistencia a la infeccin experimental con rinovirus y la inflamacin segn se determina mediante las citocinas y el grado y la duracin de eliminacin viral135., 136., 137., 138., 139.. la predisposicin psicolgica, sobre todo la sociabilidad y un tono emocional positivo, predicen desenlaces sintomticos y fisiolgicos138 , 143., 144., 145.. para el mdico integral, esto significa que la comprensin de un sistema de creencias del individuo es una parte crucial del encuentro teraputico. si un paciente ya cree en un tratamiento seguro, reforzar esa creencia puede favorecer la respuesta teraputica. si duda de un remedio que se le menciona, no hay que insistir en el tema. recurdese que tranquilizar al paciente, la empata, la habilitacin y el pronstico positivo son factores que pueden beneficiar al encuentro clnico.los frmacos que bloquean los efectos de la histamina se han vendido como remedios para el resfriado durante ms de un siglo, pero no se ha sometido a eac ms rigurosos que las alternativas, como la vitamina c, el cinc y la equincea. no obstante, hay pruebas razonables de una utilidad moderada, en lo referente a disminucin de la secrecin nasal, para los antihistamnicos de primera generacin como la difenhidramina, el fumarato de clemastina o la clofeniramina146., 147., 148., 149.. sin embargo, los efectos al parecer se deben ms a los mecanismos anticolinrgicos que a los efectos antihistamnicos en virtud de que los antihistamnicos no sedantes de segunda generacin no parecen proporcionar beneficios150. en los adultos a los que no les molestan los posibles efectos sedantes o de sequedad de las mucosas, o en quienes ocurre una respuesta alrgica, un antihistamnico de primera generacin puede ser una opcin razonable. en los nios, en los que no hay evidencia, los antihistamnicos habrn de reservarse para la rinitis alrgica ms que para la infecciosa.la histamina desempea un papel mnimo en los sntomas de ira. la utilidad teraputica de los antihistamnicos se deriva de sus efectos anticolinrgicos. el descongestivo oral seudoefedrina se ha examinado en varios ensayos clnicos y al parecer tiene una ventaja leve en cuanto a la reduccin de la congestin nasal y la secrecin151., 152., 153., 154.. son relativamente comunes los efectos secundarios como ansiedad, mareos, insomnio y palpitaciones. son ms problemticos el potencial de elevacin de la tensin arterial y las arritmias cardacas. la fenilpropanolamina, que durante decenios fue un descongestivo popular de venta sin receta, fue retirada del mercado debido a que algunos estudios indicaron una mayor mortalidad, sobre todo en los ancianos155.el descongestivo intranasal tpico oximetazolina (afrin) ha mostrado disminuir la resistencia de las vas respiratorias nasales y la produccin de mucosidad y secrecin156., 157., 158., 159.. la fenilefrina intranasal se ha estudiado menos ampliamente, pero es probable que tenga efectos similares. estas ventajas demostradas conllevan el riesgo de sequedad y malestar en la mucosa nasal. habrn de utilizarse durante no ms de 4 das debido a que puede ocurrir una congestin nasal de rebote.el dextrometorfano, principio activo de los remedios para la tos, designado como dm, se utiliza ampliamente como antitusivo de venta sin receta. se prescribe codena y en menor grado hidrocodona para tratar la tos y supuestamente funciona por los mismos mecanismos mediados por los opioides, de manera que se acompaa de efectos secundarios como sedacin, estreimiento y, potencialmente, depresin respiratoria. si bien la mayora de los pacientes y los mdicos coinciden en que estos remedios funcionan, hay un considerable debate sobre la magnitud del efecto y el mecanismo de la accin, pues es escasa la evidencia apropiada de que se dispone160., 161., 162.. la mejor revisin sistemtica de los remedios para la tos en nios y adultos concluye que no hay datos satisfactorios indicativos de eficacia o ineficacia de los medicamentos de venta sin receta en la tos aguda163. el benzonatato (perlas de tessalon) est autorizado como un antitusivo de receta, pero al parecer se ha hecho esta indicacin sin ninguna prueba satisfactoria.no hay duda de que el paracetamol y los antiinflamatorios no esteroideos (aine), como el cido acetilsaliclico, el ibuprofeno y el naproxeno, son eficaces contra el dolor y la fiebre que pueden acompaar al resfriado comn. sin embargo, tambin hay ciertos indicios de que la eliminacin de los virus puede prolongarse164 , 165. es indudablemente razonable su uso limitado para calmar el dolor; sin embargo, no est justificado el uso generalizado de aine en los sntomas generales de resfriado comn, ya que los datos indicativos de su beneficio son limitados y muchos millares de personas fallecen cada ao por hemorragia gastrointestinal e insuficiencia cardaca congestiva atribuibles a los aine166., 167., 168..la atomizacin nasal de ipratropio se ha examinado en diversos eac de buena calidad para mitigar los sntomas de rinitis infecciosa y alrgica169 , 170. estos ensayos, incluido un estudio de dosis-respuesta realizado en 955 personas con resfriado comn extrahospitalario108, indican una utilidad definitiva en cuanto a la disminucin de la congestin y la secrecin nasal. los efectos secundarios comunes consisten en cefalea, sequedad nasal molesta y hemoptisis.el mercado de los remedios para el resfriado comn, de 4.000 millones de dlares, es controlado por varios productos que contienen frmulas de politerapia. lagunas en la reglamentacin de la food and drug administration (fda) norteamericana han permitido a los laboratorios farmacuticos mezclar diversos descongestivos, antihistamnicos, analgsicos y antitusivos y luego comercializarlos bajo diversos nombres de marcas y estrategias. si bien hay ciertos datos de eficacia derivados de los primeros ensayos en los que se combinaba un descongestivo con un anhistamnico146, pocos, si es que alguno de los productos comercializados en la actualidad se han analizado en eac, estn bien controlados a gran escala. en lo personal no recomiendo utilizar ninguna frmula de politerapia para el resfriado comn, excepto para aquellas personas que estn convencidas de que una frmula especfica les resulta eficaz.docenas de ensayos de fase i y ii que utilizan modelos experimentales de infeccin con rinovirus han comunicado la utilidad de diversos frmacos antivirales diferentes171., 172., 173., 174., 175.. sin embargo, ninguno ha demostrado seguridad y eficacia en los resfriados extrahospitalarios; de ah que ninguno pueda recomendarse. no obstante, ste es un campo de investigacin activo y es muy posible que algn da se disponga de tratamientos antivirales seguros y eficaces para el resfriado comn.en la actualidad hay ms pruebas en torno a la equincea y a la vitamina c que con relacin a cualquier tratamiento convencional. lamentablemente, por cada ensayo positivo hay uno negativo. me ha impresionado el nmero de personas, incluyendo varios mdicos, que despus de una conferencia me han dicho que su remedio favorito para los resfriados era alguna forma de bebida alcohlica caliente, como un hot toddy o ron caliente con especias. si bien, al parecer, en ningn ensayo se ha puesto a prueba ninguno de estos remedios, no deberan descartarse totalmente los testimonios del beneficio sintomtico. a un nivel social, hay una relacin inversa bien conocida entre el consumo regular moderado de bebidas alcohlicas y el nmero y la gravedad de los resfriados176. quienes consumen una o dos bebidas al da tienen menos resfriados y menos graves que los que consumen bebidas intensamente y que los abstemios. en un estudio se encontr que esta relacin era ms acentuada para el vino tinto177. personalmente, me gusta aadir un poco de ron a una taza de zumo de naranja caliente como un remedio para el resfriado a la hora de acostarme. sin embargo, esto estara contraindicado en personas con trastornos por uso de alcohol, en nios y en mujeres embarazadas. estrategias preventivas consumir menos de 10 g de grasa saturada al da.practicar ejercicio de manera regular sin realizar sobreesfuerzos.mantener relaciones sociales de apoyo.reducir el contacto con personas resfriadas.reducir factores estresantes o respuestas negativas al estrs, o ambas cosas a la vez.lavarse las manos con frecuencia.  revisin teraputicaa continuacin se presenta un resumen de las opciones teraputicas para el resfriado comn. ninguna est demostrada, ms all de la duda razonable, como segura y eficaz. no obstante, todas stas son opciones razonables teniendo en cuenta su utilidad y dao actual.fitoterapia andrografis, 400 mg cada 8 h tan pronto como aparezcan sntomas. se contina durante 3-4 das. equincea: si bien no se ha encontrado que ningn producto funcione mejor que otro, considrese utilizar una de las siguientes formulaciones cada 8 h o cada 6 h durante los primeros 3-4 das de un resfriado.1 a 2 ml de extracto en zumo o agua o por va sublingual.150 a 300 mg de extracto en polvo.1 a 5 ml de tintura: (1:5 en etanol). se dispone de pruebas limitadas sobre el uso del astrgalo, la manzanilla, el ajo, el jengibre, el limn y la menta, pero su dao potencial es escaso y pueden considerarse una opcin.  complementos alimenticios vitamina c, 1.000 mg cada 8 h durante los primeros 3-4 das de los sntomas. considrese 200 a 500 mg al da para ayudar a la prevencin. acetato o gluconato de cinc, tabletas de 23 mg cada 2 h durante el da. zicam nasal gel, una atomizacin en cada fosa nasal cada 2-4 h hasta que remitan los sntomas.  frmacoslos antihistamnicos de primera generacin (sedantes) pueden mitigar la congestin nasal pero ocasionan somnolencia. difenhidramina (benadryl), 25 a 50 mg cada 6 h.clemastina (tavist), 1 a 2 mg cada 12 h o cada 8 h, segn se necesite.clorfeniramina (chlor-trimeton) 4 mg cada 6 h.los descongestivos intranasales reducen la congestin pero tambin pueden ocasionar sequedad nasal, irritacin, insomnio, palpitaciones y elevacin en la tensin arterial. oximetazolina nasal al 0,05%, dos o tres atomizaciones en cada fosa nasal cada 12 h.fenilefrina nasal al 0,25% (neo-synephrine)* una o dos atomizaciones cada 4 h, segn se necesite.los descongestivos orales tambin ayudan a contrarrestar la congestin nasal pero conllevan los mismos riesgos que los descongestivos nasales. seudoefedrina (sudafed), 30 a 60 mg por va oral cada 4-6 h.ipratropio nasal al 0,03% (atrovent), dos atomizaciones en cada fosa nasal cada 12 h o cada 8 h. tambin es eficaz para la congestin nasal pero puede ocasionar cefalea, irritacin nasal y hemoptisis.   tcnicas biomecnicas considrese el empleo de vahos a travs de un humidificador. algunos datos apoyan la inhalacin de vahos de manzanilla. considrese la irrigacin nasal cada 12 h con solucin salina normal o hipertnica a travs de una jeringa de perilla, atomizacin nasal o una vasija de neti.    las infecciones respiratorias agudas (ira) representan la primera causa de morbilidad en el entorno familiar. se estima que en los pases desarrollados ms de la mitad de las infecciones agudas producidas por virus son de tipo respiratorio, siendo las de mayor incidencia el resfriado comn y la gripe. esta patologa puede afectar a todo el tracto respiratorio, desde la nasofaringe hasta los alvolos pulmonares, aunque cada virus respiratorio presenta mayor tropismo por regiones anatmicas concretas. la mayora son procesos benignos, salvo en pacientes en edades extremas de la vida o inmunocomprometidos, que pueden evolucionar a cuadros graves o mortales. los virus que no producen inmunidad protectora duradera (virus respiratorio sincitial [vrs] , virus parainfluenza, metaneumovirus) suelen afectar ms al tracto respiratorio inferior y la afeccin es ms grave cuanto menor es la edad. otros virus, como el del herpes simple en inmunodeprimidos y algunos enterovirus pueden producir cuadros respiratorios, aunque no de forma habitual (tablas 1 y 2).todos los virus respiratorios se eliminan en concentraciones altas por la nasofaringe, durante varios das, lo que facilita su transmisin horizontal. estos virus se propagan fcilmente por gotitas de pflgge y ncleos goticulares de wells formados al hablar, toser y estornudar. en algunos virus, tambin contribuyen a propagar la infeccin los fmites y superficies recientemente contaminados por secreciones respiratorias.casi todos ellos tienen una distribucin mundial y una marcada estacionalidad circunscrita a los meses fros del ao, incluidos el otoo y el inicio de la primavera. la coincidencia estacional de muchos de ellos (gripe, vrs, metaneumovirus, virus parainfluenza y rinovirus) unido a la diversidad de cuadros clnicos que pueden ser producidos por un mismo virus hace difcil el diagnstico etiolgico basado exclusivamente en el cuadro clnico (tabla 2). gripe. los gneros influenzavirus a y b son los ms importantes a nivel clnico y epidemiolgico. las variaciones en sus antgenos superficiales (hemaglutinina y neuraminidasa) son las responsables de las variaciones genticas mayores (recombinacin genmica) y menores (mutaciones puntuales). las variantes mayores son las responsables de las pandemias humanas. la morbilidad es ms elevada en nios y adolescentes, mientras que la mortalidad afecta fundamentalmente a sujetos ancianos con patologa de base. para la profilaxis se emplean vacunas con virus inactivados. en el ao 2009 se declar una pandemia producida por un nuevo virus h1n1 de origen porcino con una constelacin gentica nica y nueva en la especie humana.rinovirus. son los principales agentes responsables del catarro comn. hay ms de 100 serotipos diferentes y su infeccin no produce generalmente inmunidad duradera.coronavirus. son la segunda causa de catarro comn. el tipo cov es el responsable del sndrome respiratorio agudo (sars).virus respiratorio sincitial. es el principal patgeno respiratorio en nios y la primera causa de bronquiolitis aguda en lactantes.virus parainfluenza. es la causa ms frecuente de crup en nios.adenovirus. adems de cuadros respiratorios afecta tambin a las mucosas. son la causa ms frecuente de la faringoamigdalitis vrica.diagnstico de laboratorio. se deben emplear mtodos directos (cultivo, deteccin antignica o molecular). el diagnstico de eleccin lo constituyen los mtodos directos.terapia antivrica. en la gripe se pueden usar frmacos que actan sobre la protena m2 (amantadita y rimantadina) e inhibidores de la neuraminidasa (zanamivir y oseltamivir). la ribavirina se ha usado en algunas infecciones por el virus respiratorio sincitial. peramivir es un nuevo inhibidor de la neuraminidasa que ha mostrado una elevada eficacia en estudios in vitro frente a la mayora de los virus gripales.la familia orthomyxoviridae est constituida por virus con simetra helicoidal y una membrana fosfolipdica en la que hay espculas glucoproteicas de hemaglutinina (ha) y neuraminidasa (na) (figs. 1, 2 y 3) los gneros influenzavirus a y b son los ms importantes, el gnero influenzavirus c incluye virus con caractersticas biolgicas diferentes y menor importancia clnica 1,2 . el gnero influenzavirus a incluye todos los subtipos humanos y animales de los virus de la gripe a (variantes mayores) y las mltiples variantes menores derivadas de aquellos. los subtipos son las combinaciones de los 16 tipos de ha (h1-h16) y los 9 de la na (n1-n9), todos ellos descritos en aves ( fig. 4 ). los virus de la gripe b no tienen subtipos ni reservorio animal, su deriva antignica es menor y son solo responsables de brotes estacionales, circulando en la actualidad dos linajes distintos (b/ hong kong y b/victoria). los virus gripales c no causan epidemias ni pandemias, la deriva antignica es mnima y existen variantes que cocirculan 3-5 .la existencia de los virus de la gripe a en la naturaleza est ligada a tres factores: un amplio reservorio aviar, fenmenos de variabilidad por reordenamiento gentico y mutaciones y la posibilidad de salto de especie 6 . la variabilidad gentica en los virus gripales afecta a las 10 protenas codificadas por sus 8 genes, siendo las ms importantes las de la ha 7 . las variaciones mayores (nuevo subtipo) son responsables de las pandemias y aparecen por salto directo de especie o por mezcla de genes y reordenamiento gentico entre virus animales o humanos al infectar a un mismo husped 8 . las mutaciones puntuales a partir del subtipo circulante como consecuencia de la presin inmune al difundir ao tras ao en la poblacin humana (presin selectiva positiva) originan las variantes menores y son la causa de las epidemias estacionales de gripe 5,9 . los virus de la gripe humana tienen afinidad por los receptores mucoproteicos de las clulas del epitelio columnar respiratorio. el virus se difunde desde la faringe por contigidad ocasionando un proceso inflamatorio con necrosis del epitelio ciliado del tracto respiratorio superior; pudiendo afectar a bronquios, bronquiolos y alvolos. la replicacin es intensa en las 48-72 horas siguientes y hasta 9 das en nios, alcanzndose dosis infectantes 50 de 10 3-7 /ml. en el curso del proceso se produce una estimulacin de diversas citocinas e interferones que tienen un papel importante en el curso y evolucin de la infeccin gripal 10-15 .la ha es el principal determinante de virulencia y precisa activarse para ser capaz de infectar a las clulas diana. la activacin proteoltica de la ha tiene lugar en el curso de la maduracin del virus (proteolisis postraslacional) ( fig. 2 ). la elevada virulencia de algunas cepas aviares (h5 y h7) est asociada a la insercin de mltiples aminocidos bsicos prximos al sitio de hidrlisis proteica de la ha. dicha caracterstica facilita la escisin por enzimas de distinta ubicuidad, dotando al virus de patogenicidad para tejidos distintos al respiratorio (rin, corazn, sistema nervioso central [snc] ) lo que ayuda a explicar su mayor virulencia 11,12 . la capacidad de franquear la barrera interespecie est ligada a la afinidad por receptores tipo neu  2,3 (virus aviares) o neu  2,6 (virus humanos) localizados respectivamente en los epitelios digestivo y respiratorio de aves y seres humanos 8 . por otra parte, la eficaz replicacin del virus en las clulas de origen aviar o mamfero se asocia a la mutacin 627lys en la protena pb2 13 . en los subtipos h5n1 aviares se ha observado una resistencia a los mecanismos de inmunidad innata asociada a la presencia de cido glutmico en la posicin 92 de la protena ns1 14-16 .los determinantes sealados no son suficientes para explicar el complejo problema de la patogenicidad de los virus gripales que dependen de los ocho segmentos genmicos del virus. en el subtipo h1n1 actual se observa una respuesta inmune modificada en los casos graves 17 .el sndrome gripal es el cuadro ms frecuente producido por los virus gripales a y b. el virus c produce cuadros banales de vas altas 4,10 . los sntomas bsicos de la gripe son: fiebre, cefalea, quebrantamiento general y manifestaciones respira- torias. estos pueden cambiar en funcin de la edad, los hbitos de la persona, los procesos gripales previos, la virulencia de la cepa y las condiciones subyacentes como el tabaquismo. la infeccin gripal puede producir tambin formas leves semejantes al resfriado comn, bronquitis aguda, faringitis e infecciones subclnicas. la gripe es una enfermedad que afecta fundamentalmente a nios o adultos jvenes y mata a ancianos y personas con patologa crnica subyacente.la gripe se caracteriza por un comienzo brusco tras un periodo de incubacin de 24-72 horas que permite a menudo "identificar" la fuente de contagio entre los contactos. el enfermo presenta una sensacin distrmica importante y escalofros. la fiebre puede alcanzar los 38-39,5 c y dura alrededor de 3,5 das (rango entre 1 y 8 das), observndose a veces una curva bifsica febril tras una breve remisin. la cefalea es posterior al inicio de la fiebre y las mialgias afectan principalmente a la espalda y las extremidades. la tos no suele ser productiva y un 10% de los pacientes presentan roncus y sibilancias.en los ancianos el catarro es la forma de presentacin en el 80% de los casos, acompaado de postracin y gran astenia con prdida de hasta un 5% de la masa muscular 18 . la fiebre es rara.las manifestaciones digestivas aparecen en el 2-3% de los casos, siendo frecuentes los vmitos. otros sntomas son: sensacin de quemazn ocular, dolor retroorbital, lagrimeo y fotofobia. en el 10-15% de los casos se palpan ganglios cervicales pequeos, rodaderos y blandos. el cuadro es generalmente autolimitado y la mxima intensidad de los sntomas sistmicos y los sntomas mayores duran entre 3 y 5 das, aunque la astenia y la tos pueden persistir hasta dos semanas. las cepas ms virulentas son las a(h3n2) seguidas de las b, siendo las a(h1n1) las menos virulentas para los adultos mayores.la gripe en nios y adolescentes ocasiona a una fiebre ms alta que en los adultos. los neonatos a menudo presentan sntomas inespecficos con apnea y rechazo del alimento y cuadros respiratorios semejantes al croup y la bronquiolitis. casi la mitad de los nios menores de 4 aos revelan un grado importante de somnolencia y letargia. en el 20% de los nios hospitalizados menores de 4 aos se pueden observar cuadros convulsivos y una mayor incidencia de otitis media (4-5%). en lactantes menores de 6 meses se dan abdominalgias, vmitos y diarrea. el sndrome sistmico gripal puede ser especialmente intenso y postrante en nios pequeos, encontrndose la creatinfosfocinasa (cpk) elevada y la transaminasa glutamicoxalactica (got) discretamente elevada a consecuencia de la afectacin muscular. hombre * hombre *la gripe en pacientes con enfermedades de base produce descompensaciones y un incremento de la mortalidad. en enfermos cardiopulmonares la gripe se asocia a cuadros isqumicos cardacos y es un factor de riesgo para el infarto de miocardio. en los perodos epidmicos las muertes de pacientes con enfermedad pulmonar obstructiva crnica (epoc) pueden aumentar hasta un 50%. en los diabticos el riesgo de neumona asociada a gripe es 1,7 veces mayor que en la poblacin general. la combinacin de neumona gripal y diabetes es especialmente grave, y la mortalidad muy importante. la exacerbacin del asma y el agravamiento de la fibrosis qustica son aspectos a tener en cuenta. la gripe puede ser causa de infecciones nosocomiales y en instituciones cerradas. la edad y la institucionalizacin son factores determinantes, siendo los internados en residencias geritricas un grupo especialmente vulnerable, y en menor medida los de centros de internamiento psiquitrico, hospicios y cuarteles 4,18,19 . los pacientes inmunodeprimidos tienen una mayor persistencia y excrecin del virus gripal y sufren con mayor frecuencia neumona primaria viral. en pacientes trasplantados la mortalidad se asocia con el grado de neutropenia. no se ha demostrado un mayor riesgo de rechazo en receptores de transplante slido. en pacientes con sida o infeccin por el virus de la inmunodeficiencia humana (vih) avanzada se ha comunicado una mayor duracin del proceso, una afectacin respiratoria ms evidente y un curso ms prolongado. en mujeres embarazadas se ha comprobado una mayor incidencia de las complicaciones entre el segundo y el tercer trimestre de la gestacin, pero no se ha probado un riesgo aadido de malformaciones congnitas.las complicaciones de la gripe se presentan en todas las edades, pero son ms frecuentes en personas con patologas crnicas subyacentes, inmunosupresin o edad avanzada. algunas, como el sndrome de reye es exclusivo de nios y jvenes. las complicaciones ms frecuentes son las respiratorias, y entre las no respiratorias se incluyen manifestaciones cardiovasculares, musculares, nerviosas, renales, endocrinas, gastrointestinales y hemticas. las ms frecuentes en nios son: la otitis media, la traqueobronquitis, la laringotraqueitis y la bronquiolitis 19,20 .la bronquitis aguda es la complicacin respiratoria ms frecuente y est asociada a pacientes naive para el virus gripal y edad avanzada. la ms grave es la neumona primaria viral, ms frecuente con los virus a. la radiografa de trax muestra infiltrados bilaterales difusos de localizacin peribronquial sin consolidacin. el deterioro de la funcin pulmonar y del enfermo es rpido, la mortalidad muy elevada y la media de supervivencia inferior a la semana. la neumona secundaria bacteriana se debe a la sobreinfeccin por s. pneumoniae, h. influenzae o s. aureus de la lesin pulmonar producida por el virus gripal y ocurre tras una aparente remisin de la sintomatologa, 11-14 das despus del inicio del sndrome gripal. la forma bronconeumnica es la ms frecuente y grave y ha sido responsable de ms del 80% de las muertes ocurridas durante las pandemias. a veces se produ-cen neumonas mixtas vricas y bacterianas y se han descrito cuadros de empiema, absceso pulmonar, neumotrax y enfisemas secundarios a gripe con una incidencia inferior al 0,1%.el sndrome de reye es una encefalopata con degeneracin heptica grasa que ocurre en la infancia (2 a 18 aos) y cursa con una alta mortalidad (10-40%). asociado a diversas infecciones vricas, sobre todo a la varicela, se presenta como una complicacin de la gripe b y, en menor medida, de la gripe a. su incidencia se estima en el 0,3-0,8 por 100.000 casos en menores de 18 aos; existiendo formas leves ms frecuentes. otras complicaciones raras son la encefalitis, la encefalopata, el sndrome de guillain-barr, la miositis, el fracaso renal, el sndrome de coagulacin intravascular y el sndrome hemofagoctico.a excepcin de los virus de la gripe, para los dems virus no existe una vacuna, y las especiales caractersticas de los virus implicados o su patogenia hacen difcil o lejana la posibilidad de disponer de una vacuna. la profilaxis de exposicin es poco eficaz, ya que resulta muy difcil evitar el contagio y la difusin de estas infecciones. no obstante, se pueden tomar ciertas medidas, principalmente en instituciones cerradas (uso de mascarillas, aislamiento areo de casos, restriccin de la circulacin de personas, etc.) que disminuyen la influencia del factor de agregacin durante las epidemias de gripe y otras viriasis respiratorias especialmente graves (sndrome respiratorio agudo grave [sars], gripe aviar, etc.).las vacunas antigripales ms utilizadas se hacen con virus inactivados. hay vacunas inactivadas con virus enteros, con virus fraccionados (contienen ha, na, parte de nucleoprotena (np) y protena m) y vacunas de subunidades de ha y na (fraccionadas y purificadas). asimismo, se dispone de vacunas inactivadas con adyuvante (mf59 y as03) que potencian la respuesta inmune, especialmente en la poblacin anciana e institucionalizada 21 y vacunas virosomales. las normas internacionales establecen que la vacuna debe contener al menos 15 g de la ha de cada uno de los virus incluidos en ella 20 . las vacunas con virus atenuados constituyen una perspectiva ms prometedora, ya que pueden mejorar los resultados obtenidos con virus inactivados: su administracin provoca una infeccin inaparente o subclnica que induce una inmunidad semejante a la natural; la administracin por va nasal induce una inmunidad sistmica y local con produccin de inmunoglobulina (ig) secretoria, esencial en la gripe. por ltimo, la dosis necesaria puede ser pequea y su administracin muy cmoda. no deben administrarse vacunas estacionales y pandmicas atenuadas de forma simultnea.la composicin de las vacunas de la gripe tiene que adaptarse forzosamente a la variacin del virus. existe una red de 130 centros de gripe repartidos en 101 pases para poder anticipar de forma racional la variacin antignica del virus; aspecto fundamental para la fabricacin de vacunas que tardan en elaborarse entre 6 y 8 meses. la aparicin de un virus pandmico con una variacin gentica importante al inicio de la onda hace que los mtodos de gentica inversa, la sustitucin de clulas por huevos y el uso de adyuvantes deban ser tenidos en cuenta para agilizar los procesos de produccin de la vacuna 21 .la vacunacin anual con vacuna trivalente inactivada (ah3, ah1 y b) antes de la temporada gripal es la estrategia habitual. en el caso de una pandemia de gripe la estrategia comporta el uso de una vacuna inactivada monovalente (cepa pandmica) y una vacunacin amplia de la poblacin si se dispone de dosis suficientes o la asuncin de prioridades basadas en criterios sanitarios y sociales.las indicaciones de vacunacin antigripal figuran en la tabla 3. la recomendacin de vacunar a mayores de 50 aos se basa en el hallazgo de una patologa no reconocida en dicho grupo etario, tambin se ha recomendado la vacunacin de nios mayores de 6 meses y sus convivientes para reducir la difusin intrafamiliar. los episodios de gripe aviar y animal ocurridos han aconsejado la vacunacin gripal de cuidadores y veterinarios para prevenir la gripe estacional y evitar la emergencia de subtipos nuevos por infecciones dobles.la eficacia de la vacunacin gripal depende fundamentalmente de la homologa entre las cepas de vacunacin y las epidmicas y de la edad e inmunocompetencia de los vacunados. en adultos sanos se cifra entre el 80-90% y cifras variables pero menores en ancianos. la vacunacin en los grupos de riesgo reduce la hospitalizacin, las complicaciones y especialmente la neumona y la mortalidad asociada 22 .en los adultos se recomienda una sola dosis de 0,5 ml por va intramuscular o subcutnea profunda. en la primovacunacin de nios de 6 meses a 8 aos se recomiendan 2 dosis por va intramuscular, separadas por un intervalo de 4 semanas, que en los nios de 6 a 35 meses deben ser de 0,25 ml. se requieren tres semanas para estar protegido. las contraindicaciones son las de aplicacin general para cualquier vacuna adems de la hipersensibilidad a las protenas del huevo. el sndrome de guillain-barr es la nica complicacin grave tras la administracin de la vacuna antigripal. en ee. uu., en 1976, durante el programa de inmunizacin frente a la gripe porcina (vacuna monovalente a/ new jersey/ 76 hsw1n1), se observ un exceso de casos de guillain-barr entre los 45 millones de personas vacunadas, estimndose el riesgo en 1/100.000 vacunaciones que no ha sido observado despus con las vacunas actuales.son virus de la familia picornaviridae. se replican solo a 33-34 c, factor que limita su patogenia a la rinofaringe. los ms de 100 tipos antignicos no producen inmunidad cruzada entre ellos (tabla 1). la infeccin puede transmitirse por los dedos contaminados de secreciones nasales y el contacto con superficies y fmites debido a la resistencia del virus. los rinovirus son los principales responsables del resfriado comn (15-40%), cuadro benigno pero de gran repercusin econmica y social. la mayor afectacin se produce en lactantes y nios pequeos, aunque los adultos pueden sufrir hasta 6 episodios al ao (tabla 2).el catarro comn puede observarse durante todo el ao, pero es ms frecuente en los meses de transicin del verano al otoo (septiembre) y de la primavera al verano (mayo).el perodo de incubacin de la infeccin por rinovirus es de 1-4 das, coincidiendo el inicio de los sntomas con la eliminacin del virus. el catarro comn comienza con rinorrea y estornudos acompaados de congestin nasal. es frecuente el dolor de garganta, siendo en algunos casos el primer sntoma. son raros el malestar general, la cefalea y la fiebre. la secrecin nasal se va haciendo purulenta, no significando esto forzosamente un signo de infeccin bacteriana secundaria. el cuadro se resuelve espontneamente en 4-9 das sin secuelas, ocasionalmente se pueden afectar las vas respiratorias bajas. las complicaciones ms importantes incluyen otitis o sinusitis bacterianas secundarias o la reactivacin de procesos crnicos (bronquitis, asma, epoc etc.).en general, circulan varios serotipos simultneamente sin que predominen unos sobre otros. la mayora de los adultos tienen anticuerpos neutralizantes frente a varios serotipos que no producen siempre inmunidad duradera, por lo que no es excepcional la reinfeccin por el mismo serotipo. las medidas preventivas ms eficaces para evitar la transmisin son el lavado de manos y la desinfeccin de superficies.los virus de la familia coronaviridae poseen una envoltura provista de proyecciones en palillo de tambor que les confiere un aspecto de "corona solar". son la segunda causa (10-20%) de catarro comn tras los rinovirus. las infecciones son frecuentes a finales del otoo, en invierno y al comienzo de la primavera, cuando los rinovirus son menos frecuentes.adultos y nios de ms de 6 meses con patologa cardiorrespiratoria (incluidos nios con asma) adultos y nios que precisan tratamiento regular u hospitalizacin en el ao anterior por enfermedades metablicas (diabetes mellitus), disfuncin renal, hemoglobinopatas o inmunosupresin (incluida por medicamentos) nios y jvenes (de 6 meses a 18 aos) en tratamiento prolongado con cido acetilsaliclico y riesgo de desarrollar un sndrome de reye tras un proceso gripal personas  50 aos personas que pueden transmitir la gripe a otras personas con riesgo elevado de padecer complicaciones mdicos y personal sanitario de hospitales y ambulatorios, especialmente los de unidades de crticos o inmunodeprimidos empleados que prestan atencin a pacientes o residentes de instituciones geritricas o de crnicos personal que cuida a personas de alto riesgo (personal sanitario, trabajadores sociales, trabajadores voluntarios) miembros del ncleo familiar (incluidos nios mayores de 6 meses) que convivan con personas de alto riego la sintomatologa es similar a la producida por los rinovirus, aunque el perodo de incubacin es ms largo y la duracin de los sntomas ms corta. se ha documentado la presencia de neumona en lactantes, casos de infeccin respiratoria aguda (ira) en reclutas y agravamiento de la bronquitis crnica. se han descubierto tres nuevos tipos de coronavirus: cov en el ao 2003 asociado al sars, cov-nl63 en el ao 2004 y cov-hku1 en el ao 2005 (tabla 1).el sars apareci a finales del ao 2002 en distintas regiones de china como consecuencia del salto desde un reservorio animal (civetas). posteriormente se extendi desde hong kong a vietnam, singapur, canad y algunos otros pases, desapareciendo el virus a partir del ao 2004.el sars se presenta como un sndrome gripal acompaado de rigidez, tos no productiva, disnea y diarrea acuosa con sangre y moco. la mayora de los casos de sras se describieron en personas adultas, con un perodo de incubacin de 2-10 das y una mortalidad global del 10% sobre ms de 8.000 casos 23 .es un virus de la familia paramyxoviridae, subfamilia pneumovirinae, gnero pneumovirus, cuya replicacin da lugar a la fusin de las clulas infectadas, formndose grandes sincitios multinucleados. se han caracterizado dos subtipos vrs a y vrs b sin diferencias patognicas (tabla 1). su distribucin es mundial, dando lugar a epidemias anuales que aparecen a final del otoo, en el invierno y en la primavera. se transmite principalmente por manos sucias o fmites. el virus se multiplica en las clulas epiteliales de la mucosa nasal, farngea y a veces larngea, pudiendo lesionar la trquea, los bronquios, los bronquiolos y los alvolos.es el principal patgeno respiratorio en lactantes y nios pequeos y la primera causa de bronquiolitis aguda en lactantes. se observa un pico de incidencia entre los 2-3 meses de edad, sobre todo en guarderas, y es responsable de entre el 25-40% de los ingresos hospitalarios por infecciones respiratorias bajas en dicha poblacin. el espectro de infecciones respiratorias causadas por el vrs es amplio.en lactantes el 25-40% de las infecciones afectan a las vas respiratorias inferiores y consiste en neumona, bronquiolitis y traqueobronquitis (tabla 2). la infeccin respiratoria de las vas altas suele preceder a la aparicin de la bronquiolitis aguda. los sntomas principales son fiebre y disnea que progresa con rapidez debido a la obstruccin de los bronquiolos, produciendo tiraje, retraccin intercostal y supraesternal, con hipoxia y cianosis asociada. una complicacin es la otitis media con derrame. existe una relacin entre los antecedentes de infeccin y los cuadros agudos de reactivacin bronquial y asma. la exploracin radiolgica muestra una gran variedad de imgenes, hiperinsuflacin pulmonar, infiltrados intersticiales y menos frecuentemente consolidacin.en el adulto, los sntomas ms habituales de la infeccin por el vrs son los del catarro comn. tambin pueden exacerbarse procesos asmticos, bronquitis crnicas y epoc. en personas de edad avanzada o con factores de riesgo puede ser la causa de neumona con importante morbimortalidad en pacientes inmunodeprimidos y su diagnstico debe ser activamente sospechado y buscado 24,25 .existen cuatro serotipos del virus parainfluenza dentro de los gneros respirovirus (parainfluenza 1 y 3) y rubulavirus (2, 4a y 4b) (tabla 1). los serotipos 1 y 2 tienden a alternarse anualmente, produciendo epidemias en otoo. el serotipo 3 suele ser prevalente a lo largo de todo el ao, destacando su capacidad para producir brotes en instituciones. los serotipos 4a y 4b son menos frecuentes.la infeccin se produce en la infancia, ya que el 90% de los nios de 7-8 aos poseen anticuerpos frente a los serotipos 1, 2 y 3 como consecuencia de infecciones previas. los virus parainfluenza ocupan el segundo lugar, tras el vrs en la etiologa de infecciones respiratorias bajas en nios pequeos. en adultos representan menos del 5% de las infecciones respiratorias siendo generalmente leves.el virus parainfluenza 1 es la causa ms frecuente de laringotraqueobronquitis o croup en nios. el serotipo 2 produce por lo general una enfermedad similar pero menos grave. el serotipo 3 es causa importante de bronquiolitis y neumona en el lactante (tabla 2), mientras que la enfermedad por el tipo 4 suele ser leve. aparece una tos metlica o perruna que evoluciona hasta un estridor franco. frecuentemente puede progresar y aparecer una obstruccin progresiva de las vas respiratorias con hipoxia. si desarrolla bronquiolitis o neumona puede aparecer tos progresiva acompaada de sibilancias, taquipnea y tiraje intercostal, aumentando la expectoracin. en inmunodeprimidos la infeccin es ms grave y prolongada. al igual que en la infeccin por otros paramyxovirus, las reinfecciones son frecuentes y su gravedad disminuye segn aumenta la edad de las personas.en el gnero mastadenovirus existen grupos de la a a la f con 51 serotipos que tienen una considerable estabilidad ambiental, lo que facilita su transmisin. los ms comunes son del 1 al 8, el 11, 21, 35, 37 y 40; pudiendo causar brotes el 3, 4, 7, 14 y 21. poseen especial afinidad por la faringe, siendo los responsables ms frecuentes de faringoamigdalitis vrica. afectan a todos los grupos de edad y a lo largo de todo el ao, aunque en nios en edad escolar el 50% de las infecciones son asintomticas, la mxima incidencia se da entre los 6-12 meses. el periodo de incubacin es amplio (2-14 das). causan brotes localizados de ira en invierno y primavera, y brotes de fiebre faringoconjuntival en verano asociados a piscinas (serotipos 3, 4, 5, 6, 7 y 14). tambin en su forma epidmica (tabla 2) se les ha relacionado con ira en reclutas (serotipos 4 y 7). la infeccin respiratoria alta cursa con faringitis, fiebre, amigdalitis y diarrea, sobre todo en nios pequeos. en los cuadros respiratorios bajos aparece fiebre, afectacin de las vas altas, bronquitis, bronquiolitis y neumona, que puede ser ms grave en nios que en adultos y frecuentemente por el serotipo 3.existe un nuevo virus del gnero metapneumovirus descrito en el ao 2002, del que se han identificado dos linajes genticos a y b, subdividindose cada uno de ellos en dos grupos (a1-a2 y b1-b2). es un virus de distribucin mundial 26 .el metaneumovirus es un virus que puede causar desde una infeccin respiratoria alta inespecfica autolimitada en nios y adultos sanos, hasta cuadros de bronquiolitis y traqueobronquitis en nios de corta edad, as como bronquitis y neumona potencialmente grave en mayores de 65 aos e inmunodeprimidos. los sntomas son similares a los producidos por el vrs, tos no productiva, congestin nasal, otitis media, bronquiolitis y neumona (tabla 2). produce infecciones respiratorias tanto de las vas respiratorias altas como de las bajas en todas las edades, pero los grupos ms afectados son los nios menores de 5 aos, existiendo reinfecciones. hay una asociacin entre espasticidad bronquial e infeccin por metaneumovirus.este nico parvovirus del gnero bocavirus fue identificado por primera vez en el ao 2005 en muestras de aspirado nasofarngeo procedentes de nios con infeccin respiratoria 27,28 . estudios posteriores han confirmado que hbov es el responsable de un porcentaje importante de bronquiolitis y sibilancias recurrentes en nios de corta edad, circula a lo largo de todo el ao, como ocurre con rinovirus o adenovirus, con picos de incidencia en los meses de noviembre y diciembre.adems de infecciones respiratorias, se ha demostrado mediante deteccin en muestras de suero de pacientes con sibilancias que hbov es capaz de inducir infeccin sistmica como ocurre con otros parvovirus. por otro lado, hbov tambin podra ser el responsable de un pequeo porcentaje de gastroenteritis.dos nuevos miembros pertenecientes a la familia polyomaviridae llamados provisionalmente ki y wu (karolinska institutet virus y washington university virus), se han descrito en 2007 29 . estos nuevos polyomavirus han sido identificados mediante tcnicas de biologa molecular en secreciones respiratorias de seres humanos. los estudios publicados no aclaran el papel patgeno de estos virus en las enfermedades del tracto respiratorio, por ello son necesarios otros estudios que demuestren su relevancia clnica.el sndrome gripal puede no requerir ser diagnosticado por el laboratorio cuando existe una evidencia epidmica confir-mada virolgicamente. sin embargo, el diagnstico etiolgico de un cuadro respiratorio se debe hacer extensivo para el resto de los virus respiratorios, sobre todo en los casos graves o complicados, en pacientes hospitalizados o inmunodeprimidos y porque en ocasiones puede haber coinfecciones.el diagnstico de eleccin es el directo. entre los mtodos de diagnstico directo cabe distinguir aquellos que permiten la recuperacin posterior viable del virus (cultivo) y otros que no permiten su recuperacin (deteccin antignica o molecular). una combinacin de ambos que se adapte al laboratorio y la clnica es la mejor opcin.las muestras deben recogerse preferentemente en los tres primeros das desde el inicio de los sntomas (virus de la gripe). en otras viriasis y en los nios pueden recogerse muestras durante la primera semana. se recomiendan frotis farngeos o nasofarngeos, aspirados nasofarngeos y lavados nasales, estos ltimos de especial utilidad en los nios. los lavados broncoalveolares y los aspirados traqueales se realizarn preferentemente en los procesos de las vas bajas de los adultos. el transporte de las muestras debe hacerse utilizando cualquier medio de calidad utilizado en virologa. los frotis pueden conservarse a 4 c hasta 24 horas en la mayora de los casos.para el aislamiento vrico se emplea el cultivo celular clsico o el cultivo rpido por centrifugacin/cultivo (shell vial). este ltimo permite el aislamiento en 24-48 horas con una ligera merma de sensibilidad. el cultivo mixto de clulas (mdck, vero; hep2) permite el crecimiento de varios virus respiratorios ampliando el repertorio diagnstico a un coste aceptable.las tcnicas de inmunofluorescencia, enzimoinmunoanlisis e inmunocromatografa capilar son mtodos rpidos de diagnstico. algunos permiten el diagnstico a la cabecera del enfermo y sirven para instaurar un tratamiento precoz o medidas de profilaxis urgentes. pueden constituir una primera lnea de diagnstico, pero no sustituir al cultivo. la calidad de la muestra influye decisivamente en la sensibilidad (65-80%) de los mtodos rpidos; sobre todo para la inmunofluorescencia que precisa de clulas morfolgicamente conservadas. por ello, es ms adecuado el lavado nasofarngeo que el frotis. las tcnicas de amplificacin genmica (reaccin de la cadena de polimerasa en transcripcin reversa (rt-pcr) ofrecen distintas alternativas. se han ensayado pcr mltiplex que permiten el diagnstico de virus gripales y otros virus respiratorios con adaptaciones a la metodologa en tiempo real 26 .es de escasa utilidad para el diagnstico y cuidado clnico de pacientes con gripe y viriasis respiratorias. la fijacin de complemento es poco sensible sobre todo en las seroconversiones especialmente en menores de 4 meses y la igm rara y difcilmente demostrable. sin embargo, la inhibicin de la hemaglutinacin es especfica para subtipos y variantes del virus de la gripe, utilizndose principalmente en seroepidemiologa y respuesta a la vacuna.en la gripe y las viriasis respiratorias altas no complicadas es suficiente el reposo y la administracin de antitrmicos y analgsicos en la mayora de los casos.en las bronquiolitis por vrs de los lactantes es eficaz la terapia con aerosol de ribavirina durante 3-6 das, pero la necesidad de dispositivos especiales complican su uso en la prctica clnica rutinaria. el tratamiento de la gripe con antivirales requiere un inicio muy precoz (menos de 36 horas desde el inicio de los sntomas).son aminas cclicas sintticas que bloquean el canal inico de la m2 ( fig. 1) de los virus gripales. slo son activas frente a los virus a, ya que los b poseen una protena distinta. su uso est limitado por los efectos secundarios y la aparicin de resistencias recientes (ms del 90% en h3 y del 100% en h1n1 de linaje humano en 2008). la pauta en los adultos sanos es de 100 mg al da durante 3-5 das. hay descritos efectos secundarios sobre el snc y emergencia de resistencias cruzadas para ambos antivirales en el curso del tratamiento.son inhibidores de la na (ina) activos frente a los virus gripales a y b, incluidos virus aviares. inhiben y bloquean especficamente los sitios activos de la na impidiendo la liberacin y difusin de nuevos virus desde la clula infectada. el zanamivir se administra inhalado y la pauta son dos inhalaciones diarias durante 5 das. en la profilaxis se recomienda una inhalacin diaria. dada su nula absorcin no hay necesidad de reduccin de dosis en enfermos renales. su uso est indicado en adultos con buen nivel de conciencia y adolescentes mayores de 12 aos. reduce las complicaciones y el perodo de estado de la gripe entre 1-3 das. el oseltamivir se administra por va oral y tras su absorcin se metaboliza a oseltamivir-carboxilato. se elimina por filtrado glomerular y secrecin tubular con una biodisponibilidad del 80%. la pauta es de 75 mg dos veces al da durante 5 das que puede aumentarse a 150 mg en casos graves y como profilaxis una dosis diaria. hay que ajustar la dosis en pacientes con aclaramientos de creatinina inferiores a 30 ml/minuto. ninguno de los ina tiene accin sobre el citocromo p450 y no hay descritas interacciones con otros antivirales.es un nuevo inhibidor de la na que ha mostrado una elevada eficacia frente a la mayora de los virus gripales en estudios in vitro, en animales y en seres humanos 30 . este frmaco perteneciente a una segunda generacin de inhibidores podra utilizarse en un futuro para la profilaxis y el tratamiento de la gripe epidmica y pandmica dada la ausencia de reactividad cruzada exhibida entre los inhibidores de la na.adems la profilaxis con antivricos puede ser una alternativa a la vacunacin en las personas con contraindicacin para la vacunacin, intensa inmunodeficiencia, importantes factores de riesgo o en instituciones cerradas sin una adecuada cobertura para la vacunacin 31 . asimismo, podran utilizarse en pacientes con un elevado riesgo de padecer gripe y recientemente vacunados hasta que se complete su inmunizacin. pueden ser la nica alternativa al inicio de una onda pandmica.las caractersticas que definen la aparicin de un virus de la gripe con potencial pandmico son: emergencia de un subtipo nuevo (h distinta), capacidad para infectar a los seres humanos y capacidad de transmisin eficaz y continua de persona a persona. en el salto de especie de un virus animal de la gripe a a los seres humanos intervienen distintos factores. los virus de linajes humanos muestran generalmente afinidad por receptores de tipo neu,2,6 mientras que los de linajes aviares por neu,2,3 y su localizacin anatmica es distinta. sin embargo, por s solos no explican la aparente dificultad de salto de barrera gentica. otros genes internos del complejo polimerasa (pb1, pb2, pa) intervienen en la eficaz replicacin del virus en clulas no aviares 13 . la gripe espaola (h1n1) caus una mortalidad muy elevada en jvenes durante la primera onda epidmica; no suficientemente explicada por las caractersticas del virus o la exagerada respuesta inflamatoria de los afectados y dicho virus posea toda su constelacin genmica de origen aviar 3,7,13 . en 1997 ocurri en hong kong un brote de gripe aviar por un subtipo de gripe a h5n1 del que se registraron 18 casos en seres humanos, seis de ellos mortales, saldndose aquel episodio con el sacrificio masivo de aves de corral del mercado de hong kong tras exhaustivos estudios epidemiolgicos 32 . desde su reemergencia en 2003 hasta el momento actual continan producindose casos espordicos en seres humanos con una mortalidad cercana al 70%, sin demostrarse una transmisin eficaz interhumana 33 .en abril de 2009 se declar la fase 4 de alerta pandmica por la aparicin de casos producidos por un nuevo virus h1n1 de origen porcino. en el plazo de algo ms de un mes se declar la fase pandmica 6, dado que se daban las condiciones de difusin internacionalmente aceptadas.a partir de dicha fecha se produjeron simultneamente casos de la enfermedad en ms de 210 pases de todo el mundo, sin asociacin estacional. el nuevo virus virus h1n1 tiene una constelacin gentica nica y nueva en la especie humana, con genes de origen porcino de dos linajes distin-tos; el clsico americano (pb1, pa, na y np) y el euroasitico (m, na) y algunos de origen aviar y humano (pb2). se ha cifrado la mortalidad sobre casos diagnosticados en un 0,1%. el virus responsable similar a la cepa a/california/7/2009 est sustituyendo eficazmente al antiguo subtipo h1n1 estacional, pero no al tipo b ni al h3. es resistente de forma natural a adamantanos y sensible a ina, las escasas resistencias encontradas se deben a la mutacin h274y, pero continan siendo sensibles al zanamivir inhalado.se han desarrollado vacunas inactivadas para europa con distintas modalidades de elaboracin. en huevo, cultivo celular, adyuvadas, utilizando virus inactivados o salvajes, que han mostrado su eficacia inmungena con una reactogenicidad similar a las vacunas estacionales clsicas de la gripe.la extensin epizotica del subtipo h5n1 junto a la situacin epidemiolgica actual del nuevo h1n1 ha hecho que la organizacin mundial de la salud (oms) exprese la necesidad de continuar la vigilancia del h5n1 aviar ante la situacin epidemiolgica que podra originarse si se produjera un reordenamiento entre ambos virus con capacidad de transmisin interhumana 34, 35 . importante  muy importante  metaanlisis  artculo de revisin  ensayo clnico controlado  gua de prctica clnica  epidemiologa  1. cox nj, fuller f, kaverin n. orthomyxoviridae. en: van regenmortelin the new millennium, the outbreak of new coronavirus has happened three times: sars-cov, mers-cov, and 2019-ncov unfortunately, we still have no pharmaceutical weapons against the diseases caused by these viruses the pandemic of 2019-ncov reminds us of the urgency to search new drugs with totally different mechanism that may target the weaknesses specific to coronaviruses herein, we disclose a new targeted oxidation strategy (tos ii) leveraging non-covalent interactions potentially to oxidize and inhibit the activities of cytosolic thiol proteins via thiol/thiolate oxidation to disulfide (tod) quantum mechanical calculations show encouraging results supporting the feasibility to selectively oxidize thiol of targeted proteins via tos ii even in relatively reducing cytosolic microenvironments molecular docking against the two thiol proteases mpro and plpro of 2019-ncov provide evidence to support a tos ii mechanism for two experimentally identified anti-2019-ncov disulfide oxidants: disulfiram and px-12 remarkably, disulfiram is an anti-alcoholism drug approved by fda 70 years ago, thus it can be immediately used in phase iii clinical trial for anti-2019-ncov treatment finally, a preliminary list of promising tos ii drug candidates targeting the two thiol proteases of 2019-ncov are proposed upon virtual screening of 32143 disulfidestargeted oxidation strategy (tos) for potential inhibition of coronaviruses by disulfiram  a 70-year old anti-alcoholism druglas infecciones por virus continan siendo una importante fuente de morbilidad y mortalidad en los pacientes trasplantados, tanto de rgano slido (tos) como de progenitores hematopoyticos (tph). la adquisicin de estas infecciones puede producirse de forma exgena, a travs de los rganos del donante (citomegalovirus, virus de epstein-barr), mediante transfusin de hemoderivados o bien por exposicin en la comunidad (influenza, adenovirus). adems de esta va exgena, la reactivacin endgena de virus latentes, fundamentalmente herpesvirus, es un problema frecuente en los pacientes trasplantados y puede conducir a la aparicin tanto de efectos directos como indirectos sobre el rgano trasplantado. esta clasificacin permite distinguir los efectos producidos por la invasin viral directa que acarrean dao celular y tisular (p. ej., neumonitis por citomegalovirus), de los efectos inmunomoduladores mediados por la respuesta inflamatoria o por las alteraciones en el sistema inmune del husped.el riesgo de infeccin viral tras el trasplante est condicionado por la suma de muchos factores entre los que se incluyen la intensidad, virulencia y mecanismos de la exposicin viral, la intensidad y tipo del rgimen de inmunosupresin y la presencia o ausencia de inmunidad antiviral preexistente. a pesar de esta variabilidad, podemos distinguir un patrn general en la cronologa de estas infecciones tras el trasplante 1 (fig. 1 ). de este modo, los pacientes infectados por virus de herpes simple (vhs) pueden presentar una reactivacin precoz durante los primeros dos meses postrasplante. igualmente, las infecciones adquiridas a travs del injerto, como las producidas por virus de la hepatitis b (vhb) y c (vhc) y virus de la inmunodeficiencia humana (vih) pueden aparecer en el primer mes tras la ciruga. respecto al citomegalovirus (cmv), tanto la reactivacin como la infeccin adquirida en perodo peritrasplante, suelen producirse entre el primero y el cuarto mes postrasplante, aunque en la actualidad se describen cada las infecciones virales continan siendo una importante causa de morbimortalidad en los pacientes trasplantados. en estos pacientes, el riesgo de infeccin viral depende de varios factores como el tipo de trasplante, la intensidad de la inmunosupresin y la susceptibilidad del receptor. adems de efectos directos, la infeccin viral puede causar efectos indirectos derivados del efecto inmunomodulador de algunos virus como citomegalovirus o herpesvirus 6. entre estos efectos se encuentran un mayor riesgo de replicacin de otros virus, de rechazo, de otras infecciones oportunistas y de otras entidades especficas en cada tipo de trasplante. los tests moleculares cuantitativos han reemplazado en la mayora de las ocasiones a los mtodos serolgicos y al cultivo para el diagnstico de estas infecciones, especialmente en el caso de citomegalovirus, virus de epstein-barr, y los virus de la hepatitis b y c. sin embargo, estos avances diagnsticos no se han acompaado del desarrollo de antivirales especficos o de vacunas eficaces, por lo que las medidas de prevencin continan siendo fundamentales en estos pacientes.palabras clave: infeccin viral. trasplante. citomegalovirus. hepatitis. enfermedad linfoproliferativa postrasplante.viral infection remains an important cause of morbidity and mortality in transplant recipients. the risk of viral infection in these patients depends on several factors, such as the type of organ transplanted, the intensity of immunosuppression, and the recipient's susceptibility. in additional to direct effects, viral infection cause indirect effects, including greater risk of replication of other viruses, graft rejection, opportunistic infections and other specific entities for each type of transplant. these indirect effects result from the immunomodulatory activity of some viruses, such as cytomegalovirus and human herpes virus-6. for the most part, quantitative molecular tests have replaced serologic testing and in vitro culture for diagnosing infection. this approach is particularly prominent for cytomegalovirus, epstein-barr virus, hepatitis b virus, and vez con ms frecuencia episodios de enfermedad por cmv ms all de este perodo (enfermedad tarda por cmv). ello se ha relacionado fundamentalmente con las pautas de profilaxis universal en el caso de tos o con la aparicin de enfermedad injerto contra husped (eich) crnica en receptores de tph. otros virus latentes como el virus de epstein-barr (veb) y el virus herpes-zoster (vhz) se presentan mayoritariamente entre el segundo y el sexto mes postrasplante. en el caso del poliomavirus bk, se ha observado una distribucin bimodal en la presentacin de los casos; el 50% de ellos aparece durante las primeras 8 semanas postrasplante y el resto en perodos posteriores que pueden abarcar desde meses hasta aos tras el trasplante. finalmente, las infecciones por virus adquiridos en la comunidad como influenza, virus sincitial respiratorio (vsr) y adenovirus pueden aparecer en cualquier perodo.la infeccin por cmv es la principal causa de morbilidad y mortalidad de origen viral en los pacientes trasplan-tados. este virus se encuentra distribuido ampliamente en la poblacin general con tasas de seroprevalencia que oscilan entre el 60 y el 90%. despus de la infeccin primaria, el cmv permanece latente, y puede encontrarse su genoma en mltiples tipos celulares como los monocitos cd14+ y las clulas progenitoras cd34+, aunque su reservorio y los mecanismos por los cuales permanece latente son mal conocidos.el cmv puede producir tanto efectos directos como indirectos. entre los efectos directos se incluyen el sndrome viral (fiebre acompaada de neutropenia, trombopenia o alteracin de transaminasas) y la enfermedad invasora por cmv, cuyo riesgo se incrementa de forma exponencial con el aumento de la carga viral 2,3 . entre los rganos ms frecuentemente afectados se encuentran el pulmn, el hgado, el tracto gastrointestinal y la retina, en los cuales se produce una respuesta inflamatoria responsable del dao tisular. para el diagnstico de certeza de enfermedad por cmv se requiere la presencia de un cuadro clinicoanaltico compatible junto con la demostracin de lesiones histolgicas en una biopsia (inclusiones intracelulares en "ojo de lechuza") y/o cultivo positivo para cmv ( fig. 2 ). en el caso de la neumona, se acepta la deteccin del virus en el lavado broncoalveolar 4 .los efectos indirectos, a diferencia de la enfermedad invasora, son independientes del grado de viremia, y resultan de la interaccin del cmv con la respuesta inmune del husped 5 . estos efectos pueden estar, al menos en parte, relacionados con la presencia durante largos perodos de tiempo de baja concentracin de replicacin viral, lo que facilitara una disfuncin de los linfocitos cd4+ y macrfagos inducida directamente por el cmv e indirectamente a travs de la produccin de citocinas supresoras. entre los numerosos efectos indirectos del cmv descritos hasta el momento se encuentran un aumento en el riesgo de rechazo y disfuncin del injerto, ateroesclerosis acelerada en el trasplante cardaco, bronquiolitis obliterante (bos) en el trasplante pulmonar, infecciones oportunistas, neoplasias, sndrome de guillain-barr y diabetes mellitus postrasplante 2,6 ( fig. 3 ).la asociacin entre infeccin por cmv y rechazo se ha evidenciado en estudios aleatorizados con frmacos frente a cmv en receptores de trasplante renal. en uno de ellos se observ que receptores seronegativos que haban recibido injertos procedentes de donantes seropositivos (d+/r-) presentaron una reduccin del 50% en la incidencia de rechazo cuando se emple profilaxis frente a cmv respecto a placebo 7 . en otros estudios realizados en trasplante renal se ha evidenciado una mayor supervivencia y una menor tasa de rechazo a los 3 aos del trasplante en aqullos sometidos a profilaxis 8 . en el caso del trasplante heptico, la profilaxis frente a cmv se ha relacionado con una mayor supervivencia del injerto, una menor tasa de rechazo y una disminucin de la mortalidad de los pacientes 9 . este aumento de la supervivencia se ha observado igualmente en el anlisis retrospectivo de una cohorte de trasplantados renales y cardacos en situacin d+/r-sometidos a profilaxis frente a cmv 8 .adems del rechazo, la disfuncin del injerto y la disminucin de la supervivencia, la enfermedad cardiovascular ha sido relacionada con la infeccin por cmv en pacientes trasplantados. en un anlisis post hoc de un ensayo que incluy a pacientes aleatorizados a recibir ganciclovir o placebo durante los primeros 28 das postrasplante, los pacientes que recibieron profilaxis con ganciclovir y gammaglobulina presentaron menor riesgo de arteriopata coronaria que los del grupo placebo 10 . por otro lado, el efecto inmunosupresor mediado por cmv, puede traducirse en un aumento en la incidencia de infecciones oportunistas as como de neoplasias. en este sentido se ha considerado la infeccin por cmv un factor de riesgo de infecciones bacterianas y fngicas (pneumocystis jiroveci, aspergillus spp. y candida spp.), as como de enfermedad linfoproliferativa postrasplante asociada al virus de epstein-barr 11 .en la actualidad desconocemos el impacto de las diferentes pautas de profilaxis frente a cmv sobre la aparicin de efectos indirectos 12 . entre estas pautas se incluyen la terapia anticipada (vigilancia y administracin de antivirales cuando se detectan concentraciones significativas de viremia) y la profilaxis universal (administracin de antivirales a todos los pacientes). en trasplantados hepticos, la terapia anticipada se ha asociado con tasas de infeccin oportunista, rechazo y supervivencia similares a las de los pacientes que no han recibido ninguna profilaxis antiviral 13 . igualmente, no se han encontrado diferencias entre las tasas de rechazo y disfuncin renal al comparar pacientes trasplantados renales sometidos a terapia anticipada frente a aqullos en quienes se ha empleado tratamiento diferido de la enfermedad 14 . la incapacidad de la terapia anticipada para impedir la presencia de baja replicacin viral podra justificar estos resultados. por el contrario y desde un punto de vista terico, las pautas de profilaxis universal al impedir cualquier grado de replicacin del cmv podran disminuir el riesgo de aparicin de efectos indirectos. sin embargo, estos beneficios podran contrarrestarse por un mayor riesgo de aparicin de resistencias y por una mayor probabilidad de aparicin de enfermedad tarda por cmv tras la retirada de dicha profilaxis 15 .en la actualidad, la aparicin de enfermedad por cmv ms all de los primeros 6 meses postrasplante es un hecho cada vez ms frecuente, el cual se encuentra relacionado con la supervivencia a largo plazo de estos pacientes 16 . en un ensayo realizado con pacientes sometidos a trasplante heptico que realizaron profilaxis con ganciclovir oral, la mediana del comienzo de aparicin de enfermedad por cmv fue de 10 meses 17 . igualmente, en otro ensayo que compar valganciclovir con ganciclovir oral en castn profilaxis durante 90 das en receptores de tos (heptico, cardaco, renal y pncreas y rin) en situacin d+/r-, se observ cmo en ambos grupos todos los casos de enfermedad por cmv aparecieron despus de los primeros 6 meses postrasplante 18 . la aparicin tarda de enfermedad por cmv probablemente sea debida a una alteracin en la reconstitucin inmune dependiente de los linfocitos t especficos frente al virus. de hecho, se ha comprobado que la disminucin en la inmunidad celular especfica frente a cmv es un factor de riesgo de enfermedad posterior por este virus 19 . la profilaxis antiviral se ha postulado como un factor fundamental en el desarrollo de alteraciones de la reconstitucin inmune responsables de la enfermedad tarda por cmv, tanto en receptores de tos como de tph. en el caso del tph, los pacientes que reciben profilaxis con ganciclovir durante los primeros 100 das postrasplante presentan una disfuncin en la respuesta especfica frente a cmv por parte de los linfocitos cd4+ y de los cd8+, cuando se les compara con pacientes que no reciben dicha profilaxis 19 . de la misma forma, en receptores de trasplante heptico en tratamiento durante 6 semanas con ganciclovir oral, se ha comprobado una mayor supresin de la respuesta inmune inducida por linfocitos t-helper especficos en comparacin con pacientes que no haban recibido ganciclovir 20 . estos resultados podran explicarse porque en los pacientes que reciben ganciclovir existe una disminucin en la proliferacin de clulas t, as como una menor velocidad de expansin de precursores de clulas t especficas frente a cmv.la enfermedad tarda por cmv ha sido igualmente asociada con los regmenes no mieloablativos de tph. aunque estos pacientes presentan una baja incidencia de enfermedad por cmv en los primeros 100 das postrasplante cuando se comparan con los que reciben regmenes mieloablativos, las tasas de enfermedad por cmv al ao son similares en ambos grupos, y es ms tardo el comienzo de los sntomas en receptores de tph no mieloablativo 21 . este hecho podra deberse al efecto protector de las clulas t residuales procedentes del receptor en el postrasplante inmediato y a un comienzo tardo de la eich en estos pacientes.la aparicin cada vez ms frecuente de complicaciones tardas relacionadas con el cmv ha motivado que en la actualidad la profilaxis antiviral est siendo sometida a evaluacin. aunque se desconoce cul ser la mejor estrategia para evitar estas complicaciones, parece razonable pensar que entre las posibles alternativas se encuentren el desarrollar estrategias que faciliten la reconstitucin inmune de los pacientes d+/r-en los primeros meses postrasplante, la prolongacin de la profilaxis antiviral ms all de los primeros 3 meses postrasplante en pacientes de alto riesgo y el empleo de terapia anticipada basada en la antigenemia pp65 22 o en la deteccin de adn viral mediante reaccin en cadena de la polimerasa (pcr). en estos casos sera deseable desarrollar marcadores objetivos de riesgo de padecer enfermedad tarda (virolgicos o inmunolgicos), para extender la profilaxis nicamente en estos pacientes. para el tratamiento de la enfermedad establecida por cmv ganciclovir contina siendo el frmaco de eleccin tanto en tos como en tph. la buena biodisponibilidad de valganciclovir, un l-valyl ster de ganciclovir ha posibilitado que sea empleado por algunos clnicos como una alternativa a ganciclovir, aunque su eficacia deber ser demostrada en ensayos bien diseados. la resistencia a ganciclovir puede deberse a mutaciones en los genes ul97, ul54 o ambos. como pautas alternativas se han propuesto el foscarnet, cidofovir y la leflunomida. adems, otros frmacos como benzimidazol, adefovir, lobucavir y maribavir se encuentran actualmente en estudio, aunque no disponemos de datos clnicos. en pacientes sometidos a tph que presentan neumonitis por cmv se recomienda, adems del tratamiento antiviral, el empleo de gammaglobulina inespecfica. no existe evidencia de que la inmunoglobulina hiperinmune especfica frente a cmv sea ms eficaz que la inespecfica. en receptores de tos no existen datos concluyentes sobre el beneficio de ninguna de estas inmunoglobulinas.la enfermedad linfoproliferativa postrasplante (elpt) engloba a un grupo heterogneo de trastornos linfoproliferativos que comprenden desde un sndrome mononuclesico inducido por el veb hasta proliferaciones monomrficas muy agresivas, las cuales pueden ser indistinguibles de formas graves de linfoma 23 (tabla 1). esta proliferacin linfoide aparece como consecuencia de las pautas de inmunosupresin que son instauradas tras el trasplante, las cuales condicionan un descenso en la funcin de clulas t especficas frente al veb. esto desencadena una proliferacin incontrolada de clulas b infectadas por dicho virus.la elpt, sin embargo, no se asocia exclusivamente con la infeccin por el veb, sino que cada vez ms frecuentemente aparecen formas de elpt negativas a veb, las cuales tienden a desarrollarse en perodos ms tardos tras el trasplante y presentan mayor mortalidad. de hecho, para el diagnstico de elpt no se requiere la presencia de veb en clulas tumorales 24 .el perodo de mayor riesgo de aparicin de elpt es el primer ao postrasplante. en receptores de tos la mediana del tiempo de comienzo de elpt es de 6 meses, mientras que en el caso del tph es de 2 meses tras el trasplante, presentndose generalmente con formas ms extensas y agresivas de la enfermedad 23 .la incidencia de elpt vara segn el tipo de trasplante, y son el trasplante pulmonar y el de intestino delgado los que presentan mayor incidencia (5-32%) y el trasplante renal el de menor riesgo, con una incidencia inferior al 1%. estas diferencias pueden deberse a la mayor intensidad de la inmunosupresin empleada en estos tipos de trasplante, la cual es uno de los factores de riesgo ms importantes para el desarrollo de elpt. en este sentido, se ha evidenciado que la induccin y el tratamiento del rechazo con okt3 y globulina antitimoctica se relacionan con un mayor riesgo de elpt 25 .en la actualidad no existen datos concluyentes sobre la asociacin particular entre algunos de los frmacos inmunosupresores con el desarrollo de elpt. aunque existe discusin a este respecto sobre los efectos del tacrolimus en comparacin con ciclosporina a, el frmaco ms reciente micofenolato mofetil no se ha asociado con mayor riesgo de elpt 25 . el efecto de los inhibidores de la serina-treonina cinasa de mamferos, sirolimus y evorolimus no se ha aclarado an. sin embargo, podramos pensar que dado su efecto inhibidor sobre las celulas derivadas de elpt en modelos animales, su empleo no se asocie a mayor riesgo de elpt 26 .en general, podemos concluir que probablemente el grado de inmunosupresin global ms que cada frmaco inmunosupresor en particular, interviene de forma ms importante en el desarrollo de elpt. adems de con la inmunosupresin, la elpt se ha relacionado con el estado serolgico del receptor frente al donante respecto al veb. de esta forma, los receptores seronegativos que reciben rganos de donantes seropositivos presentan entre 10 y 50 veces mayor riesgo de elpt como consecuencia del desarrollo de infeccin primaria por veb 27 . esto justifica adems la mayor incidencia de elpt en la poblacin peditrica en perodos precoces tras el trasplante.el mayor riesgo de elpt en receptores seronegativos que reciben injertos de donantes seropositivos frente a veb ha posibilitado que se haya sugerido la inmunizacin pretrasplante frente al virus como una de las estrategias de prevencin de la enfermedad. sin embargo, y aunque se encuentra en desarrollo, en la actualidad no se dispone de una vacuna frente al veb 28 . por otro lado, existen datos contradictorios sobre la utilidad de la profilaxis frente a cmv para la prevencin de elpt. adems, se ha observado que el cmv es un factor de riesgo independiente de elpt en pacientes seronegativos con respecto al veb, que reciben injertos de donantes seropositivos. la correcta profilaxis frente a cmv en esta poblacin es crucial para evitar la elpt asociada al veb 29 .la localizacin donde puede desarrollarse la elpt parece estar en relacin con el tiempo transcurrido desde la realizacin del trasplante. en receptores de trasplante pulmonar, ms del 50% de todas las elpt durante el primer ao se desarrollan sobre el injerto, mientras que esta localizacin se afecta solamente en el 15% de las ocasiones tras este perodo 30 . este hecho se ha comprobado igualmente en el caso del trasplante renal 30 .adems de la implicacin del injerto, otras localizaciones extralinfoides pueden verse afectadas por la elpt; predomina fundamentalmente el tracto gastrointestinal. se ha especulado que la continua exposicin antignica que tiene lugar en esta localizacin podra desencadenar una respuesta inflamatoria local que sera la responsable de la aparicin de elpt. otras localizaciones frecuentemente afectadas por la elpt son los senos paranasales, el sistema nervioso central, los ganglios linfticos y la piel.para el diagnstico precoz de elpt se requiere un alto grado de sospecha clnica, debido a que generalmente no existen formas clnicas especficas de presentacin. esto es especialmente importante cuando se produce afectacin del injerto por elpt. los receptores de trasplante renal con elpt del injerto se presentan por lo general con insuficiencia renal, hidronefrosis o fiebre. en estos casos, la ultrasonografa puede revelar la presencia de adenopatas. si se tiene en cuenta que el aparato gastrointestinal es una localizacin frecuente de elpt, la aparicin de sntomas como diarrea o sangrado digestivo deben hacernos pensar en la posibilidad de elpt como causante del cuadro.debido a la inespecificidad de los sntomas, resulta necesario el empleo de mtodos diagnsticos que permitan establecer un diagnstico de certeza de la forma ms precoz posible. entre estos mtodos se encuentra la deteccin del adn de veb mediante tcnicas de pcr, entre las cuales se considera de eleccin la de pcr cuantitativa en tabla 1. clasificacin actual de la oms de la enfermedad linfoproliferativa postrasplante elpt zarse en cada paciente, y puede estar limitado por el riesgo de rechazo o cuando el injerto es imprescindible para la supervivencia del paciente. esta estrategia presenta diferentes tasas de respuesta, que oscilan entre el 0 y el 89%, en funcin de factores pronsticos tales como valores elevados de lctico deshidrogenasa, la afectacin multiorgnica de elpt y la presencia de disfuncin orgnica en el momento del diagnstico 34 . la quimioterapia citotxica convencional puede ser empleada en pacientes con elpt que no presentan respuesta o cuando resulta imposible reducir el grado de inmunosupresin. varios regmenes de quimioterapia como el chop (ciclofosfamida, adriamicina, vincristina y prednisona) han sido empleados en estos pacientes con buenos resultados, aunque la alta mortalidad asociada a las complicaciones del tratamiento limita su empleo en numerosas ocasiones.en cuanto al valor de los frmacos antivirales como aciclovir o ganciclovir en el tratamiento de la elpt existe una experiencia limitada que incluye un pequeo nmero de estudios no aleatorizados con diferentes poblaciones de riesgo y dosificaciones desiguales 33 .finalmente, los anticuerpos monoclonales constituyen una opcin atractiva para el tratamiento de elpt debido a su baja capacidad inmunosupresora, su actividad frente a clulas linfocitarias y su potencial para activar las clulas del sistema inmune. entre este grupo, rituximab, un anticuerpo monoclonal quimrico anti-cd20 ha demostrado los mejores resultados. choquet et al 35 realizaron un ensayo prospectivo y multicntrico de rituximab en pacientes con elpt en el que se incluyeron pacientes peditricos y adultos tratados con dosis estndar de 375 mg/m 2 semanalmente durante 4 semanas. el 68% de los pacientes present respuesta mantenida al ao de seguimiento con una baja incidencia de efectos adversos.hasta hace poco tiempo, los pacientes con elpt sin respuesta a la disminucin del tratamiento inmunosupresor eran sometidos a tratamiento con quimioterapia citotxica convencional. en la actualidad no existen estudios que hayan comparado de forma prospectiva y aleatorizada las pautas de quimioterapia frente a rituximab. sin embargo, en un estudio retrospectivo que incluy a 35 pacientes, las tasas de supervivencia y curacin fueron similares en ambos grupos, aunque con una menor toxicidad y mortalidad relacionada con el tratamiento en el grupo que recibi rituximab 36 . estos resultados han posibilitado que algunos autores sugieran que rituximab debera ser considerado antes que la quimioterapia como segunda lnea de tratamiento en los casos de elpt cd20 positivos, reservando la quimioterapia para los pacientes en los que no pueda usarse o que no respondan a rituximab 33 .otros herpesvirus: herpes-6, herpes-7, herpes-8, herpes simple-1, herpes simple-2 y virus varicela zster virus herpes 6 (vhh-6) y virus herpes 7 (vhh-7)vhh-6 y vhh-7 son beta-herpesvirus linfotropos que generalmente causan infeccin en los primeros aos de vida. la infeccin primaria casi siempre es asintomtica o se manifiesta nicamente como una enfermedad febril de la infancia, posteriormente permanece en estado latente al igual que ocurre con otros herpesvirus. en adultos la seroprevalencia llega hasta el 90%, lo que condiciona que la mayora de infecciones en pacientes trasplantados se producen por reactivacin del virus latente. en el trasplante de rgano slido las tasas de infeccin por vhh-6 oscilan entre el 31 y el 55% 37 , y existen dos variantes distintas del virus, vhh-6a y vhh-6b; esta ltima es la responsable de la mayora de infecciones en pacientes trasplantados. en el tph, la tasa de infeccin documentada llega hasta el 40%. en el caso del vhh-7 las tasas de infeccin oscilan entre el 0 y el 46%, aunque la informacin disponible es menor que para el vhh-6.en receptores de tos, la mayora de infecciones por vhh-6 ocurren entre las dos y cuatro semanas postrasplante, y se han asociado con el empleo de anticuerpos monoclonales frente a cd3 (okt3) o globulina antitimoctica, y con los regmenes que contienen sirolimus y anticuerpos frente al receptor il-12 como terapia de induccin 38 . en el caso del tph, el mayor nivel de replicacin se alcanza dentro de las primeras 4 semanas postrasplante, siendo el tph alognico, la presencia de enfermedad hematolgica avanzada, el tratamiento con esteroides y la presencia de antgeno mayor de histocompatibilidad (hla) no idntico entre donante y receptor los principales factores de riesgo.al igual que ocurre con el cmv, las manifestaciones clnicas del vhh-6 y vhh-7 pueden producirse por la accin directa del virus o bien a travs de sus efectos inmunomoduladores. las infecciones sintomticas parecen ser ms frecuentes en receptores de tph que en pacientes sometidos a tos, y pueden estar relacionadas con el tipo de trasplante y la intensidad de la inmunosupresin. en receptores de tos, la primoinfeccin suele ser asintomtica 39 y la manifestacin clnica ms frecuente es la aparicin de un sndrome febril inespecfico. en este sentido, se ha especulado que los cuadros febriles atribuidos al cmv en pacientes trasplantados pudieran estar relacionados con infecciones concomitantes por vhh-6 o vhh-7, ms que con infeccin nicamente por cmv. de hecho, se ha comunicado que el 89% de los receptores de trasplante heptico con infeccin por cmv presentan infeccin concomitante por vhh-6 variedad b o vhh-7 40 .por otro lado, el vhh-6 puede producir afectacin del sistema nervioso central tanto en pacientes sometidos a tos como a tph. esta afectacin puede traducirse en encefalitis, alteracin del estado mental y convulsiones, y son poco frecuentes los sntomas de focalidad.adems de estos sntomas se han descrito otras manifestaciones asociadas al vhh-6 como hepatitis, enfermedad gastrointestinal y mielosupresin, generalmente en forma de leucopenia o trombopenia y que aparecen tanto en tos como en tph.entre los efectos indirectos asociados al vhh-6 en tos se han comunicado un mayor riesgo de desarrollo de enfermedad por cmv y de infeccin fngica invasora en trasplantados hepticos. en estos pacientes la infeccin por vhh-6 se ha asociado adems a formas ms agresivas de recurrencia de la hepatopata por virus de la hepatitis c y con disfuncin del injerto 41, 42 . otros efectos indirectos descritos son un mayor riesgo de enfermedad por veb, virus varicela-zster y micobacterias. en pacientes sometidos a tph, existen datos conflictivos respecto a la influencia del vhh-6 en el riesgo de rechazo as como de eich.en general, de los datos disponibles podemos deducir que en el caso del tos la afectacin producida por el vhh-6 se manifiesta fundamentalmente a travs de los efectos indirectos, y son menos frecuentes los casos de enfermedad invasora. sin embargo, en los pacientes sometidos a tph, las secuelas clnicas directas parecen ser predominantes, aunque los efectos indirectos especialmente sobre la eich podran contribuir a un aumento de la mortalidad de estos pacientes.en cuanto al diagnstico, al igual que para otros herpesvirus la serologa no resulta de utilidad en el postrasplante ya que carece de la suficiente sensibilidad en el momento de la infeccin aguda. las tcnicas de pcr son las que aportan mayor sensibilidad para detectar estos virus, aunque presentan la limitacin de no diferenciar entre infeccin latente y activa, lo que puede evitarse mediante el empleo de tcnicas cuantitativas. en la actualidad no existe suficiente evidencia para recomendar la monitorizacin sistemtica de vhh-6 y vhh-7 en pacientes asintomticos.carecemos de la suficiente evidencia para recomendar profilaxis universal o terapia anticipada frente a vhh-6 y vhh-7. existen datos in vitro que han evidenciado actividad de ganciclovir, foscarnet y cidofovir frente a vhh-6 43 . estos datos se han confirmado in vivo por la disminucin de reactivaciones de vhh-6 en pacientes sometidos a tratamiento con ganciclovir o foscarnet. ambos frmacos se han empleado con xito en el tratamiento de meningoencefalitis por vhh-6 tras el trasplante. sin embargo, la tasa de curacin de este tratamiento que podemos extraer de los casos publicados llega nicamente al 60% 37 . tanto vhh-6 como vhh-7 presentan baja sensibilidad frente a aciclovir. la eleccin del frmaco antiviral deber basarse fundamentalmente en el perfil de seguridad del mismo. aunque ganciclovir presenta riesgo de nefrotoxicidad, parece razonable evitar la administracin de foscarnet en pacientes con riesgo elevado o que presentan insuficiencia renal. por el contrario, en aquellos casos en los que existan citopenias hematolgias, foscarnet puede ser una alternativa debido a que no posee los efectos mielosupresores de ganciclovir.el vhh-8 es un gamma-herpesvirus conocido por ser el agente etiolgico del sarcoma de kaposi (sk), linfoma de cavidades y la enfermedad de castleman 44, 45 . a diferencia de otros herpesvirus, la infeccin por este virus no es ubicua, presenta tasas de seroprevalencia que oscilan dependiendo de las regiones geogrficas entre el 0 y el 5% en norteamrica, el 5 y el 20% en el rea mediterrnea y ms del 50% en regiones de frica.el riesgo de reactivacin y de infeccin primaria despus del trasplante depender, por tanto, de la seroprevalencia del virus en la regin, lo que justifica las diferentes tasas de incidencia de sk que han sido comunicadas (0,5% en norteamrica y norte de europa, y 5,3% en arabia saud) 46 . la seropositividad previa al trasplante, as como la infeccin primaria adquirida a travs del donante, incrementan el riesgo de sk. adems, la intensidad de la inmunosupresin y el empleo de productos antilinfocitarios pueden desempear un papel importante en la patogenicidad del vhh-8 47 .la realizacin de tcnicas de pcr constituye una opcin atractiva para monitorizar la carga viral del vhh-8, sobre todo si tenemos en cuenta que las concentraciones de vhh-8 en linfocitos de sangre perifrica se han asociado con el desarrollo de sk 48 . el empleo de cribado serolgico del donante y receptor puede resultar til sobre todo en poblaciones de alto riesgo. sin embargo, la utilidad de la deteccin rutinaria de la carga viral en el seguimiento de estos pacientes deber demostrarse en futuras investigaciones.aunque existen estudios in vitro que han demostrado actividad de ganciclovir, foscarnet y cidofovir frente a vhh-8, el papel de estos antivirales en estrategias de profilaxis o terapia anticipada resulta incierto. se desconoce si las estrategias empleadas para la prevencin del cmv ejercen un efecto frente a la infeccin por vhh-8. en cuanto a la prevencin, resulta complicado realizar recomendaciones especficas. en receptores seropositivos frente a vhh-8 o que reciben un rgano de un donante seropositivo, la monitorizacin de la carga viral podra resultar de utilidad. en pacientes con sk, la reduccin de la inmunosupresin puede llevar a la regresin del tumor y constituye la primera lnea de tratamiento 46 . en pacientes que no responden a esta medida puede emplearse radiacin o quimioterapia. el empleo de frmacos antivirales en pacientes trasplantados con sk u otras manifestaciones de infeccin por vhh-8 requiere futuras investigaciones.el virus herpes simple (vhs)-1 y vhs2, y el virus varicela zster (vvz) pertenecen a la familia de los alfaherpesvirus. las tasas de seroprevalencia para vhs varan entre las diferentes poblaciones. oscila entre el 60 y el 80% para el vhs-1, con cifras algo inferiores para vhs-2. la incidencia de enfermedad por vhs en pacientes que no reciben profilaxis oscila entre el 25 y el 35%, y el perodo de mximo riesgo son las primeras 4 semanas postrasplante 49 . en los pacientes trasplantados la mayora de las infecciones por vhs son originadas por reactivacin de una infeccin latente, aunque se han descrito infecciones primarias transmitidas desde el injerto. la presentacin ms frecuente es la gingivoestomatitis causada por vhs-1 o la enfermedad genital o perianal originada por vhs-2. adems de estas manifestaciones el vhs puede ocasionar enfermedad invasora y producir esofagitis, hepatitis y neumonitis, que afectan fundamentalmente a pacientes trasplantados de pulmn o de pulmn y corazn 50 .en cuanto al vvz, la seroprevalencia se sita en torno al 75% y al igual que para otros herpesvirus, en la mayora de los casos la enfermedad en pacientes trasplantados se origina a partir de la reactivacin de una infeccin latente. la incidencia de herpes zster se sita entre el 2 y el 10% en trasplante renal y heptico y en el 20% para el trasplante cardaco 49, 51, 52 . en el caso del tph la incidencia es mayor y puede llegar hasta el 50%. en estos pacientes la afectacin puede ser metamrica o generalizada y aparece la mayora de los casos despus de los primeros 3 meses postrasplante. al igual que para vhs, adems de la afectacin superficial el vvz puede producir complicaciones viscerales como neumonitis, hepatitis y encefalitis.el estado serolgico del receptor condiciona el riesgo de infeccin despus del trasplante. los pacientes seropositi-vos para vhs o vvz previamente al trasplante presentan mayor riesgo de reactivacin posterior. los pacientes seronegativos pueden adquirir la infeccin a partir de la exposicin en la comunidad. en receptores de tph, la eich aguda y crnica, los receptores hla no idnticos y el trasplante autlogo por linfoma se han descrito como factores de riesgo de reactivacin clnica de vvz 38 . adems, la eich aguda y el desarrollo de varicela por infeccin primaria se han asociado a mayor riesgo de enfermedad diseminada en estos pacientes. en el caso del tos la intensidad de la inmunosupresin empleada condiciona el riesgo de reactivacin viral.en la mayora de los casos las manifestaciones clnicas tpicas de la enfermedad por vhs y vvz son la principal herramienta para el diagnstico. los mtodos de laboratorio se reservan para los casos de presentacin atpica o afectacin visceral. entre estos mtodos, el cultivo viral obtenido de muestras de la lesin es comnmente empleado, as como las tcnicas de pcr que pueden emplearse para detectar el genoma viral tanto en muestras de tejido como de fluidos.en cuanto a la profilaxis, aciclovir y valaciclovir han mostrado ser efectivos para prevenir la enfermedad por vhs y vvz 53 . adems, los regmenes empleados en la profilaxis frente a cmv son efectivos para la prevencin de vsh y probablemente tambin para vvz 7 . en candidatos a trasplante que son seronegativos frente a vvz, la vacunacin con virus atenuados estara indicada para prevenir la infeccin primaria postrasplante. en estos pacientes se aconseja un intervalo de entre cuatro y seis semanas entre la vacunacin y la realizacin del trasplante al ser una vacuna de virus atenuados. adems, y debido a su alta contagiosidad, en estos pacientes resulta recomendable la vacunacin de los potenciales contactos seronegativos. la administracin de la vacuna se desaconseja una vez que se ha realizado el trasplante al ser una vacuna de virus atenuados. finalmente, los pacientes seronegativos frente a vvz expuestos a un caso de varicela, zster o exantema tras vacunacin deben recibir profilaxis postexposicin mediante la administracin de gammaglobulina especfica tan pronto como sea posible (dentro de las 92 h siguientes) 54 . pasado este perodo la administracin de antivirales como profilaxis postexposicin debe ser considerada.en pacientes seropositivos la profilaxis con aciclovir no se recomienda de forma sistemtica dada la buena respuesta al tratamiento y el riesgo potencial de desarrollo de resistencias asociado a la profilaxis. para el tratamiento de la enfermedad por vhs o vvz, el frmaco de eleccin es aciclovir administrado por va intravenosa. la administracin de aciclovir oral, famciclovir o valaciclovir puede considerarse en casos de afectacin orolabial por vhs o de zster monometamrico. en los pacientes trasplantados la resistencia a aciclovir es un hecho infrecuente y el tratamiento con foscarnet es la alternativa en estos casos.el vhb se encuentra distribuido ampliamente en todas las zonas del mundo; existen aproximadamente unos 500 millones de portadores crnicos y una incidencia de in-feccin de 30.000-50.000 casos al ao, de los cuales el 10 y el 15% desarrollarn hepatitis crnica.la prevalencia de vhb entre los pacientes incluidos en programa de hemodilisis y trasplantados renales se encuentra entre el 0,1 y el 1,4%. en estos pacientes, la positividad del antgeno de superficie del virus de la hepatitis b (hbs-ag) implica un peor pronstico que los pacientes negativos de hbs-ag, especialmente cuando se acompaa de coinfeccin por virus de la hepatitis c 55 . en trasplantados cardacos, la prevalencia de infeccin por vhb se sita en el 3-10%. la mayora de estos pacientes permanecen asintomticos durante largos perodos aunque hasta un 50% desarrollar cirrosis a los 7-10 aos del trasplante. en el caso de los trasplantados hepticos, a pesar de que el empleo de inmunoglobulina especfica frente al vhb (ighb) junto con lamivudina ha reducido las tasas de recurrencia hasta menos del 10%, la recidiva de la infeccin postrasplante contina limitando el pronstico especialmente en aquellos con replicacin activa en el momento de ser trasplantados 55 .entre los principales factores de riesgo de adquisicin de novo de vhb tras el trasplante se encuentran el estado serolgico donante/receptor, la intensidad de la inmunosupresin, el empleo de hemoderivados y la ausencia de vacunacin previa al trasplante 56 . el trasplante de un rgano positivo de hbs-ag a un receptor seronegativo supone un alto riesgo de transmisin del virus 57 . en los casos de donantes negativos de hbs-ag y positivos de hbc-ac existe un alto riesgo de transmisin a receptores de trasplante heptico a menos que se administre una pauta intensiva de profilaxis. sin embargo, el riesgo de transmisin a receptores de trasplante no heptico seronegativos es escaso 58 . por otro lado, los candidatos positivos de hbs-ag que presentan adn viral o hbe-ag positivo tienen una mayor mortalidad de origen heptico que aquellos hbs-ag positivos sin adn viral o hbe-ag. para la prevencin de la infeccin por vhb se aconseja la vacunacin de forma precoz de los candidatos negativos de hbs-ag, realizando una monitorizacin anual de los ttulos de anticuerpos con administracin de una dosis de recuerdo si el ttulo desciende por debajo de 10 mu/ml 59 . adems de la vacunacin debe realizarse un cribaje riguroso de los hemoderivados as como la monitorizacin de parmetros serolgicos y virales en todos los pacientes en programa de hemodilisis.para prevenir o al menos retrasar la reinfeccin por vhb tras el trasplante heptico se recomienda el empleo combinado de ighb y lamivudina. en trasplantados no hepticos puede emplearse lamivudina en casos de hepatitis activa y alta carga viral, teniendo en cuenta que el tratamiento con interfern alfa es menos eficaz en este contexto y que ha sido asociado con un mayor riesgo de rechazo. en algunos casos de resistencia a lamivudina, la continuacin de este tratamiento se ha mostrado eficaz en algunas ocasiones. adems, otro frmaco como adefovir ha sido satisfactoriamente empleado en infecciones por vhb resistentes a lamivudina, aunque debido a la posibilidad de toxicidad renal su empleo puede estar limitado en pacientes con disfuncin renal asociada a los inhibidores de la calcineurina.en la actualidad se estima que existen 150 millones de pacientes infectados por el vhc en todo el mundo. de los pacientes infectados, el 85% desarrolla una infeccin crnica mientras que el 10-30% evolucionan a cirrosis a largo plazo. los factores de riesgo universales para la adquisicin de la infeccin son la transfusin de hemoderivados y el uso de drogas por va parenteral. adems, el vhc puede transmitirse a travs del injerto con un riesgo que vara en funcin del rgano trasplantado. en pacientes en dilisis la incidencia de infeccin por vhc de novo ha disminuido mediante la aplicacin de medidas de control y el cribaje de productos sanguneos, hasta situarse actualmente en el 0,7-3% 60 . una vez que se realiza el trasplante renal, la infeccin por vhc se asocia con mayor morbilidad y mortalidad que los pacientes trasplantados vhc negativos. adems, los receptores de trasplante renal infectados por vhc presentan mayor riesgo de glomerulonefritis membranoproliferativa, membranosa, vasculitis leucocitoclstica y crioglobulinemia 61 . es importante destacar que en estos pacientes no existe correlacin entre el grado de elevacin de transaminasas, la carga viral y el genotipo del vhc con la gravedad de las lesiones histolgicas. la enfermedad heptica avanzada, particularmente la cirrosis, en pacientes con insuficiencia renal crnica, se considera una contraindicacin para el trasplante renal aislado, por lo que se debe considerar la biopsia renal para los candidatos sin evidencia clnica de cirrosis. en estos casos se recomienda evaluar la realizacin de trasplante doble de rin e hgado.una vez que se realiza el trasplante renal, la disfuncin en la respuesta de los linfocitos t puede originar una menor progresin de la enfermedad, lo que podra explicar la mayor supervivencia de los pacientes trasplantados infectados por vhc en comparacin con los pacientes vhc positivos en hemodilisis 62 . sta es la razn por la que se recomienda aceptar a los pacientes con insuficiencia renal terminal para la realizacin de trasplante.en receptores de trasplante cardaco negativos de vhc el empleo de donantes seropositivos implica un significativo riesgo de transmisin del vhc, aunque no parece existir gran influencia sobre el injerto y la supervivencia del paciente.respecto al trasplante heptico, la hepatopata crnica por vhc constituye su principal indicacin a pesar de que la tasa de reinfeccin sobre el injerto es virtualmente universal, y en el 50-80% se desarrollar hepatitis del injerto. de hecho, la supervivencia tanto del rgano trasplantado como del paciente es inferior a la de los trasplantados hepticos negativos de vhc, dependiendo del grado de replicacin viral previa al trasplante.adems de la intensidad de la replicacin, el tipo y la intensidad de la inmunosupresin presentan una influencia sobre la progresin de la hepatopata por vhc postrasplante, con una mayor incidencia de fibrosis del injerto y cirrosis con pautas de doble o triple terapia que la inmunosupresin con un nico frmaco.en algunos estudios se ha evidenciado que el trasplante heptico desde un donante positivo de vhc a un receptor seropositivo parece ser una estrategia segura 63 . sin embargo, y dado que el genotipo 1 presenta menor respuesta al tratamiento antiviral y requiere una mayor duracin de ste, se recomienda evitar el trasplante de rganos de un donante con genotipo 1 a un receptor seropositivo pero con un genotipo ms favorable como el 2 o 3.el diagnstico de infeccin crnica y activa se realiza detectando el arn del virus en sangre.el interfern alfa en combinacin con ribavirina es el tratamiento ms eficaz para la hepatopata crnica por vhc. sin embargo, en trasplantados renales el empleo de interfern se ha asociado a rechazo, prdida del injerto y a un rebote de la carga viral a los valores anteriores al tratamiento, por lo que se desaconseja su uso en estos pacientes. la eficacia a largo plazo de la monoterapia con ribavirina en esta poblacin es desconocida. en contraste con los trasplantados renales, el tratamiento con interfern en monoterapia o combinado con ribavirina se ha recomendado en receptores de trasplante heptico positivos de vhc. la respuesta virolgica completa se presenta hasta en el 50% de los pacientes, aunque slo una parte de ellos presentar respuesta viral sostenida despus de la retirada del tratamiento. la escasez de los datos disponibles sobre tratamiento del vhc en trasplantados cardacos, pulmonares o de pulmn y corazn no permite realizar recomendaciones generales en el momento actual.el virus bk pertenece a la familia de los poliomavirus y se encuentra ampliamente distribuido con tasas de seroprevalencia del 80%. en el husped inmunocomprometido la mayora de casos de infecciones por virus bk suceden como consecuencia de la reactivacin del virus latente, que se encuentra fundamentalmente en las clulas epiteliales del tbulo renal. en esta poblacin, hasta el 90% de las infecciones son asintomticas aunque pueden aparecer una gran variedad de manifestaciones como viruria y viremia, ulceracin y estenosis uretral, cistitis hemorrgica y nefritis intersticial 64 .la mayora de casos de infecciones por virus bk se producen en pacientes sometidos a trasplante renal. en estos pacientes la nefritis tubulointersticial (nefropata bk) constituye la expresin ms frecuente de enfermedad por este virus 65 . esta entidad se manifiesta tpicamente como una elevacin en la concentracin de creatinina plasmtica como consecuencia de una progresiva prdida de funcin del injerto, por lo que puede resultar difcil su distincin del rechazo o de toxicidad farmacolgica.aunque los factores de riesgo no estn bien definidos, el estado donante/receptor d+/r-y d+/r+, la intensidad de la inmunosupresin, el empleo de algunos inmunosupresores especficos (tacrolimus y cido micofenlico) y la presencia de rechazo se han asociado a mayor riesgo de nefropata bk 38 .para el diagnstico definitivo de enfermedad por virus bk se requiere la realizacin de biopsia renal. en estadios iniciales de la enfermedad, pueden observarse inclusiones virales junto con un pequeo grado de inflamacin. las fases tardas se caracterizan por un infiltrado de clulas mononucleares con invasin focal del uroepitelio y el tbulo renal. las clulas infectadas muestran grandes ncleos hipercromticos junto con inclusiones virales intra-nucleares. este hallazgo es importante ya que para confirmar el diagnstico resulta necesaria la demostracin del virus en el interior de la clula infectada, lo que permite distinguir a la nefropata bk del rechazo.adems del examen anatomopatolgico pueden emplearse otros mtodos no invasores, como el estudio citolgico de la orina que permite la visualizacin de las clulas decoy (clulas epiteliales con grandes ncleos e inclusiones basfilas). la presencia de estas clulas es sugestiva de viruria, y presentan una sensibilidad de aproximadamente el 100% para el diagnstico de infeccin por virus bk, aunque con un valor predictivo positivo del 30% 66 . esto puede ser debido a que las clulas decoy pueden aparecer en la infeccin por otros virus como el jc, cmv o adenovirus, o bien porque la presencia de viruria presenta escasa correlacin con la nefritis por virus bk. la escasa especificidad del estudio citolgico ha motivado el empleo de tcnicas moleculares en sangre y orina para el diagnstico de esta infeccin. de esta forma se ha evidenciado cmo la viremia plasmtica de bk se correlaciona con la presencia de nefropata por este virus y puede emplearse para monitorizar la respuesta al tratamiento 66 .para el tratamiento de la nefropata bk la medida ms importante consiste en la disminucin de la inmunosupresin. sin embargo, en algunas ocasiones la aplicacin de esta estrategia se encuentra limitada por el rechazo de forma concomitante con la nefritis viral. esto ha motivado el empleo de frmacos antivirales como vidarabina, cidofovir y leflunomida, de los cuales disponemos de escasos datos sobre su eficacia 67 .parvovirus b-19 es un virus adn cuya seroprevalencia en adultos oscila entre el 60% y el 90%. la infeccin primaria por este virus ocurre ms frecuentemente en la infancia y se manifiesta clsicamente como eritema infeccioso, aunque en la mayora de ocasiones se presenta de forma asintomtica. en adultos, la infeccin primaria por parvovirus b-19 puede manifestarse como artritis y en los casos de adquisicin durante el embarazo se ha asociado con el desarrollo de hydrops fetalis.en pacientes trasplantados la incidencia de infeccin por parvovirus b-19 es baja, a pesar de que el virus persiste en los tejidos de los individuos seropositivos, y que, por tanto, podra transmitirse potencialmente a travs del injerto o de productos sanguneos trasfundidos al receptor 68 .en pacientes sometidos a tos la infeccin por parvovirus b-19 se manifiesta tpicamente por el desarrollo de aplasia pura de serie roja con un escaso o ausente recuente reticulocitario. ello es debido a que parvovirus b-19 infecta a los precursores eritroides mediante la unin al receptor conocido como antgeno p. adems, parvovirus b-19 se ha asociado con otras manifestaciones como hepatitis, neumonitis, miocarditis y disfuncin del injerto. en receptores de tph, la anemia asociada a parvovirus b-19 es un hecho infrecuente probablemente por el efecto profilctico de la inmunoglobulina intravenosa que es administrada en muchos de estos pacientes.para el diagnstico de infeccin por parvovirus b-19 se han empleado la serologa, el examen histolgico de la m-dula sea y la deteccin del adn viral mediante pcr. la serologa presenta la importante limitacin de su escasa sensibilidad en pacientes inmunosuprimidos, por lo que la presencia de igm negativa frente a parvovirus b-19 no descarta el diagnstico de infeccin. en estos pacientes el diagnstico puede realizarse mediante tcnicas de pcr en sangre perifrica. en los casos en los que exista alta sospecha de enfermedad por parvovirus b-19 en los que el resultado de la pcr haya sido negativo, el diagnstico puede confirmarse mediante estudio histolgico de la mdula sea 68 .para el tratamiento de la enfermedad por parvovirus b-19 no existen en la actualidad frmacos antivirales disponibles, por lo que se aconseja si es posible la reduccin en la inmunosupresin. el hecho de que la viremia desaparezca con la generacin de anticuerpos, ha llevado a la inclusin de la inmunoglobulina intravenosa en el tratamiento de la enfermedad por parvovirus b-19 69 . la inmunoglobulina intravenosa contiene inmunoglobulinas especficas frente a parvovirus b-19 y resulta til en el tratamiento de la anemia asociada a la replicacin viral. sin embargo, en la actualidad se desconocen tanto las dosis como la duracin ptima del tratamiento con inmunoglobulina y se observan recadas tras el cese de su administracin. para el diagnstico precoz de estas recadas puede ser recomendable la monitorizacin de las concentraciones de hemoglobina una vez suspendido el tratamiento y considerar la realizacin de pcr en aquellos pacientes que desarrollen anemia. en aquellos pacientes en quienes se confirme el diagnstico, el retratamiento con inmunoglobulina intravenosa puede ser empleado.los virus respiratorios causan frecuentemente enfermedad que afecta al tracto respiratorio tanto en pacientes inmunosuprimidos como inmunocompetentes, y afectan sobre todo a la poblacin infantil. entre estos virus se incluyen el virus respiratorio sincitial (vrs), parainfluenza (vp), influenza (vi), adenovirus, rhinovirus, coronavirus y enterovirus.el vrs es un virus arn causante de epidemias anuales por todo el mundo. aunque los sntomas de la infeccin por vrs son generalmente leves en nios y adultos, se han descrito casos de enfermedad invasora fundamentalmente en receptores de tph relacionados con la adquisicin de la infeccin por debajo del primer ao de edad, la enfermedad pulmonar subyacente y el grado de inmunosupresin 70 . el diagnstico definitivo se realiza mediante el cultivo del virus en determinadas lneas celulares, aunque el coste y el tiempo requeridos para su crecimiento han posibilitado la aparicin de otras alternativas como la deteccin antignica y los mtodos de shell vial. para estas infecciones se recomienda el tratamiento de soporte en los casos de afectacin del tracto respiratorio superior en ausencia de factores de riesgo. en los casos de afectacin del tracto respiratorio inferior o de presencia de factores de riesgo se recomienda el empleo de aerosoles de ribavirina en combinacin con inmunoglobulina intravenosa o palivizumab, un anticuerpo monoclonal especfico frente a vrs 38 .el vi se considera uno de los virus causantes de morbimortalidad ms importantes a lo largo de todo el mundo. en la actualidad la informacin prospectiva sobre la incidencia de este virus en la poblacin trasplantada es escasa. sin embargo, en estudios retrospectivos se ha evidenciado el papel del virus en la aparicin de enfermedad grave en pacientes peditricos. en trasplantados adultos la gravedad de la enfermedad por vi se ha relacionado con la intensidad de la inmunosupresin, el tipo de trasplante y la variacin estacional en su virulencia 38 . el diagnstico de certeza de infeccin por vi se obtiene por el aislamiento del virus en el cultivo. adems, otros mtodos como el cultivo shell vial, la deteccin antignica y la deteccin de actividad neuraminidasa son relativamente sensibles y especficos aunque no siempre se encuentran disponibles. el tratamiento precoz de la infeccin por influenza a con amantadina o los inhibidores de neuraminidasa zanamivir y oseltamivir se ha mostrado efectivo en adultos sanos. nicamente estos ltimos presentan eficacia frente a influenza b. el tratamiento de vi con zanamivir inhalado u oseltamivir oral parece reducir el riesgo de complicaciones respiratorias aunque ninguno de estos frmacos ha demostrado eficacia en la prevencin de complicaciones graves del vi. a pesar de la ausencia de datos en pacientes trasplantados, algunos autores recomiendan el uso de un antiviral para el tratamiento de los pacientes trasplantados con infecciones por vi. la vacunacin de los pacientes de alto riesgo parece la medida ms eficaz frente al vi. esta vacuna debe administrarse adems a los contactos cercanos y a los trabajadores sanitarios 38 . la respuesta a la vacuna en los pacientes trasplantados no es, sin embargo, tan intensa como la que aparece en la poblacin general.las infecciones por los tipos 1 y 2 del vp se producen generalmente en invierno, a diferencia del tipo 3, cuyas infecciones se distribuyen a lo largo de todo el ao. el vp puede producir enfermedad grave en pacientes peditricos y en receptores de trasplante pulmonar de cualquier edad. en estos ltimos, la infeccin por vp se ha asociado con la presencia de rechazo agudo y bronquiolitis obliterante. las manifestaciones clnicas de esta infeccin incluyen desde un cuadro catarral de vas altas hasta insuficiencia respiratoria grave. al igual que para el vrs y el vi, el cultivo del virus y la deteccin antignica mediante inmunofluorescencia constituyen las principales herramientas para el diagnstico. a ellas se ha sumado recientemente la deteccin del arn viral. aunque no se dispone de tratamiento antiviral especfico frente a vp, se ha propuesto el empleo de ribavirina en aerosol en pacientes de alto riesgo con enfermedad grave asociada a este virus. sin embargo, en el anlisis de esta estrategia procedente de estudios no aleatorizados en receptores de tph se ha evidenciado escasa respuesta clnica. las medidas de control de la transmisin nosocomial representan la mejor actitud profilctica ya que no existen pautas especficas de profilaxis frente a vp.los pacientes trasplantados pueden adquirir el virus west nile (vwn) a travs del donante, mediante transfusin o a travs de exposicin en la comunidad. en es-tos pacientes, el riesgo de desarrollo de meningoencefalitis tras la exposicin es mayor que en individuos inmunocompetentes. en reas endmicas, el cribado de los hemoderivados, la monitorizacin de los donantes y las medidas de precaucin de los receptores frente a la adquisicin comunitaria del virus constituyen las principales estrategias preventivas. la reduccin de la inmunosupresin representa la principal estrategia en los receptores con enfermedad por vwn 71 .financiado por el ministerio de sanidad y consumo, instituto de salud carlos iii, red espaola de investigacin en patologa infecciosa (reipi rd06/0008).los artculos publicados en la seccin "formacin mdica continuada" forman parte de grupos temticos especficos (antibiograma, antimicrobianos, etc.). una vez finalizada la publicacin de cada tema, se irn presentando al sistema espaol de acreditacin de la formacin mdica continuada (seaformec) para la obtencin de crditos.una vez concedida la acreditacin, esta se anunciar oportunamente en la revista y se abrir un perodo de inscripcin gratuito para los socios de la seimc y suscriptores de la revista, al cabo del cual se iniciar la evaluacin, durante un mes, que se realizar a travs de la web de ediciones doyma.a) el citomegalovirus puede causar enfermedad despus del cuarto mes postrasplante. b) la reactivacin del virus de epstein-barr se presenta mayoritariamente entre el segundo y el sexto mes postrasplante. c) no est influida por la intensidad de la inmunosupresin. d) las infecciones adquiridas a travs del injerto, como la hepatitis b, pueden aparecer en el primer mes tras la ciruga. e) la enfermedad por virus respiratorios puede producirse en cualquier momento tras el trasplante.a) comparte gran parte de su genoma con el herpesvirus 6. b) se ha asociado con rechazo en pacientes con trasplante renal. c) las pautas de terapia anticipada se han asociado con la aparicin de infecciones tardas. d) se ha asociado con mayor riesgo de infecciones fngicas. e) puede reactivar la replicacin de otros herpesvirus.3. respecto a la enfermedad linfoproliferativa postrasplante seale la respuesta falsa:. a) se asocia al virus de epstein-barr. b) suele aparecer durante el primer ao postrasplante. c) existen una gran variedad de formas clnicas. d) la deteccin del virus de epstein-barr es imprescindible para el diagnstico. e) la reduccin de la inmunosupresin es fundamental para su tratamiento.a) en receptores de trasplante de rgano slido la primoinfeccin suele ser asintomtica. b) no tiene propiedades inmunomoduladoras. c) los efectos indirectos son excepcionales en trasplantados de rgano slido. d) se recomienda la monitorizacin sistemtica del vhh-6 en los pacientes trasplantados. e) aciclovir es eficaz frente a vhh-6.a) en pacientes trasplantados seronegativos se considera indicada la vacunacin. b) en pacientes seropositivos no se recomienda la profilaxis con aciclovir. c) la incidencia de herpes zster es superior en tph. d) los pacientes seronegativos expuestos a un paciente con exantema por vvz deben recibir profilaxis postexposicin. e) aciclovir constituye el tratamiento de eleccin.a) el trasplante de un rgano de donante positivo de hbs-ag a un receptor seronegativo supone alto riesgo de transmisin del virus. b) la coinfeccin por virus de la hepatitis c implica peor pronstico en el trasplante renal. c) se considera indicada la vacunacin pretrasplante de los candidatos seronegativos. d) en casos de resistencia a lamivudina, la continuacin del tratamiento se ha mostrado eficaz en algunos casos. e) todas las anteriores son correctas.a) la tasa de reinfeccin sobre el injerto es prcticamente del 100%. b) el genotipo 1 presenta mayor respuesta al tratamiento antiviral. c) el interfern alfa se asocia a rechazo en trasplantados renales. d) la supervivencia es mayor en trasplantados renales que en pacientes en hemodilisis. e) la serologa negativa no descarta enfermedad activa.a) la presencia de rechazo se ha asociado a nefropata por bk. b) existe buena asociacin entre viruria y nefropata por bk. c) existe buena asociacin entre viremia y nefropata por bk. d) las clulas decoy pueden aparecer en la infeccin por adenovirus. e) en la mayora de ocasiones se distingue fcilmente del rechazo.a) su incidencia en pacientes trasplantados es alta. b) la anemia por parvovirus b-19 es frecuente en receptores de tph. c) la presencia de igm negativa descarta el diagnstico. d) la manifestacin ms tpica de la infeccin en la infancia es la artritis. e) todas las respuestas anteriores son falsas.a) se producen fundamentalmente en la infancia. b) los aerosoles de ribavirina pueden emplearse en el tratamiento de la infeccin por vrs. c) la vacunacin de los pacientes de alto riesgo es la medida de prevencin ms eficaz frente a la infeccin por virus influenza. d) no se dispone de tratamiento antiviral especfico frente al virus parainfluenza. e) todas las anteriores son correctas.el asma, con una prevalencia del 8-10%, es la enfermedad crnica ms frecuente de la infancia. de forma paradjica, tambin es una enfermedad que sufre retrasos diagnsticos y, por tanto, retrasos en cuanto al tratamiento, que a veces es insuficiente. los progresos referentes a los mecanismos fisiopatolgicos, as como la mejora de las estrategias teraputicas centradas en la inflamacin, deben permitir en el futuro que los nios asmticos lleven una vida (casi) normal, a la vez que se conserva o se restaura su reserva funcional respiratoria.el asma se puede considerar la resultante del entorno sobre un paciente predispuesto y los estudios sobre la gentica del asma son muy numerosos, incluso aunque hasta el momento slo han podido identificar los genes de susceptibilidad [1] . el asma de los nios mayores adquiere sus elementos caractersticos a partir de los 2 o 3 aos. antes de los 3 aos, se habla del asma del lactante. de los 3 a los 5-6 aos (nio de edad preescolar), las diferencias con el asma de los nios mayores se atenan de forma progresiva. desde un punto de vista prctico, se distingue esencialmente el asma del nio mayor, cuya definicin tiende a confundirse con el del adulto, y el asma del lactante, cuya definicin es clnica.definicin la definicin del asma infantil insiste en el aspecto fisiopatolgico. el asma es una enfermedad inflamatoria crnica de las vas respiratorias en la que intervienen numerosas clulas, sobre todo los mastocitos, los eosinfilos y los linfocitos t. en las personas predispuestas, esta inflamacin provoca sntomas recidivantes de sibilancias, disnea y tos, en especial por la noche y a primera hora de la maana. estos sntomas suelen asociarse a una obstruccin difusa, pero variable, de las vas respiratorias, que es al menos parcialmente reversible, ya sea de forma espontnea o bien con tratamiento. la inflamacin tambin provoca un aumento de la reactividad de las vas respiratorias a numerosos estmulos. sbito, sino que en la mayora de las ocasiones la crisis comienza de forma progresiva por la tarde o al final del medioda, precedida a veces de prdromos. stos varan segn los nios, pero casi siempre son iguales en el mismo nio: rinorrea clara acuosa, tos seca en quintas. en este estadio, existe una disminucin del flujo espiratorio mximo (fem). la disnea, que al principio es silenciosa, despus se vuelve ruidosa y, sobre todo, con sibilancias y un predominio espiratorio. la tos es frecuente y puede acompaarse de vmitos que conllevan un riesgo de comprometer la absorcin de frmacos. puede convertirse en productiva y dar lugar a una expectoracin hiperviscosa. en la exploracin, el nio est sentado o en bipedestacin, inclinado hacia delante o incluso tumbado, a menudo angustiado. las sibilancias pueden escucharse a distancia. en la palpacin se percibe la hipersecrecin a nivel del trax; se debe buscar de forma sistemtica en las zonas supra e infraclaviculares la presencia de una crepitacin similar a la de la nieve debido a un enfisema subcutneo. el trax aparece distendido en inspiracin e hipersonoro. la espiracin es activa, lenta y ruidosa. la auscultacin es caracterstica enseguida, con numerosos estertores crepitantes bronquiales y, sobre todo, estertores sibilantes de predominio espiratorio. la temperatura suele ser normal. slo la existencia de una fiebre elevaba debe hacer que se busque una causa infecciosa de la crisis. la respuesta inicial a los broncodilatadores, la naturaleza y la intensidad de los sntomas permiten clasificar la crisis como leve, moderada o grave (cuadro i).en teora, la disnea cede de forma espontnea en unas horas, pero casi siempre se acorta en gran medida con los tratamientos apropiados. el retorno de la respiracin y auscultacin normales no es inmediato, pues se pueden observar algunas sibilancias que se trata en realidad de un cuadro de asma.la exacerbacin se define como la presencia de sntomas agudos que duran ms de 24 horas y que requieren un cambio de tratamiento [2] . la exacerbacin grave se define por la necesidad de tomar corticoides orales y de recurrir a la asistencia sanitaria. en la actualidad, este trmino tiende a sustituir al de crisis de asma, que se defina como un episodio paroxstico de cualquier duracin. los sntomas de corta duracin (menos de 24 h) traducen en la mayora de las ocasiones el control diario del asma. la crisis puede traducirse por uno solo de estos tres signos cardinales: tos, sibilancias o taquipnea.ms que de status asmaticus, es preferible hablar de asma aguda grave. se trata de una crisis refractaria al tratamiento broncodilatador inicial realizado correctamente. por tanto, el primer signo de alarma es la ausencia de respuesta a los broncodilatadores. los factores de riesgo se resumen en el cuadro ii. se pueden observar numerosos criterios en el propio domicilio del nio. el asma aguda grave requiere un tratamiento urgente. un bronquio principal, ramificarse a nivel distal, produciendo una impactacin mucoide rica en polimorfonucleares eosinfilos y en cristales de charcot-leyden y causar una atelectasia o enfisema obstructivo. la evolucin suele ser favorable con tratamiento. si ste fracasa, puede estar indicado realizar una endoscopia bronquial.el diagnstico se sospecha cuando existe un cuadro de dolor retroesternal irradiado al brazo y al cuello, que se agrava por los movimientos respiratorios y, en ocasiones, por la deglucin. se suele asociar a un enfisema subcutneo cuyo signo clnico esencial es la percepcin de una crepitacin similar a la de la nieve en la regin cervical y torcica superior, dolorosa a la palpacin. el neumomediastino se traduce en la radiografa pulmonar por hiperclaridades lineales verticales, a lo largo del mediastino y de los contornos cardacos, con elevacin de las dos hojas pleurales, mientras que el enfisema subcutneo provoca imgenes claras subcutneas cervicales o parietales. se trata de complicaciones normalmente benignas del asma; su tratamiento coincide con el de la exacerbacin y su desaparicin se logra en unos das. sin embargo, la hospitalizacin del nio es indispensable, debido al riesgo de neumotrax. el neumotrax, con independencia de si se debe a un neumomediastino o a una ruptura de una bulla pleural, es una complicacin infrecuente.se observa con ms frecuencia en adolescentes que siguen mal su tratamiento o en quienes ste es insuficiente, al final de un deterioro progresivo del estado respiratorio al que no se ha prestado atencin, de una duracin que vara de varios das a varias semanas y, en menos ocasiones, en crisis muy graves cuyo inicio ha sido muy sbito.no es infrecuente que las manifestaciones menos llamativas que la crisis sean la sintomatologa predominante.la tos crnica es un motivo habitual de consulta en pediatra sin que tenga relacin con el asma. puede estar relacionada con infecciones virales recidivantes de las vas respiratorias superiores y/o inferiores, a una enfermedad otorrinolaringolgica (orl) persistente o a un reflujo gastroesofgico. la tos espasmdica equivalente de asma se suele traducir por episodios de tos seca, a menudo de predominio nocturno, sobre todo en la ltima parte de la noche, pero tambin con la risa, durante episodios de enfado o de emociones, al interrumpir un esfuerzo o con el cambio de tiempo y son poco o nada sensibles a los tratamientos sintomticos habituales.para relacionar una tos crnica aislada con un cuadro de asma, deben coincidir varios elementos:  episodios de tos seca, a menudo de predomino nocturno, sobre todo en la ltima parte de la noche, pero tambin con la risa, durante episodios de enfado o de emociones, al interrumpir un esfuerzo o con el cambio de tiempo y poco o nada sensibles a los tratamientos sintomticos habituales;  positividad del estudio cutneo alergolgico;  presencia de una obstruccin bronquial basal, reversible tras el uso de broncodilatadores. la bsqueda de una hiperreactividad bronquial inespecfica es til, pero parece menos discriminante;  positividad del tratamiento de prueba.al igual que en todos los nios, la tos crnica puede estar relacionada con infecciones virales recidivantes de las vas respiratorias superiores y/o inferiores, con una enfermedad orl resistente o a un cuadro de reflujo gastroesofgico.se producen sobre todo en nios menores de 6 aos. corresponden a manifestaciones de inflamacin bronquial, de predominio en otoo e invierno y en relacin con una hiperreactividad bronquial inespecfica, en ocasiones inducida por virus. la sintomatologa es bastante estereotipada, con rinorrea, tos (bastante a menudo productiva), obstruccin respiratoria y, con mucha frecuencia, la percepcin en la auscultacin de estertores bronquiales o estertores sibilantes, con o sin fiebre.en los nios que presenten bronquitis recidivantes, no es infrecuente que las radiografas muestren focos pulmonares recidivantes o persistentes. el territorio que se afecta con ms frecuencia es el lbulo medio, con un borramiento del borde derecho del corazn. si se realiza una fibroendoscopia bronquial, se observa un orificio lobar medio libre o, simplemente, con inflamacin y secreciones.indican la existencia de una hiperexcitabilidad de las vas respiratorias inferiores, con disnea larngea afebril, de inicio y final bruscos, que aparecen de forma preferente en el perodo invernal.factores de asma aguda grave en la edad infantil. la aparicin de molestias con el esfuerzo tambin es un motivo frecuente de consulta. el asma (broncoespasmo) inducida por el esfuerzo (aie) se caracteriza por disnea, tos, opresin respiratoria y sibilancias, que suelen aparecer 5-10 minutos tras la interrupcin de un esfuerzo fsico intenso. en ocasiones, slo aparece la tos. aunque por lo general el cuadro de aie aparece despus de interrumpir el esfuerzo, tambin puede observarse durante el mismo. la aie es distinta de una disnea indicativa de una falta de forma fsica, pero no siempre es fcil distinguir ambos cuadros. la aie no debe confundirse con una anafilaxia inducida por el esfuerzo, tanto si es dependiente o no de una sensibilizacin alimentaria. en caso de duda, el diagnstico se basa en la realizacin de una prueba de esfuerzo.el diagnstico de asma suele ser evidente cuando se asiste a la crisis. pasado un tiempo de la crisis, el estudio inicial consta, adems de la bsqueda de factores desencadenantes, de radiografas de trax, la evaluacin de elementos atpicos y la realizacin de pruebas funcionales respiratorias (pfr).la anamnesis permite, en especial, estudiar los factores desencadenantes de la crisis: infecciones virales (en especial los rinovirus), contactos alrgenos, ejercicio fsico mal controlado (carrera a pie), emociones, enfados, contaminacin (incluido el humo de cigarrillos), cambio de tiempo o de clima. algunas circunstancias tambin conllevan un riesgo de asma: vuelta al colegio, viajes, regreso al domicilio despus de las vacaciones, regreso de una cura o estancia climtica. se debe destacar tambin la posibilidad de crisis al salir del hospital, despus de una crisis y/o estudio. los impactos psicoafectivos, sobre todo en situacin de estrs crnico, aumentan el riesgo de las crisis.es indispensable realizar radiografas de trax en proyeccin frontal, en inspiracin y espiracin forzadas durante el estudio inicial. deben ser normales. forman parte del diagnstico diferencial y en ellas deben buscarse signos de asma grave (deformacin y distensin torcica, mal vaciamiento espiratorio).el componente hereditario de la atopia est claramente establecido [3] . el 80-90% de los nios asmticos son atpicos y tienen al menos un resultado positivo de una prueba cutnea [4] .la existencia de rasgos atpicos se define, por una parte, por la presencia de asma, polinosis, eccema, alergia alimentaria en los progenitores o en la fratra y/o de antecedentes personales de dermatitis atpica o de alergia alimentaria.su utilidad es fundamental. sus resultados completan la anamnesis y la exploracin fsica. las pruebas de puncin constituyen el mtodo de referencia. la tcnica es simple, rpida e indolora, pero requiere un gran rigor en su ejecucin. se realizan con el nio en estado estable despus de interrumpir los antihistamnicos h 1 . la positividad de una prueba cutnea debe interpretarse respecto a un control negativo (solucin de glicerina al 50%) y positiva (histamina, 1 mg/ml y fosfato de codena al 9%). una prueba cutnea se considera positiva si el dimetro de la induracin es superior a 3 mm y mayor del 50% del control positivo.en los nios mayores, los alrgenos responsables ms frecuentes son los caros, seguidos por los epitelios de animales (sobre todo el gato), los plenes de gramneas y despus las cucarachas y los mohos. los principales alrgenos usados en las pruebas se resumen en el cuadro iii. las alergias alimentarias pocas veces son causas aisladas de crisis de asma.argumentos a favor de un rasgo atpico. eosinofilia sangunea  400 /mm 3 .  elevacin de las inmunoglobulinas e (ige) sricas.el lmite superior de los valores de referencia puede estimarse de forma arbitraria en 20 u/ml por ao de edad, hasta los 12 aos.identificacin de los alrgenos responsables. las pruebas multialergnicas (pma) pueden ser tiles para detectar una alergia ante una sintomatologa respiratoria atpica o cuando las pruebas cutneas son irrealizables o ininterpretables (tratamiento antihistamnico activo, dermografismo, dermatosis extensa). las ige especficas son tiles en caso de discordancia entre la clnica y las pruebas cutneas.pma. la mayor parte de las pma proporciona una respuesta global para los neumoalrgenos o para los alimentos. las pma a los neumoalrgenos cubren al menos el 95% de las posibilidades etiolgicas para una afeccin como el asma alrgica. para las pma a los alimentos habituales (por ejemplo, la correspondiente a seis trofoalrgenos: leche, huevo, pescado, soja, cacahuete, trigo), el porcentaje de cobertura es similar.los otros dos tipos de pma son de respuesta especfica cualitativa o semicuantitativa. estas pruebas no aportan por lo general elementos suplementarios en comparacin con las pruebas de puncin y son ms caras. su interpretacin es complicada y algunos mtodos son poco reproducibles en ocasiones.los resultados correlacionan bien con las pruebas cutneas, sobre todo para los neumoalrgenos. en caso de ige totales superiores a 3.000 ui/ml, los resultados pueden ser falsamente positivos.determinaciones unitarias. las ige especficas pueden determinarse mediante los mtodos radioinmunolgico o inmunoenzimtico. los resultados se presentan en phadebas rast unit (pru)/ml o en ui/ml convertibles en clases de 0 a vi. un resultado superior a 0,35 ui o pru se considera significativo. se suelen utilizar tres mtodos: el capsystem y el phadezym cuadro iii. batera habitual de pruebas cutneas en la edad peditrica. (revelado por un anti-ige marcado con b-galactosidasa) y el phadebast rast (revelado mediante un marcado con yodo radiactivo). existe una buena correlacin entre las pruebas cutneas de alergia y las ige especficas, en especial para los neumoalrgenos habituales.las pfr son indispensables para el tratamiento del asma. la eleccin de las pruebas que se deben realizar depende de la edad del nio: medicin de las resistencias de las vas respiratorias mediante pletismografa (raw), de las resistencias totales del sistema respiratorio (rrs) por interrupciones intermitentes del flujo de la corriente area o con la tcnica de las oscilaciones forzadas; maniobras forzadas, espirometra y curvas de flujovolumen a partir de los 6-7 aos de edad.las pfr tienen poca utilidad durante una crisis (confirmaran el sndrome obstructivo y la distensin torcica), pero son obligatorias en el perodo intercrtico.  la bsqueda de una hiperreactividad bronquial inespecfica o la reversibilidad del broncoespasmo con la inhalacin de b2-adrenrgicos son tiles sobre todo cuando el diagnstico de asma es incierto. desde el punto de vista diagnstico, las pfr pueden poner de manifiesto un sndrome obstructivo de base reversible tras los broncodilatadores (mejora del 12% del volumen espiratorio mximo/segundo [vems] y de ms del 40% de las resistencias) [5] . el umbral de reactividad corresponde a la dosis de metacolina que produce una disminucin de al menos el 20% del vems o un aumento del 45% de la conductancia. la medicin de la presin parcial transcutnea de oxgeno (tcpo 2 ) puede completar o sustituir a estos mtodos en los lactantes. una disminucin del 20% de la tcpo 2 es significativa.  las pfr permiten apreciar de forma objetiva el estado respiratorio. en los nios no tratados, las pfr normales en el perodo intercrtico permiten proponer slo un tratamiento secuencial. al contrario, una obstruccin intercrtica, incluso en ausencia de percepcin clnica, incita a aplicar un tratamiento de fondo. en un nio que recibe tratamiento, las pfr permiten medir la eficacia real de los tratamientos prescritos y adaptar su posologa. la normalizacin de los volmenes y flujos gracias al tratamiento permite prever una calidad de vida excelente. esta vigilancia debe implicar a todos los nios asmticos, de forma anual en caso de asma bien controlado y de forma tri o cuatrimestral si se ha instaurado un tratamiento de fondo. la medicin del fem es un complemento muy til en la consulta o en el domicilio para medir la obstruccin bronquial. el valor se expresa en l/min y correlaciona con la estatura del nio. el aumento del fem al menos en un 20% tras la inhalacin de un broncodilatador tiene un excelente valor diagnstico. las variaciones circadianas mayores de un 20% del fem indican un asma inestable. la magnitud de la disminucin del fem durante una crisis y la evaluacin de la respuesta tras la administracin de b2-adrenrgicos mejoran el tratamiento domiciliario.debido al carcter inflamatorio de la enfermedad asmtica, muchos estudios se han centrado en la evaluacin de los fenmenos inflamatorios y en la bsqueda de marcadores de la inflamacin bronquial para el diagnstico o la vigilancia.  las determinaciones de los distintos mediadores, como la protena catinica de los eosinfilos (ecp), la histamina y los leucotrienos en el suero, las secreciones nasales o la orina, se han abandonado por ausencia de sensibilidad o de especificidad.  el enfriamiento sbito del aire espirado permite la recogida de varios mililitros de condensado. la bsqueda de marcadores de la inflamacin (citocinas, metabolitos de los leucotrienos, por ejemplo) en el condensado exhalado sigue en fase de evaluacin [6] .  el recuento de eosinfilos en la expectoracin inducida, que aumenta durante los episodios agudos, correlaciona con la obstruccin y la hiperreactividad bronquial. disminuye bajo la influencia del tratamiento. la expectoracin se induce por la inhalacin de suero salino hipertnico. por tanto, existe un riesgo de broncoespasmo, que se previene por lo general mediante b2-adrenrgicos. la tcnica de la expectoracin inducida es muy laboriosa y es difcil utilizarla antes de los 6 aos de edad.  el xido ntrico exhalado (eno) es un marcador de la inflamacin bronquial alrgica. su concentracin correlaciona con la hiperreactividad bronquial. una concentracin elevada se suele observar en pacientes asmticos, sobre todo durante una crisis, y disminuye cuando se usa un tratamiento antiinflamatorio oral y/o inhalado. existe una correlacin entre el eno y el nmero de eosinfilos sanguneos, as como entre el eno y la eosinofilia de la expectoracin. la utilizacin del no como parmetro del control o marcador predictivo de la aparicin de exacerbaciones an es motivo de controversia (cf infra). en la actualidad, el eno es el nico mtodo de evaluacin no invasivo de la inflamacin que puede usarse en la prctica clnica. sin embargo, an se requieren ms estudios para precisar su papel exacto en el diagnstico y, sobre todo, en la vigilancia del asma infantil.no se puede hablar de asma sin descartar las otras causas de tos crnica y de disnea obstructiva (cuadro iv).algunas de ellas pueden coexistir con el asma o asociarse a hiperreactividad bronquial. esta lista de los diagnsticos diferenciales muestra la relevancia de la exploracin fsica completa, del estudio de los antecedentes, incluidos los neonatales (documento de salud infantil), de la curva de crecimiento pondoestatural y de las pruebas complementarias realizadas con anterioridad, en especial de las radiografas pulmonares.  la demostracin de un atrapamiento espiratorio localizado hace pensar en primer lugar en un obstculo (sobre todo un cuerpo extrao) y debe llevar a realizar una endoscopia bronquial. si no hay cuerpos extraos, se deben buscar las secuelas de neumopata viral.  la presencia de acropaquias indica en la mayora de los casos una insuficiencia respiratoria crnica. se puede observar en el la discinesia de las cuerdas vocales puede simular una crisis de asma grave (tos y disnea intensa, en ocasiones sibilancias y tiraje intercostal) [7] . este sndrome que afecta sobre todo a los adolescentes, refleja la aduccin paradjica de las cuerdas vocales que se produce de forma exclusiva o principalmente durante la inspiracin. no es fcil, durante una crisis, demostrar mediante laringoscopia el cierre paradjico de los dos tercios anteriores de la glotis y/o en la curva flujo/volumen (aspecto recortado) de la curva inspiratoria. la atencin se centra en el desencadenamiento emocional de las crisis de asma, pues su gravedad aparente contrasta con una saturacin de oxgeno en la sangre arterial (sao 2 ) normal y una ausencia de distensin en las radiografas de trax, la variabilidad inexplicada de las funciones respiratorias y, sobre todo, la resistencia a los tratamientos antiasmticos de fondo y de las crisis. la coexistencia frecuente en la poblacin neumoalergolgica peditrica de una disfuncin de las cuerdas vocales y de asma puede causar un temible exceso teraputico. como sucede con la tos psicgena, no se debe considerar al paciente como un simulador. la discinesia de las cuerdas vocales tiene en la mayora de las ocasiones, aunque no siempre, causas psicolgicas y su mecanismo se ejerce a nivel subconsciente.  el diagnstico de sndrome de hiperventilacin pulmonar es difcil en ocasiones, porque los sntomas pueden asociarse a un asma autntica. el diagnstico se basa sobre todo en la anamnesis, complementada con un cuestionario estandarizado [8] . en ocasiones, se requiere una prueba de hiperventilacin para reproducir los signos atpicos.el tratamiento debe instaurarse lo antes posible. el establecimiento de un plan de accin escrito y explicado debe permitir que los progenitores reconozcan y traten la crisis desde los prdromos en funcin de la gravedad.en las figuras 1 y 2 se resumen los algoritmos del tratamiento inicial en el domicilio y en el medio hospitalario, as como despus de 1 hora.  las nebulizaciones de broncodilatadores de corta duracin de accin (bdca) se administran con oxgeno, con un flujo de 6-8 l/min y vigilando la saturacin de oxgeno de la hemoglobina mediante pulsioximetra (spo 2 ) con la siguiente posologa: c para el salbutamol: 2,5 mg si el peso es inferior a 16 kg y 5 mg si es superior a 16 kg (o 0,15 mg/kg, mnimo 1,25 mg y mximo 5 mg);c para la terbutalina: 0,1-0,2 mg/kg (mximo 5 mg, es decir, una ampolla de 2 ml). las nebulizaciones se repiten cada 15 minutos con un mnimo de tres nebulizaciones por hora.  las nebulizaciones de ipratropio (0,25 mg [hasta los 6 aos] o 0,5 mg [despus de los 6 aos]) se reservan a las exacerbaciones graves asociadas a los bdca.  los bdca inyectables estn representados por la terbutalina por va subcutnea (a partir de los 2 aos), con una posologa de 10 g/kg o el salbutamol por va intravenosa con una dosis de carga de 1,5-5 g/kg en 3 minutos.  la corticoterapia que se debe utilizar es la prednisona o la prednisolona (1-2 mg/kg) o la betametasona (0,15-0,3 mg/ kg) en una toma diaria durante 5 das.  los antibiticos suelen ser intiles.cuando existen signos de gravedad iniciales o en caso de agravamiento, es necesario trasladar al paciente a una unidad de reanimacin. el tratamiento consiste en:  broncodilatadores: o bien nebulizaciones cada 20 minutos (cf supra) o bien nebulizacin continua con la siguiente mezcla durante 2 horas: 0,2 ml/kg de salbutamol al 0,5% + tres ampollas (=6 ml) de dibromuro de ipratropio + suero fisiolgico hasta completar 30 ml o bien salbutamol intravenoso (dosis de carga: 15 g/kg en 10 minutos y despus perfusin: 3 g/kg/min, tras lo que se administra 1 g/kg/min desde la mejora); . e -4-063-f-10  asma infantil y del lactante  corticoides intravenosos: metilprednisolona 2 mg/kg (mximo 60 mg) y despus 1 mg/kg/6 h;  intubacin y ventilacin:c nicamente si hay agotamiento con pausas respiratorias y alteraciones del nivel de conciencia; c la ventilacin tiene como objetivo mantener una spo 2 > 92% y evitar la hiperinflacin dinmica. se puede tolerar una hipercapnia de hasta 80 mmhg y una acidosis con un ph  7,10); c la ventilacin se asocia a una sedacin, bien mediante curarizacin + remifentanilo o bien mediante ketamina + midazolam;  otras medidas que ya casi no se usan:c sulfato de magnesio: 25 mg/kg (mximo 2 g) por va intravenosa lenta (20 min) una sola vez; c aminofilina intravenosa: se utiliza mucho menos en la actualidad. hay que tener cuidado con los riesgos de sobredosis por error de dilucin de la preparacin. la dosis de carga es de 7,5 mg/kg en 20 minutos, seguida de una perfusin de 1 mg/kg/h adaptada para obtener teofilinemias de 10-16 mg/l. cualquier crisis de asma que haya requerido una hospitalizacin y, con ms motivo, una estancia en reanimacin, debe hacer que se reevale el tratamiento: educacin, tratamiento de fondo, indicaciones detalladas en caso de crisis (plan de accin).el tratamiento de un nio asmtico tiene como objetivos limitar las exacerbaciones, los sntomas intercrticos y las necesidades de b2-adrenrgicos de rescate, permitir que el nio participe en las actividades familiares, escolares, deportivas y sociales, normalizar y mantener las funciones respiratorias normales y reducir las variaciones circadianas del fem. estos objetivos deben lograrse con unos tratamientos que sean bien tolerados.corticoides inhalados (ci). los ci son en la actualidad el arma esencial del tratamiento a largo plazo del asma persistente. hoy en da se dispone del dipropionato de beclometasona, la budesonida y la fluticasona. en el cuadro v se resumen las posologas en la edad peditrica [9] . pronto estarn disponibles otras molculas como el furoato de mometasona y la ciclesonida. el ndice teraputico es la relacin entre los efectos tpicos deseados y los efectos sistmicos indeseables. el ndice teraputico de un ci es elevado en los medicamentos cuya absorcin orofarngea es baja y el depsito pulmonar es significativo. los efectos sistmicos de los corticoides se deben a la fraccin del frmaco que pasa a la circulacin general, por una parte desde el depsito broncopulmonar y, por otra, a partir del depsito asma infantil y del lactante  e -4-063-f-10 orofarngeo que se deglute secundariamente. slo la fraccin sistmica procedente del depsito orofarngeo y gastrointestinal est notablemente disminuida por los primeros pasos hepticos que inactivan la molcula de corticoide. los ci aportan un beneficio seguro sobre la mejora e incluso la desaparicin de los sntomas (tos, sibilancias, despertares nocturnos), la actividad fsica, la disminucin de las exacerbaciones, el uso de b2-mimticos de rescate [10, 11] e incluso en los lactantes. esta mejora se acompaa de una mejora de los parmetros funcionales.la excelente tolerancia clnica, incluso en dosis altas y prolongadas, no significa que los ci carezcan de repercusiones.eje corticosuprarrenal. los ci pueden inhibir el eje corticosuprarrenal, lo que se mide mediante el rea bajo la curva del cortisol plasmtico o el cortisol libre urinario de 24 horas. esta inhibicin es dependiente de la dosis [12] . para dosis  400 g/da, los estudios muestran una ausencia de inhibicin [13] o una inhibicin modesta y parece intil realizar una exploracin de la funcin corticosuprarrenal. en cambio, hay que ser prudente con posologas superiores, sobre todo si son prolongadas. se han descrito casos de insuficiencia suprarrenal aguda en nios que han recibido dosis elevadas de ci durante perodos prolongados [14] .crecimiento. los estudios a corto plazo (2 semanas) mediante knemometra han demostrado un retardo en la velocidad de crecimiento [15] . los estudios a medio plazo (12 meses), muestran una desaceleracin moderada, del orden de -0,5 de, dependiente de la dosis y que se observa en los primeros meses de tratamiento [10, 13, 16] . a esta edad, el crecimiento depende sobre todo de factores endocrinos (hormona de crecimiento), al contrario de los lactantes, en quienes los factores nutricionales son primordiales y en los nios en perodo puberal, donde el crecimiento depende de una combinacin entre las hormonas de crecimiento y las hormonas sexuales. en cambio, los estudios a largo plazo realizados en perodos de varios aos muestran que la velocidad de crecimiento, aunque se ralentiza durante el primer ao de tratamiento [10, 13] , despus se conserva y la estatura definitiva de los adultos asmticos es totalmente comparable a la de las personas del grupo control, tanto si han recibido corticoides inhalados como si no [10, 17] . la interpretacin de los estudios sobre la repercusin de la corticoterapia inhalada sobre el crecimiento no debe hacer que se pierda de vista que el asma mal equilibrada tambin provoca un retraso del crecimiento.metabolismo seo. los resultados sobre el recambio y la mineralizacin seos que pueden hacer sospechar una osteoporosis a largo plazo tambin son discordantes. se pueden evaluar distintos parmetros marcadores de la osteosntesis y de la ostelisis. la mayora de las mediciones de densitometra sea mediante absorciometra bifotnica muestran resultados normales con tratamientos  400 g/da. algunos estudios biolgicos apuntan a favor de un retardo del metabolismo seo [18] .riesgo de candidiasis bucal, de disfona o de ronquera. antes se consideraba bajo en los nios (1-2% de los casos), en especial con las cmaras espaciadoras. los estudios ms recientes han encontrado la presencia de candidiasis en el 10% de los casos [19] .riesgo de cataratas o de atrofia cutnea. es excepcional en los nios. la prevencin de estos efectos secundarios, aunque son infrecuentes en las dosis que se suelen utilizar, se basa en:  la bsqueda sistemtica de la dosis mnima eficaz;  la utilizacin de cmara espaciadora en caso de aerosol;  el lavado de la boca tras su utilizacin;  el fraccionamiento de la dosis diaria en los perodos de inestabilidad.el anlisis de las curvas de dosis/respuestas muestra que lo esencial de los efectos beneficiosos de los ci se obtiene con dosis de 100, 200 e incluso 400 g/da [20] . por encima de esta cifra, pueden obtenerse algunos beneficios funcionales, en especial sobre el aie [21] , pero la probabilidad de efectos secundarios aumenta broncodilatadores de larga duracin de accin (bdla). se dispone de dos molculas, el salmeterol y el formoterol. la utilidad de este ltimo es su rapidez de accin, con una broncodilatacin en 1-3 minutos. los bdla tienen una accin sinrgica con los ci. los corticoides permiten tambin prevenir una posible desensibilizacin a la accin de los b2-mimticos (taquifilaxia). los bdla se utilizan en la prevencin del aie y/o asociados con los ci en el tratamiento de fondo del asma persistente moderada o grave. hay que citar tres especialidades combinadas:  fluticasona (100, 250 g) + salmeterol. esta combinacin se puede usar como inhalador de polvo (dosis de 100 y 250 g de fluticasona) y tambin como aerosol (dosis de 50, 125 y 250 g de fluticasona). por tanto, puede administrarse con cmara espaciadora. por este motivo es el nico frmaco combinado que puede usarse en nios pequeos a partir de 4 aos.  budesonida + formoterol. slo existe como inhalador de polvo (dosis de 100, 200 y 400 g de budesonida). su gran utilidad es la rapidez de accin del formoterol, que permite una nueva estrategia teraputica en la que se usa esta asociacin a la vez para el tratamiento de fondo y para el de la crisis. esta estrategia teraputica an no est autorizada en algunos pases para menores de 18 aos.  beclometasona (100 g) + formoterol (6 g), a partir de los 12 aos. antileucotrienos. slo el montelukast, que es un inhibidor de los receptores de leucotrienos, est disponible en algunos pases, donde recientemente se ha autorizado a partir de los 6 meses:  en caso de asma persistente leve o moderada, como tratamiento aditivo en asociacin con los ci, en los nios que tienen un control insuficiente con ci, o bien en monoterapia en caso de incapacidad de cumplir un tratamiento con ci en pacientes con un asma persistente leve o moderada controlada de forma insuficiente con ci y en quienes los b2-mimticos de accin inmediata y de corta duracin administrados a demanda ya no proporcionan un control clnico suficiente del asma;  para el tratamiento preventivo del asma inducida por el ejercicio. a partir de los 2 aos de edad, el montelukast tambin se puede prescribir como monoterapia alternativa a los ci en dosis bajas en los pacientes que presentan un asma persistente leve sin antecedentes recientes de crisis de asma grave que hayan justificado una corticoterapia oral y cuya incapacidad de cumplir un tratamiento con ci se haya demostrado.la variabilidad de respuesta podra estar relacionada con una variacin genotpica en la va de los antileucotrienos [22] . la posologa peditrica por va oral es de 4 mg/da antes de los 6 aos y de 5 mg/da entre los 6 y los 14 aos. a partir de los 15 aos, la posologa es de 10 mg/da.bases xnticas: teofilina de liberacin sostenida. se pueden utilizar asociadas a los ci a partir del estadio de asma persistente moderada. en la prctica, pocas veces se prescriben, debido a la necesidad de vigilancia de las concentraciones sricas para evitar las sobredosis.anticuerpos anti-ige: omalizumab. los anticuerpos anti-ige son una nueva clase teraputica de la alergia respiratoria. el omalizumab es un anticuerpo monoclonal humanizado de origen murino que se une a las ige circulantes, impidiendo su fijacin a sus receptores celulares. se administra por va subcutnea cada 2-4 semanas con una posologa dependiente del peso y de la concentracin inicial de ige, que debe estar comprendida entre 30 y 700 ui/ml. su tolerancia parece ser buena, incluso en nios. la eficacia es ptima en el asma grave, con una reduccin de la tasa de exacerbacin, una disminucin del uso de tratamientos de urgencia y una mejora de la calidad de vida [23, 24] . sin embargo, en los nios, an se dispone de pocos datos, en especial en el asma grave. el omalizumab est autorizado en nios mayores de 12 aos como indicacin de tratamiento de segunda lnea del asma alrgica (ige especficas o pruebas cutneas positivas) persistente grave despus del fracaso de los tratamientos antiasmticos convencionales.esta evaluacin es el paso previo de cualquier tratamiento. los criterios de evaluacin propuestos por la global initiative for asthma (gina) en 2006 y el national asthma education and prevention program en 2007 (naepp 2007) son a la vez complejos, variables en sus componentes y en su frecuencia para un mismo estadio y en muchas ocasiones estn extrapolados del adulto al nio (cuadro vi). no tienen en cuenta la variabilidad temporal de los sntomas y tienen umbrales de funcin respiratoria (fem y vems) inadecuados en los nios, porque en la mayora de las ocasiones estn en los lmites de la normalidad, incluso en los casos de asma grave. por otra parte, puede haber un sesgo por un posible tratamiento de fondo que ya est instaurado, sin evaluacin inicial, lo que ha llevado a que en las recomendaciones del naepp y despus en las de la gina se incluya la carga teraputica en la evaluacin de la gravedad. la clasificacin propuesta por el consenso internacional peditrico en 1998 en tres estadios (intermitente, persistente leve y grave) es ms simple [25] , pero ya no se utiliza en los estudios de cohortes ni en los ensayos teraputicos. lo esencial en la prctica es distinguir, por una parte, los nios que tienen exacerbaciones poco frecuentes y que estn bien entre ellas, de aquellos que tienen exacerbaciones frecuentes y/o sntomas intercrticos y que requieren el uso de ci debido a una inflamacin persistente.a cada nivel de gravedad inicial le corresponde una o varias opciones teraputicas (fig. 3) : el asma intermitente slo requiere un tratamiento farmacolgico a demanda;  en caso de asma persistente leve, el tratamiento de primera eleccin consiste en una corticoterapia inhalada en dosis baja. cuando esto no puede realizarse, la alternativa es el tratamiento con antileucotrienos;  en los casos de asma persistente moderada, se propone la asociacin de un bdla con ci en dosis bajas. la asociacin de un bdla a los ci es ms eficaz que la duplicacin de las dosis de ci [26] o la adicin de un antileucotrieno;  en caso de asma persistente grave, a los bdla se asocian dosis altas de ci. se pueden instaurar otras molculas en funcin de los resultados. el uso de una corticoterapia oral prolongada es excepcional en los nios asmticos;  por ltimo, ante el fracaso y en los nios alrgicos, se debe plantear el uso de anti-ige.las recomendaciones insisten en la actualidad en el concepto de control, que refleja el dominio del asma y traduce, por tanto, la actividad, el carcter dinmico de la enfermedad a lo largo de varias semanas. este concepto es til con independencia de la gravedad del asma. al igual que para la gravedad inicial, la gina en 2006 y el naepp en 2007 (cuadro vii) han propuesto criterios de control. tambin en este caso existen diferencias en los elementos considerados y en el intervalo estudiado. de este modo, la aparicin de una sola exacerbacin en el ao transcurrido se acepta en el naepp, mientras que es indicativa de un asma parcialmente controlada para la gina. por otra parte, la aparicin de sntomas hasta 2 veces por semana se tolera en estas dos clasificaciones para aceptar un asma bien controlada. sin embargo, el control total, definido por la ausencia de sntomas y por una funcin respiratoria normal, debe ser el objetivo en los nios [27] . las posologas de ci que se recomiendan en la actualidad permiten controlar la gran mayora de los cuadros de asma. al principio del tratamiento, se inhalan en dos tomas diarias. la adaptacin teraputica depende del control del asma (fig. 4) .en caso de asma controlada. la reduccin de las dosis de ci es progresiva, cada 3-6 meses, hasta alcanzar la dosis mnima de ci que permita mantener el control del asma (dosis mnima eficaz). en funcin de la posologa inicial de ci, la disminucin de las dosis se realiza en pasos del 25-50%, teniendo siempre como objetivo mantener el control total del asma. durante la disminucin, se puede plantear pasar a una toma nica [28, 29] para favorecer el cumplimiento, a excepcin de la beclometasona, debido a sus caractersticas farmacolgicas [30] . en caso de tratamiento adicional, en dosis altas/medias de ci, la prioridad es la reduccin de las dosis de ci [31, 32] . despus de haber alcanzado una dosis baja de ci, se puede intentar interrumpir los ci o el tratamiento adicional. si se est usando un tratamiento con una asociacin de ci + bdla, es preferible mantener el tratamiento combinado pasando de dos a una toma diaria, en lugar de pasar de entrada a un ci solo. no se recomienda dejar un bdla solo (sin ci) como tratamiento de fondo diario.en caso de asma no controlada. cuando el control del asma es insuficiente, antes de reforzar el tratamiento es esencial buscar un defecto de la tcnica o un factor agravante:  bsqueda y tratamiento de un reflujo gastroesofgico;  tratamiento de una rinitis alrgica o de una sinusitis;  reevaluacin del control del entorno;  bsqueda de una alergia alimentaria enmascarada; lucha contra el tabaquismo pasivo o activo en los nios mayores;  tratamiento del sobrepeso;  deteccin de situaciones de estrs agudas o crnicas.en caso de ausencia de control y en los nios que no han recibido ci, se recomienda iniciar el tratamiento con dosis bajas de ci. la adicin de bdla mejora el control del asma en los nios que no se controlan solo con ci [33] [34] [35] . un estudio reciente muestra la utilidad de la forma combinada frente a la duplicacin de las dosis de ci en los nios de 4-11 aos no controlados con fluticasona (200 g/da). en caso de sntomas diarios o despus de un asma aguda grave, se recomienda prescribir de entrada una asociacin de ci + bdla [36] . los antileucotrienos se pueden utilizar en monoterapia o asociados a los ci. los metaanlisis [37, 38] apuntan a favor de una asociacin de los bdla con los ci como primera eleccin. la corticoterapia oral prolongada se ha convertido en algo totalmente excepcional en los nios.vigilancia del tratamiento. la clnica y las pfr siguen siendo los elementos de referencia del nio asmtico. el control se han estudiado estrategias de vigilancia de la inflamacin bronquial para ayudar a adaptar el tratamiento de fondo. los dos principales parmetros propuestos son la vigilancia del eno y de la hiperreactividad bronquial. la hiperreactividad bronquial es un parmetro til, relacionado con la gravedad y el riesgo de persistencia [39] del asma. la utilizacin del no como parmetro de control o marcador predictivo de la aparicin de exacerbaciones an sigue estando discutido [40, 41] . zacharasiewicz et al han demostrado que la medicin del eno ha permitido una reduccin de la posologa de los corticoides sin desestabilizar el asma [42] , mientras que en el estudio de szefler et al, la utilizacin del no se acompa de un consumo mayor de ci sin un mejor control clnico [41] . la medicin no invasiva de la inflamacin tambin puede evaluarse mediante el estudio de la eosinofilia en la expectoracin inducida y en los condensados exhalados, lo que parece una herramienta prometedora para adecuar el tratamiento antiasmtico, pero cuya realizacin en la prctica clnica parece difcil [43] .control del entorno. el control del entorno es un elemento fundamental del tratamiento, porque participa en gran medida en la lucha contra la inflamacin bronquial. las situaciones que aumentan el estrs oxidativo o la inflamacin (tabaco, ozono, bacterias, virus, alrgenos) pueden disminuir la respuesta a los ci. los factores alrgicos ocupan un papel destacado, no slo en el desencadenamiento de las crisis, sino tambin en la perennizacin de la inflamacin bronquial. una carga alergnica intensa y precoz de caros aumenta el riesgo y la gravedad del asma [44] . el umbral de riesgo de sensibilizacin a los caros es de 2 g/g de polvo y el umbral de riesgo de aparicin de crisis, de 10 g/g de polvo. la reduccin de la carga alergnica, en especial de caros, permite disminuir la sintomatologa, el consumo de frmacos y la hiperreactividad bronquial.se han propuesto varias tcnicas para reducir la exposicin a los neumoalrgenos [45] :  para los caros: c disminucin de la humedad relativa (aireacin, apertura de las ventanas y climas templados, deshumidificacin y climatizacin en regiones clidas y hmedas);c utilizacin de ropa de cama sinttica; c empleo de fundas anticaros; c supresin de las alfombras, tapices y moquetas o limpieza peridica con acaricidas e incluso utilizacin de productos textiles que incorporen un acaricida;c lavado regular de las sbanas a una temperatura > 55c, utilizacin de aspiradores provistos de filtros especiales;  el control del entorno tambin consiste en:c la lucha contra las cucarachas, que es difcil de poner en prctica, porque en la mayora de las ocasiones, la contaminacin de una vivienda proviene de otras viviendas adyacentes, lo que requiere un tratamiento de todo el inmueble;c la limitacin de los contactos alergnicos exteriores, en especial los plenes;c la evitacin de los animales domsticos a los que sea alrgico el nio;c la lucha contra los mohos, cuya multiplicacin se ve favorecida por el entorno hmedo (y los humidificadores);c la lucha contra el tabaquismo pasivo. inmunoterapia. la inmunoterapia especfica tiene como objetivo reducir en los nios sensibilizados los sntomas provocados durante una nueva exposicin al alrgeno. ha demostrado ser eficaz, sobre todo en personas sanas, y puede mejorarse an ms con el uso de extractos alergnicos purificados. en la actualidad, la inmunoterapia por va sublingual tiende a sustituir a la inmunoterapia especfica por va inyectable y puede comenzarse desde los 3 aos de edad. la indicacin de una desensibilizacin especfica debe responder a un cierto nmero de criterios precisos [46] :  la responsabilidad del alrgeno debe demostrarse mediante la anamnesis, las pruebas cutneas y, si es necesario, con las pruebas de provocacin especficas;  los inconvenientes de la desensibilizacin deben ser inapreciables respecto a las consecuencias inmediatas de la enfermedad asmtica;  la desensibilizacin slo puede plantearse despus de un control al menos parcial del asma;  el cumplimiento del nio y de sus progenitores es indispensable para una buena cooperacin. en el asma, la inmunoterapia est indicada en caso de asma persistente leve a moderada, estabilizada con tratamiento. la duracin de dicho tratamiento se escalona a lo largo de un perodo de 3-5 aos. los alrgenos implicados son sobre todo los caros y los plenes (gramneas, betulceas, cupresceas, fagceas). la prescripcin debe basarse en una identificacin precisa y una demostracin de la responsabilidad de los alrgenos, que deben estar en un nmero limitado (si es posible, no ms de dos).medidas adyuvantes.  la kinesiterapia respiratoria permite luchar contra una deformacin. cada vez se usa ms en la lucha de la prdida de forma fsica mediante el reentrenamiento del esfuerzo.  la antibioticoterapia pocas veces es til. pocas crisis de asma en los nios se desencadenan o se asocian a una infeccin bacteriana.  las estancias prolongadas en altitud slo estn indicadas en las formas de asma grave no equilibrada a pesar de un tratamiento intenso, para evitar una corticoterapia oral prolongada, y parece necesario realizar un alejamiento temporal del medio familiar y un internamiento mdico en un centro especializado.  por ltimo, la intervencin de un paedopsiquiatra o de un psiclogo puede ser necesaria. el asma se ha considerado durante mucho tiempo como la enfermedad ms psicosomtica de todas. muchos estudios han demostrado la repercusin del asma sobre la calidad de vida de los nios y las familias, el cumplimiento teraputico y la incidencia de las complicaciones. las dificultades psicopatolgicas observadas en los nios y sus allegados se relacionan sobre todo con la gravedad del asma. el anlisis de estos datos hace que se produzca una evolucin en la presentacin del asma respecto a la literatura existente. el asma se controla cada vez mejor desde el punto de vista teraputico y, en la actualidad, altera poco la escolaridad y la calidad de vida de los nios, salvo en caso de mal cumplimiento.entre 2008 y 2009 se han propuesto varias recomendaciones sobre el tratamiento del asma de los nios menores de 3 aos.al contrario que en los nios, en quienes la definicin insiste en el aspecto fisiopatolgico, la definicin del asma del lactante an sigue siendo clnica [47] . se considera como asma cualquier episodio disneico con sibilancias que se reproduce al menos 3 veces antes de los 2 aos de edad y con independencia de la edad de inicio, de la existencia o no de estigmas de atopia y de la causa aparentemente desencadenante. esta definicin puede parecer amplia, en la medida en la que slo una parte de estos lactantes continuarn teniendo crisis y se comportarn como asmticos, mientras que los dems tendrn manifestaciones slo transitorias relacionadas con la accin de las viriasis y/o de un tabaquismo pasivo sobre unas vas respiratorias que son ms estrechas inicialmente. sin embargo, en ausencia de criterios predictivos fiables, el reconocimiento del asma favorece el uso de tratamientos dirigidos.la crisis de asma adopta habitualmente el carcter de una bronquiolitis aguda viral. comienza con una rinitis o rinofaringitis banal que precede unos 2-3 das a la aparicin de tos seca, en quintas, con polipnea, signos de lucha y sibilancias. la intensidad de los signos de lucha y de la polipnea, as como la tolerancia de los sntomas (desde el punto de vista digestivo y respiratorio) y la cifra de saturacin de o 2 (normal > 95%) son ndices de gravedad. el cuadro evoluciona hacia la curacin en varios das. los agentes infecciosos principales en el perodo de otoo-invierno son el virus respiratorio sincitial, los rinovirus, los virus parainfluenza, los metapneumovirus y los virus de la gripe.puede haber otras caractersticas:  una sibilancia continua con persistencia, despus de una bronquiolitis, de signos de obstruccin bronquiolar. la intensidad de las manifestaciones vara en funcin de los episodios infecciosos orl y de la actividad del nio; los sntomas aumentan durante la agitacin, las comidas y el esfuerzo, pero disminuyen en reposo y durante el sueo. no obstante, estos bebs sibilantes mantienen un desarrollo pondoestatural, una actividad y un apetito normales (sibilantes felices);  episodios de disnea con sibilancias y una tos espasmdica con sibilancias al final de la tos. estos episodios aparecen fuera de cualquier viriasis y, con ms frecuencia, por la noche o durante la risa o con episodios de agitacin;  las crisis graves pueden causar un cuadro de asma aguda grave, con necesidad de un traslado a reanimacin. recientemente, se ha propuesto distinguir a los lactantes cuyas manifestaciones sean slo inducidas por virus y aquellos que tengan mltiples factores desencadenantes [48] .en los lactantes, cualquier afeccin obstructiva que dificulte la evacuacin de las secreciones provoca una inflamacin bronquial y sibilancias. algunas enfermedades completamente orgnicas responsables de una obstruccin pueden presentarse como un cuadro de asma del lactante e incluso de asociarse a l (cuadro iv). por tanto, la confrontacin de los datos de la anamnesis (antecedentes de prematuridad, dificultad respiratoria neonatal, viriasis grave, antecedentes atpicos personales y familiares, signos de reflujo gastroesofgico), de la historia de la enfermedad (frecuencia e intensidad de los sntomas de asma, estado respiratorio entre los episodios, factores desencadenantes, respuesta a los tratamientos recibidos), de la exploracin fsica (signos respiratorios: sibilancias, tos, disnea, signos de lucha, distensin, cianosis, etc., crecimiento, eccema, signos atpicos) y las radiografas de trax es indispensable en el momento del diagnstico.el estudio alergolgico debe reservarse a los nios que tengan sntomas respiratorios persistentes, recidivantes, que requieran un tratamiento continuo o que se asocien a sntomas extrarrespiratorios compatibles con un origen alrgico. las pruebas de puncin se recomiendan como primera eleccin en el estudio alergolgico. si su realizacin no es posible como primera eleccin, se recomienda orientarse hacia una pma. en caso de positividad, el estudio alergolgico debe continuarse. la determinacin como primera eleccin de las ige sricas totales o especficas de un neumoalrgeno no se recomienda en la prctica habitual.las pfr no se recomiendan como primera eleccin, porque en los nios menores de 3 aos requieren una sedacin y un material que slo est disponible en laboratorios especializados. algunos autores han mostrado concentraciones de eno ms elevadas en los lactantes con sibilancias crnicas que en los que presentaban el primer episodio de disnea con sibilancias [49] .a favor del diagnstico de asma debe tenerse en cuenta:  la presencia de signos de atopia personales (eccema) y familiares (asma, eccema y rinitis polnica en los progenitores y/o en la fratra); la repeticin de episodios de tos y de sibilancias, a menudo favorecidos por las infecciones virales, los irritantes, el ejercicio o las emociones;  la normalidad de la exploracin fsica entre las crisis y la ausencia de repercusin sobre la curva pondoestatural;  la normalidad de las radiografas de trax;  las pruebas cutneas positivas para los neumoalrgenos y/o los alrgenos alimentarios (leche, huevo) que poseen un buen valor predictivo positivo de recidiva de las manifestaciones clnicas. castro rodriguez ha propuesto un ndice predictivo de persistencia de las manifestaciones. este ndice es positivo cuando existe un criterio mayor o dos criterios menores:  criterios mayores: diagnstico de asma en uno de los progenitores, diagnstico confirmado mdicamente de dermatitis atpica, sensibilizacin a al menos un neumoalrgeno;  criterios menores: sibilancias fuera de una infeccin orl, eosinofilia sangunea > 4%, sensibilizacin a un trofoalrgeno (leche, huevo, cacahuete). se debe sospechar otro diagnstico ante:  la presencia de signos atpicos, cianosis, soplo cardaco, vmitos excesivos, trastornos de la deglucin, acropaquias, deformacin torcica, diarrea grasa, etc.;  la persistencia de sntomas respiratorios (tos, obstruccin, sibilancias, disnea) entre los episodios agudos o manifestaciones despus del nacimiento;  una interrupcin de la curva pondoestatural;  estridor;  una anomala radiolgica;  un mal control a pesar de las dosis moderadas de ci mediante aerosol dosificador con cmara espaciadora. en estos casos, es indispensable completar las exploraciones (endoscopia bronquial, tomografa computarizada [tc] de trax, estudio de la motilidad ciliar, estudio inmunitario, prueba del sudor, etc.) en un medio especializado.en los lactantes, la eficacia de los b2-adrenrgicos es muy inconstante, debido a un bajo depsito pulmonar y a la obstruccin bronquiolar de origen esencialmente mecnico, mientras que el componente del espasmo es muy limitado. aunque las nebulizaciones de b2-adrenrgicos suelen tolerarse bien en los lactantes, hay que saber que antes del ao de edad son susceptibles de causar hipoxia por agravamiento de la relacin ventilacin/perfusin. en las crisis menos graves, las cmaras espaciadoras de volumen reducido (300-400 ml) acopladas a una mascarilla facial permiten administrar de forma eficaz los b2-adrenrgicos con un aerosol dosificador.los corticoides orales se prescriben con ms facilidad que en los nios mayores, en un ciclo de 5-10 das y en una dosis de 2 mg/kg de prednisolona o equivalente. sin embargo, su eficacia sigue siendo controvertida, sobre todo cuanto ms pequeo es el nio [50] .la prescripcin de montelukast durante 4 semanas despus de una bronquiolitis por virus respiratorio sincitial ha disminuido de forma significativa el nmero de das sin sntomas y el nmero de exacerbaciones [51] . sin embargo, un estudio realizado con un numero mayor de lactantes no ha confirmado estos resultados [52] .los objetivos del tratamiento en los nios pequeos son la normalizacin de la exploracin fsica, la ausencia de sntomas cada da (diurnos y nocturnos), el mantenimiento de una actividad fsica normal para la edad y la normalizacin del crecimiento ponderal cuando se haba modificado.es sobre todo clnica y diferencia el asma intermitente, el asma persistente leve a moderado y al asma persistente grave, as como el asma intermitente grave (cuadro viii). la apreciacin de la gravedad del asma se basa sobre todo en la frecuencia de los sntomas y de las exacerbaciones, as como en las necesidades de frmacos. los sntomas intercrticos suelen evaluarse en el ltimo mes y las exacerbaciones en los 6-12 ltimos meses.  asma intermitente: las crisis son poco frecuentes (tres a cuatro al ao), aparecen en el perodo de otoo-invierto entre septiembre y abril. entre las crisis, el asma no afecta a la vida diaria.  asma persistente leve a moderada: las crisis aparecen alrededor de 1 vez al mes durante el otoo y el invierno y entre las crisis se producen episodios infrecuentes y ms breves de tos nocturna o bien con el esfuerzo o los cambios de tiempo.  asma persistente grave: se caracteriza por crisis frecuentes (al menos una vez al mes) que requieren una corticoterapia oral o bien por sibilancias persistentes o manifestaciones de tos seca diurna y nocturna, episodios de sibilancias transitorias con o sin disnea que se produce varias veces por semana aparte de las infecciones orl, que requieren el uso de broncodilatadores y que no se controlan con tratamientos no esteroideos.los ci que se utilizan en el lactante son la fluticasona (aerosol dosificador de 50 g), la budesonida (formas nebulizadas de 0,5 y 1 mg), la beclometasona en aerosol dosificador de 50 y 250 g y nebulizada (formas de 0,4 y 0,8 mg). se recomienda usar dos modalidades de administracin: aerosol dosificador con cmara espaciadora de inhalacin adaptada (y mascarilla facial) y nebulizacin con un generador neumtico. en los lactantes y con las dosis bajas y medias, la tolerancia de los ci es buena. con las dosis ms elevadas, los resultados sobre el crecimiento son contradictorios y se aconseja una vigilancia de la curva estatural.los bdca se utilizan sobre todo para el tratamiento de los sntomas. sin embargo, pueden emplearse como tratamiento de fondo, asociados con los ci. los bdla slo estn autorizados a partir de los 4 aos de edad.la autorizacin del montelukast se ha modificado recientemente y se permite su uso a partir de los 6 meses de edad (cf supra). cuadro viii. clasificacin de la gravedad del asma del lactante propuesta por los expertos franceses (adaptada de la referencia bibliogrfica [27] a estos tres estadios de gravedad se aade el asma intermitente grave, definido por la aparicin de exacerbaciones frecuentes inducidas por virus sin sntomas intercrticos.asma infantil y del lactante  e -4-063-f-10la estrategia teraputica de partida se basa en la evaluacin inicial de la gravedad (fig. 5) . los lactantes que sufren una exacerbacin durante el invierno y que no presentan casi manifestaciones fuera de esa estacin tienen un asma intermitente y slo requieren ms que un tratamiento secuencial. cuando ha habido al menos dos exacerbaciones en los ltimos 6 meses o si existen sntomas intercrticos ms frecuentes, se recomienda aplicar una corticoterapia inhalada, en dosis bajas en caso de asma persistente leve o en dosis medias ms altas en los casos de asma persistente moderada y grave. el fracaso de las dosis altas de ci en aerosol dosificador constituye una indicacin para las nebulizaciones de ci. recientemente se ha propuesto un estadio intermitente grave [54] , que corresponde a un subgrupo de lactantes cuyas exacerbaciones son frecuentes en el perodo invernal, pero que carecen de sntomas en otras estaciones.en todos los casos, la eficacia o el fracaso del tratamiento se deben evaluar con regularidad.  en caso de control del asma, la reduccin de las dosis de ci debe ser progresiva, cada 3-6 meses, hasta alcanzar la dosis mnima de ci que permita mantener el control del asma (dosis mnima eficaz) como en los nios de ms edad.  si no se logra el control, es necesario (como en los nios mayores y antes de aumentar la presin teraputica) asegurarse de que el diagnstico del asma es adecuado y buscar los factores asociados con ms frecuencia a la falta de control (evaluacin del cumplimiento teraputico de fondo y de la utilizacin de los dispositivos de inhalacin, evaluacin y tratamiento de una posible rinitis alrgica asociada, control del entorno domstico, con evitacin del tabaquismo ambiental y de los alrgenos interiores en los nios sensibilizados.el asma grave asocia al menos un criterio mayor (necesidad de dosis altas de ci [800 g/da de equivalente de beclometasona] o corticoterapia sistmica) y al menos dos de los criterios menores siguientes: tratamiento a largo plazo con bdla, teofilina o antileucotrieno, sntomas de asma que requieren el uso casi diario de bdca, obstruccin bronquial persistente con vems < 80% del valor terico, variaciones nictemerales del fem > 20%, al menos una demanda de consulta con los servicios de urgencia en el ao precedente, al menos tres exacerbaciones que requieran una corticoterapia oral en el ao precedente o un antecedente de asma aguda grave [55] .se estima que su frecuencia es de alrededor del 5%, pero tiene una morbilidad considerable en trminos de uso de los servicios asistenciales y de hospitalizaciones.el asma grave constituye un grupo heterogneo de situaciones y pueden encontrarse varios fenotipos:  persistencia de sntomas varias veces a la semana o exacerbaciones frecuentes en un nio cuya funcin respiratoria se mantiene normal;  persistencia de los sntomas asociada a un sndrome obstructivo intercrtico fijo, no reversible despus de una prueba con corticoides;  presencia de un sndrome obstructivo intercrtico fijo en un nio poco o nada sintomtico. esta definicin implica tambin tres aspectos: la ausencia de otro diagnstico, un tratamiento correcto de los factores precipitantes y un buen cumplimiento teraputico.la diversidad de los perfiles clnicos y funcionales respiratorios del asma grave dificulta el enfoque fisiopatognico y puede haber varios mecanismos implicados. wenzel distingue los pacientes segn el tipo de clulas predominante con un fenotipo eosinoflico y un fenotipo neutroflico [56] . en el grupo que presenta una eosinofilia bronquial, el engrosamiento de la membrana basal era mayor, las crisis de asma sobreaguda ms frecuentes y la obstruccin perifrica, ms intensa. el fenotipo neutroflico se caracteriza por un aumento de los neutrfilos en la expectoracin inducida, el lquido del lavado broncoalveolar (lba) o las biopsias. la corticoterapia prolonga la supervivencia del polimorfonuclear neutrfilo por inhibicin de la apoptosis, lo que podra explicar la menor eficacia de los corticoides en algunos pacientes. por otra parte, existe un fenotipo paucicelular caracterizado por la ausencia de clulas inflamatorias y en cuya patogenia podran participar anomalas estructurales fijas o una inflamacin distal predominante no accesible a los estudios broncoscpicos. no es seguro que estos fenotipos puedan extrapolarse totalmente a la poblacin infantil, pero es seguro que la magnitud de los fenmenos inflamatorios y de remodelacin de las vas respiratorias intervendr en el futuro en el tratamiento del asma infantil difcil al igual que las caractersticas clnicas y funcionales respiratorias. aparte de los procesos inflamatorios, hay varios factores de riesgo de asma grave que pueden intervenir: el polimorfismo gentico, fenmenos de corticorresistencia, fenmenos de remodelacin precoz y la magnitud de la hiperreactividad bronquial inespecfica.la exploracin del asma difcil consta de tres fases esenciales: eliminar los falsos cuadros de asma grave, buscar los factores agravantes y evaluar los fenmenos inflamatorios y la remodelacin de las vas respiratorias.los principales diagnsticos diferenciales deben descartarse (cuadro iv). sin embargo, los defectos del tratamiento, del cumplimiento y/o de educacin sobre la enfermedad constituyen los problemas ms frecuentes.los principales factores agravantes que deben buscarse estn representados por el reflujo gastroesofgico, las enfermedades de la regin orl, la persistencia de exposiciones alergnicas, la existencia de alrgenos alimentarios ocultos, as como el tabaquismo pasivo y tambin activo en los nios mayoresesta evaluacin, que es reciente, representa el aspecto ms innovador del tratamiento del asma difcil. en ella se recurre a mtodos directos invasivos, lba y biopsias bronquiales o a mtodos indirectos no invasivos: medicin del eno, expectoracin inducida, condensado exhalado, tc torcica.se basa en el anlisis del lba y, sobre todo, de las biopsias endobronquiales, que se realizan durante la endoscopia. los principales resultados de las biopsias muestran que los fenmenos inflamatorios (aumento del nmero de polimorfonucleares eosinfilos y neutrfilos intraepiteliales, aumento del nmero de mastocitos submucosos y en el interior de los msculos lisos) correlacionan con los sntomas [57, 58] , mientras que, aparte del engrosamiento de la membrana basal, las anomalas estructurales de remodelacin, es decir, la hipertrofia/hiperplasia del msculo liso, la hiperplasia miofibroblstica, la hipertrofia de las glndulas mucosas y la angiognesis correlacionan ms con el grado de obstruccin bronquial [59] .hay varias tcnicas que estn en fase de evaluacin: correlacin entre el eno y la inflamacin/remodelacin, medicin de distintos marcadores en la expectoracin inducida (limitada en los nios por su complejidad tcnica) o el condensado exhalado (en fase de estandarizacin), valoracin mediante tc de las remodelaciones estructurales asociadas al asma [60] .el asma grave requiere en un primer momento un tratamiento educativo especfico (autovigilancia del fem, plan de accin de las crisis, coordinacin entre la familia, el mdico responsable, el pediatra, etc.), el tratamiento apropiado de los factores agravantes y la optimizacin de los tratamientos farmacolgicos. stos se basan en la actualidad en la asociacin de dosis altas de ci (800-1.000 g/da de equivalente de budesonida) y de bdla [53] . este tratamiento optimizado permite el control de la mayor parte de los casos de asma supuestamente difciles.sin embargo, algunos nios siguen estando sintomticos o mantienen una obstruccin bronquial intercrtica y representan los verdaderos cuadros de asma grave, difciles o refractarios. aunque es tentador aumentar la posologa diaria de ci, el riesgo potencial de efectos secundarios puede superar a los beneficios esperados. ante esta posibilidad, en la actualidad se propone una prueba con corticoides (2 mg/kg/da durante 7-10 das). una prueba positiva (control de los sntomas, mejora del vems  15%) incita a reforzar, al menos de forma temporal, el tratamiento antiinflamatorio y broncodilatador. una prueba negativa, que se refleja por la persistencia de los sntomas clnicos o la ausencia de respuesta funcional respiratoria, debe hacer que se evale de un modo ms completo al nio en un medio especializado. la identificacin de subgrupos basados en los datos histopatolgicos podra tener implicaciones teraputicas. por ejemplo, la ausencia de infiltracin eosinoflica o neutroflica asociada a la presencia de signos marcados de remodelacin debera hacer que se disminuyera la presin de ci, mientras que una infiltracin inflamatoria considerable debera llevar a reforzar, al menos temporalmente, dicha presin. sin embargo, hasta el momento se han realizado demasiado pocos estudios prospectivos para validar esta distincin y, debido a la diversidad de la imbricacin de los fenmenos inflamatorios implicados, es ms probable que detrs de esta clasificacin simple existan fenotipos muy diferentes.las indicaciones de los tratamientos alternativos destinados a reducir o a evitar los esteroides orales, tanto si se trata de ig intravenosas o de la ciclosporina, nunca han sido objeto de estudios con doble ciego con un tamao muestral suficiente o han sido negativos. la mejor comprensin de los mecanismos implicados en la fisiopatologa del asma ha permitido el desarrollo de nuevas molculas. entre ellas, las anti-ige han permitido, en los nios que tienen un asma persistente moderada o grave, evitar los ci, as como reducir el nmero de exacerbaciones. otras molculas como los inhibidores de la fosfodiesterasa, las antiinterleucinas (il) 4 y los antagonistas de las quimiocinas o los inhibidores de la cinasa tal vez encuentren su lugar en el arsenal teraputico de estos cuadros de asma grave [61] .en francia, por ejemplo, la mortalidad por asma ha disminuido en los ltimos aos. en 2005, la mortalidad en los menores de 15 aos era de 0,1/100.000 habitantes tanto en varones como en mujeres, lo que supone ocho fallecimientos en nios de 1-4 aos y cinco de nios de 10-14 aos [62] . el fallecimiento se produce sobre todo en los asmticos graves, incluso aunque se ha descrito en casos de asma aparentemente moderados. por tanto, la adolescencia es un perodo especialmente expuesto, porque las exigencias mdicas son mal vistas, el tratamiento se toma de forma caprichosa, dando prioridad a menudo a los b2-adrenrgicos, en detrimento de los tratamientos a largo plazo.el fallecimiento se produce a menudo al final de un deterioro progresivo del estado respiratorio al que no se ha prestado atencin, con una duracin que vara de unos das a unas semanas. se instaura un cuadro de asfixia progresiva al final del cual el nio fallece de repente en su casa, a veces despus de una ltima toma de b2-adrenrgicos. en menos ocasiones, el fallecimiento se produce de un modo ms sbito, con frecuencia en el domicilio. las otras causas de fallecimiento en el asma son mucho menos habituales: exposicin masiva a un alrgeno, neumotrax espontneo, insuficiencia suprarrenal, arritmias, intoxicacin farmacolgica, shock por aspirina, abuso de sedantes. es probable que las lesiones anatomopatolgicas sean comparables a las observadas en los adultos con infiltracin neutroflica en la muerte sbita y eosinoflica en los fallecimientos menos repentinos [56, 63] . lo esencial es determinar cul es la poblacin de mayor riesgo (cuadro ix).en realidad, la gran mayora de los fallecimientos puede prevenirse mediante un tratamiento adecuado. es esencial ensear a los nios y a sus progenitores a reconocer un deterioro de su asma, a evaluar la gravedad de la crisis, a interpretar los sntomas clave y a utilizar la flujometra mxima. un plan de accin por escrito puede disminuir la mortalidad un 70% y la corticoterapia sistmica durante una crisis grave puede reducir dicha mortalidad un 90% [64, 65] .las infecciones virales se reconocen en la actualidad como el factor precipitante ms comn de las crisis de asma, en los pacientes asmticos comprobados [66] . en alrededor del 80% de las crisis de asma, el uso de las tcnicas clsicas de diagnstico (inmunofluorescencia, cultivo, serologa) y de la reaccin en cadena de la polimerasa (pcr) permite implicar al menos a un agente infeccioso. de este modo, el estudio de caen efectuado con 75 nios de 3 meses a 13 aos de edad, hospitalizados por una crisis de asma, ha detectado, por orden de frecuencia, rinovirus (46,9%), virus respiratorio sincitial (21,2%), enterovirus, (9,8%), virus influenza (5,1%), chlamydia pneumoniae (4,5%), adenovirus (4,5%), coronavirus (4,5%), virus parainfluenza (3,7%) y mycoplasma pneumoniae (2,2%) [67] . la clnica de las infecciones virales o relacionadas corresponde a una alteracin de las vas respiratorias inferiores. las infecciones virales tienen una recrudescencia en otoo e invierno. pueden ser graves, con una insensibilidad relativa a los b2-adrenrgicos y requerir la hospitalizacin.las infecciones virales y el regreso a la escuela pueden combinarse para desequilibrar un cuadro de asma que se haba controlado durante las vacaciones de verano. la recrudescencia de las exacerbaciones en el momento de la vuelta a la escuela se ha relacionado desde hace mucho tiempo con la asociacin de modificaciones atmosfricas, alergnicas y psicolgicas. los datos recientes han demostrado que esta epidemia de exacerbaciones en septiembre es de origen viral [68] .el aie se caracteriza por disnea, tos, opresin respiratoria y sibilancias que aparecen por lo general 5-10 minutos tras interrumpir un ejercicio fsico intenso. esta disnea es de intensidad variable, a menudo moderada, pero a veces intensa. de forma espontnea, es mxima unos quince minutos despus de finalizar el ejercicio y desaparece una hora despus. la existencia de una fase retardada est puesta en entredicho.aunque, por lo general, el aie se produce despus de interrumpir el ejercicio, tambin puede observarse durante un ejercicio fsico mantenido [69] .en el 40-50% de los pacientes, existe un perodo refractario alrededor de 1 hora durante la cual no se puede producir un nuevo broncoespasmo si se realiza un nuevo esfuerzo. desde el punto de vista clnico, en los nios pequeos suele predominar la tos. en ocasiones, el nio consulta por disnea con pocas o ninguna sibilancia ni tos. la bsqueda del aie debe ser sistemtica si el nio no lo refiere de forma espontnea. en caso de duda diagnstica, se puede realizar una prueba de esfuerzo, que ser positiva si el vems o el fem disminuyen al menos un 15% despus del ejercicio [70] .en la actualidad, el aie se incluye en la evaluacin de la gravedad del asma. un buen control del asma disminuye por lo general la frecuencia y la gravedad del aie. la reduccin de la inflamacin es prioritaria en tales casos, sobre todo mediante la corticoterapia inhalada. en menos ocasiones, las manifestaciones de esfuerzo representan las nicas manifestaciones de asma. por ltimo, en algunos nios, mientras que el asma parece bien controlada desde el punto de vista clnico y funcional, el aie, que en ocasiones es intensa, sigue siendo la manifestacin ms preocupante del nio. la adicin de un tratamiento antileucotrienos parece ser eficaz en tales casos [71] .la respuesta de un nio al ejercicio puede variar de forma considerable de un da a otro, dependiendo de las caractersticas del ejercicio, de las condiciones atmosfrica y de la hiperreactividad bronquial, que se ve afectada a su vez por las infecciones virales, la exposicin a los alrgenos y la utilizacin de ciertos frmacos. una gran parte de esta variabilidad se explica por la fisiopatologa del aie, en la que interviene sobre todo el nivel de ventilacin, de prdida de calor y de agua por el rbol respiratorio. la intervencin de los fenmenos inflamatorios y de los mediadores procedentes de las clulas epiteliales, de los mastocitos, de los eosinfilos, de los macrfagos y de las clulas neurosensoriales explica probablemente la accin beneficiosa a largo plazo de los ci. la eficacia de los broncodilatadores b2-adrenrgicos inhalados, a ttulo preventivo, tiene un gran valor diagnstico.el aie es distinta de una disnea secundaria a una falta de forma fsica, pero la distincin no siempre es fcil. el aie no debe confundirse con la anafilaxia inducida por el ejercicio, tanto si depende como si no de una sensibilizacin alimentaria [72] .el ejercicio fsico corresponde a una necesidad somtica, psicolgica y sociocultural en los nios asmticos. a excepcin del submarinismo con equipo autnomo, los pacientes asmticos pueden realizar cualquier deporte, una vez que se ha asegurado el buen control del asma y la ausencia de crisis recientes. por tanto, los nios asmticos no deben verse excluidos de las actividades deportivas, sobre todo en el medio escolar. se debe hacer todo lo posible para sacar al nio asmtico del crculo vicioso de falta de forma fsica. el reentrenamiento del esfuerzo debe formar parte de la estrategia teraputica en los nios con asma. en el cuadro ix se ofrecen las clasificaciones aproximadas de los deportes segn sus caractersticas ms o menos asmgenas.el futuro a largo plazo del asma infantil es una preocupacin considerable. la introduccin de los ci ha transformado el tratamiento del asma infantil y del adulto. una de las preguntas ms frecuentes que plantean los progenitores es saber si el asma persistir toda la vida o al menos hasta la adolescencia. por tanto, se debe establecer qu factores de riesgo son determinantes en la persistencia de la enfermedad asmtica.los estudios prospectivos de cohortes han permitido determinar mejor la evolucin natural del asma de los nios de edad preescolar. los resultados de la cohorte de tucson en arizona cuadro ix. clasificacin de los deportes en funcin de su carcter asmgeno. han permitido describir varios fenotipos evolutivos [73] . a los 6 aos de edad, el 51,5% de los nios nunca haba tenido sibilancias, un 15% nunca las haba tenido antes de los 3 aos de edad, pero s a los 6 aos (sibilantes tardos), un 13,7% haba tenido sibilancias antes de los 3 aos y continuaba con ellas a los 6 aos (sibilantes persistentes). en el 41% de los nios que haban tenido sibilancias antes de los 3 aos persistan las manifestaciones: los sibilantes transitorios, cuyas manifestaciones no perdurarn ms all de los 3 aos de edad. estas sibilancias se asocian al tabaquismo materno y a una disminucin de las funciones respiratorias antes del primer episodio de afeccin respiratoria baja;  los sibilantes persistentes, cuyas manifestaciones persistirn a los 6 aos de edad. este grupo tiene funciones respiratorias normales durante la primera infancia y marcadores de atopia: aumento precoz de las ige sricas totales, madres asmticas con mucha frecuencia. la alteracin de las funciones respiratorias a los 6 aos en este grupo hace temer una remodelacin precoz de las vas respiratorias asociada o secundaria a la inflamacin bronquial persistente. en funcin de la existencia o no de una atopia, los sibilantes persistentes se han subdividido en atpicos y no atpicos;  los sibilantes tardos, cuyas manifestaciones aparecen entre los 3 y los 6 aos [74] . por otra parte, el estudio reciente de jackson muestra que el 90% de los lactantes que han tenido una bronquiolitis por rinovirus antes de los 3 aos de edad tiene asma a los 6 aos y que este riesgo es 8 veces mayor que la presencia a los 3 aos de una sensibilizacin a sustancias transmitidas por el aire [75] .los estudios de cohortes [74, [76] [77] [78] [79] [80] que han tenido un seguimiento prolongado muestran que los factores pronsticos de persistencia y/o de recada en la infancia son:  la gravedad y la frecuencia de las manifestaciones iniciales;  la existencia de atopia:c sensibilizacin alergnica precoz (antes de los 3 aos) y persistente a los neumoalrgenos domsticos (caros, gato, perro); c sensibilizacin a los trofoalrgenos; c atopia parental;  el bajo peso al nacer y el sexo masculino;  el tabaquismo materno durante la gestacin y/o el tabaquismo pasivo en la primera infancia;  la presencia de una obstruccin bronquial en las pfr y una hiperreactividad bronquial persistente;  varios estudios prospectivos han evaluado el efecto de la corticoterapia inhalada sobre la evolucin natural del asma [81] [82] [83] . estos estudios han demostrado que los tratamientos tienen un efecto de suspensin sintomtica, pero no un efecto sobre la evolucin natural, quiz debido a que se prescriben demasiado tarde.slo los estudios prospectivos realizados desde la infancia hasta la edad adulta permiten evaluar de forma vlida el pronstico del asma. estos estudios muestran que la evolucin del asma puede seguir varios modos.  las recidivas del asma se producen a veces de forma tarda no slo en los asmticos graves, sino tambin en los asmticos benignos [84] . esta evolucin se ha demostrado en la cohorte de strachan en reino unido [85] . se seleccion una muestra a partir de una cohorte de 18.559 nios nacidos en una semana de marzo de 1958. estos nios fueron seguidos a los 7, 11, 16, 23 y 33 aos de edad, con cuestionarios sobre el asma en los que se apuntaban los episodios de sibilancias. a los 7 aos de edad, el asma o las sibilancias fueron referidas por el 18,2% de los pacientes; a los 11 aos, slo un 12% tena sntomas de asma y a los 16 aos, la prevalencia era an menor, del 11,5%. en el grupo de 880 nios que haban tenido asma antes de los 7 aos, el 50% estaba an asintomtico a los 7 aos, el 18% continuaba con sibilancias persistentes a los 11 aos, el 9% a los 23 aos y el 27%, a los 33 aos. slo el 5% de los pacientes haba tenido manifestaciones de asma persistentes a lo largo de todo el seguimiento. de este modo, despus de perodos asintomticos que podan durar varios aos, podan producirse recidivas, que eran ms frecuentes en los pacientes atpicos y/o fumadores. el estudio de gerritsen [86] se realiz con 119 nios asmticos seguidos hasta los 32-42 aos de edad. el 43% de ellos an estaba sintomtico en la edad adulta. los pacientes que desde la infancia tenan un vems bajo, una sensibilidad a la histamina elevada y una puntuacin clnica elevada eran los que tenan ms probabilidades de persistencia del asma. la disminucin del vems era ms significativa en los asmticos fumadores y que no tomaban los ci todos los das.  por lo general, el grado de gravedad cambia poco con la edad.el estudio de blair, realizado con 267 nios menores de 12 aos y que fueron seguidos durante 20 aos, muestra que el 66% de los nios con asma benigna tiene un estado excelente 20 aos despus [84] . en cambio, el 66% de los nios con asma preocupante sigue con l 20 aos despus, a pesar de tener verdaderas remisiones. en la cohorte de melbourne [87] , 479 nios se siguieron con regularidad desde 1964, desde el punto de vista clnico y funcional. en principio, los nios se clasificaron de la forma siguiente: ninguna sibilancia (105 nios), bronquitis disneizantes sibilantes poco frecuentes (es decir, menos de cinco antes de los 7 aos de edad [74 nios]), bronquitis disneizantes sibilantes frecuentes (es decir, ms de cinco antes de los 7 aos de edad) y asociadas a virosis (104 nios), asma con aparicin de crisis sin relacin con viriasis (113 nios) y asma grave con crisis frecuentes y obstruccin intercrtica (83 nios). la evolucin de las definiciones y del tratamiento del asma explica que, de forma progresiva, las denominaciones hayan sido un poco diferentes y, en la actualidad, los pacientes se clasifican en asintomticos del modo siguiente: asintomtico, asma intermitente, frecuente o persistente. a los 42 aos de edad, alrededor del 60% de los nios que tenan bronquitis disneizantes episdicas est asintomtico, el 20% tiene un asma episdico poco frecuente y slo el 20% tiene un asma frecuente. a la inversa, ms de la mitad de los casos de asma grave conserva un asma persistente sintomtica, un 25% mantiene un asma frecuente y slo un 10% tiene un asma episdica y otro 10% est asintomtico. durante todo el estudio se observ una buena correlacin entre la gravedad de los sntomas clnicos y la alteracin de la funcin respiratoria con el tiempo. los asmticos graves tienen muchos ms riesgos de presentar sntomas persistentes a los 42 aos de edad. estos pacientes tenan desde el principio y durante la adolescencia hasta la edad adulta una obstruccin bronquial ms grave. en tasmania [88] , 8.600 nios de 7 aos de edad fueron estudiados con cuestionarios y espirometra y 2.000 de ellos (1.000 con asma y 1.000 sin asma) se revisaron 20 aos despus. entre los pacientes asmticos diagnosticados a los 7 aos de edad, el 25,6% era asmtico en la edad adulta en comparacin con el 10% del grupo control que se volvi asmtico. los factores de persistencia del asma en la edad adulta eran una edad ms avanzada de descubrimiento de la enfermedad y crisis de asma ms frecuentes. el sexo femenino, el eccema, una alteracin de la funcin pulmonar y los antecedentes familiares de asma eran factores de riesgo significativo del asma en tasmania. en todos estos estudios, el papel de los ci es difcil de apreciar, porque slo se empezaron a prescribir a partir de la dcada de 1980 y slo se han descrito a partir de los 21-28 aos de edad. se debe sealar e incluso insistir sobre el hecho de que a los 21 aos de edad, el 79% de los casos de asma moderado y el 41% de los casos graves reciben un tratamiento inadecuado o incluso nulo, en especial con un exceso de broncodilatadores respecto a los antiinflamatorios. la mitad de estos pacientes que tienen un cuadro de asma preocupante fuman, mientras que el conocimiento del asma y el uso sensato de los frmacos es deficiente.los factores asociados a la persistencia del asma infantil que se han deducido a partir de estos principales estudios son:  antecedentes familiares de asma;  atopia personal. la mayora de estos estudios epidemiolgicos ha demostrado con claridad que las caractersticas de atopia personal son un factor de riesgo de persistencia del asma [84, 87] ;  el tabaquismo materno durante la gestacin [89] y/o el tabaquismo pasivo en la primera infancia;  la gravedad del asma infantil. la mayora de los estudios han demostrado que cuanto ms grave es el asma infantil, mayor es el riesgo de persistencia en la edad adulta [84, 90] ;  la hiperreactividad bronquial. se ha demostrado una relacin inversa entre el nivel de la funcin respiratoria y el grado de hiperreactividad bronquial en los nios y los adultos [86, 91] ;  el sobrepeso y la precocidad de la pubertad [92] ;  el sexo; aunque el asma infantil sea ms frecuente en los varones que en las mujeres, el asma persistente parece afectar tambin a las mujeres en la adolescencia [93] . los estudios longitudinales han demostrado que la prevalencia del asma actual cambia del varn a la mujer en el momento de la pubertad (la proporcin se invierte entre los 15 y los 18 aos).la escolaridad y, por tanto, el futuro sociolaboral de los nios asmticos, puede verse alterado en varios niveles. el primer problema es el de las crisis de asma. cualquier crisis de asma, incluso modesta e inicial, debe tratarse de inmediato, lo que justifica que el nio asmtico tenga siempre cerca su broncodilatador inhalado. algunas circunstancias y perodos son ms propicios a la aparicin de crisis: regreso a la escuela, educacin fsica, por ejemplo. es necesario que el nio asmtico tenga el derecho de inhalar su b2-adrenrgico antes de la clase de educacin fsica y deportiva. tambin se debe aceptar la idea de que en algunos perodos, los rendimientos fsicos del nio se vean reducidos y de que se deba dar prioridad a algunas actividades fsicas a expensas de otras ms asmgenas. la escolaridad de los nios asmticos tambin puede verse comprometida por problemas de alergia a los pequeos animales que se tienen en la clase, a las concentraciones apreciables de alrgenos de origen felino o canino transportados por la ropa de quienes tienen gatos y/o perros en casa, los picos de contaminacin polnica o a una asociacin a una alergia alimentaria. el proyecto de acogida individualizada concebido para favorecer la integracin de los nios asmticos debe permitir una buena integracin del nio asmtico en el medio escolar.el proyecto de acogida individualizada no exime a los progenitores de su propia responsabilidad. lo esencial en el tratamiento del asma es la regularidad teraputica. son los progenitores quienes deben asegurar el cumplimiento teraputico de su hijo. los tratamientos que se toman por la maana y la noche son los que permiten evitar la mayora de las crisis que se producen durante el da. todo esto justifica el desarrollo de las escuelas del asma. los programas de educacin teraputica para los nios asmticos y sus progenitores tienen por objetivo desarrollar en el nio asmtico, sobre todo en los casos de asma moderado a grave, competencias que permitan una autogestin razonada de sus sntomas y mejorar el cumplimiento teraputico. la educacin teraputica permite reducir la morbilidad, disminuir el coste de la enfermedad y mejora la calidad de vida de los nios asmticos y de sus progenitores. la educacin teraputica debe estar estructurada, organizada y ha de llevarse a cabo por profesionales con formacin al respecto, adems de ser accesible a los pacientes tanto en el hospital como en el mbito de la medicina de familia.los nios asmticos deben someterse a un seguimiento mdico prolongado. este seguimiento debe ser clnico y funcional respiratorio. se debe luchar contra el mito de la curacin del asma en la pubertad y contra la idea de que los frmacos son ms peligrosos que la enfermedad. la corriente actual se orienta a prescribir los tratamientos en una etapa precoz de la vida, lo que hara que el nio estuviese asintomtico, pero tambin normalizara sus funciones respiratorias. no se debe pasar por alto el control del entorno, tanto desde el punto de vista alrgico como de los irritantes (tabaco, por ejemplo). se deben tener en cuenta las condiciones socioeconmicas que, si son desfavorables, complican el tratamiento global de los nios asmticos y de su familia. bibliografain recent years, the smart home market has proven its relevance [1, 2] . if all 43 million households in germany were equipped with smart home technology by 2030 with an average value of 3,000 eur, this would result in a market potential of 129 billion eur [3] . for other european countries, the situation seems to be similar [4] . beyond smart homes, the term "smart living" ranges over various areas that are separated today concerning energy management, health and home automation [5] . the smart home is a core element in a connected world, as well as smart city and smart grid [6] . this will lead to more comfort, better assistance and increased safety and security as well as improved resource efficiency and reduced overall costs. the base for such advanced opportunities is the intense usage of ai.the foresight project follows the approach of an open platform which integrates ai-based solutions, interoperability, context-awareness and established building automation technologies into a flexible multi-domain and multicomponent system ranging across different manufacturers and industries [6] . furthermore, foresight will provide the flexibility to add new services and offers corresponding tools for service providers. in europe, privacy and security issues play an important role [7] . data needs to be handled carefully. to ensure this, foresight will create an adequate iam mechanism and be as restrictive as possible to ensure privacy concerns, i.e. we will try to keep data stored locally, whenever it is possible.these days, systems for energy management, classic smart home use cases like lighting as well as health applications exist. to optimize residents' benefits it is useful to combine these three domains and make them controllable by one single platform, which allows domain and vendor independence. in other areas like manufacturing industry reference architecture models have been established to visualize needs to improve interoperability in general. we adapted these models like rami 4.0 [8] to the smart living domain (see fig. 1 ). accordingly, we strive to enable an interoperability level on the business model layer. after describing necessities of interoperability, privacy and security, we need to introduce the concepts of iam to ensure a solid base for reaching our goals.there are four topics when it comes to iam, which need to be considered. in a first step, the user who wants to access the system needs to identify himself (identification). this claim needs to be verified (authentication) by the system. subsequently, it is necessary to grant appropriate rights to the user (authorisation). for many systems and domains, it is mandatory to log different system events for ensuring auditing, monitoring or tracing (accountability) [9] .to carry out a target group-oriented authorization, four basic concepts are considered. the first is identity-based access control (ibac), which provides an access control list for each object, which in turn contains all subjects that are allowed to access the corresponding object [10] . the second concept, role-based access control (rbac), provides different read and write permissions (generally: transactions) for different user groups [11] . attribute-based access control (abac) defines a similar approach to rbac, except that users are granted rights based on certain attributes of subjects and objects and environmental conditions [12] . the last type, capability-based access control (capbac) turns the rights management the other way around and grants rights based on the token that the user hands over at login [13] . this token then contains an indication of the possibilities a user has on the platform.openhab is a smart home middleware, so it is possible to control different systems in one single graphical user interface (gui) or app. the software uses specific components to offer an abstraction layer for all of its subsystems. to connect to a third-party system like homematic [14] , it is necessary to create a binding. after activating the binding it is possible to search for accessible objects, here for the homematic bridge and all the homematic devices, e.g. a switch. the signal of the device and the triggered action from openhab to the homematic device is transported through so-called channels. to create a gui a sitemap is needed. in the sitemap file there is a possibility to name items. an item is a concrete instance of a thing and a channel can be mapped to an item. for automating event-driven tasks there is the concept of rules, a scriptlike openhab feature. there are several other smart living middleware systems or promising approaches besides openhab, for example, universaal, homekit and connected home over ip.to fulfill the idea of our smart living reference architectural model (see fig. 1 ) it is necessary to offer a platform architecture which is able to handle upcoming requests as flexible as possible. the corresponding iam needs to be considered in all systems. this is challenging because existing middleware systems need to be used to connect to different smart home systems to achieve an adequate market penetration. moreover, as mentioned before, security interferes with comfort, so new concepts need to be evaluated in regard to user acceptance.openhab does not yet provide access rights for different user groups and thus does not offer authentication for end-users, besides developer-addressed possibilities. therefore, openhab needs to be extended. in addition, there are three variants that allow access from outside on the basis of an encrypted connection. the most secure option is to set up virtual private networks (vpn) to access your system via the router. the second option is to use the specially designed myopenhab cloud, which can be accessed like various other cloud platforms via a tunnel connection. the third option is to set up a reverse proxy before openhab, which in turn uses authentication and security certificates to ensure that the smart living system is protected from unauthorized external access. such remote access strategies are important for several use cases like predictive maintenance scenarios in smart buildings.foresight offers a flexible mechanism to handle requests, i.e. it is possible that requests are handled in the local network or, if necessary, will be forwarded to cloud services to increase performance. the core of foresight's architecture approach is the thinking object (to) -a device or group of devices which offers a specific service to the user or other tos (see fig. 2 ). there are three main modules, which are interacting to fulfill the system needs, here a service engineering module for service providers, e.g. a company of the housing industry, and an ai module to handle requests for computationally intensive operations, e.g. visually based object identification, and an iot module to connect to different smart home middleware systems, e.g. openhab, which will be able to connect to many different vendor-specific systems. summing up, foresight is connecting to openhab to ensure interoperability on a syntactic level. besides, foresight will enable the usage of different smart home middleware systems like universaal as well.it will be necessary and helpful for tos if attributes like context sensitiveness, interoperability, semantic information, data management capabilities, rights management, security and privacy are available. in addition, it is helpful to create a digital twin of the corresponding building and another digital twin of the user to predict their specific behavior. as mentioned before it needs to be considered to handle requests exclusively in the local network. therefore, we create strategies to adapt cloud-based approaches to edge computing as well, especially methods like preprocessing and device performance enhancements. to verify our concepts different use cases, e.g. smart door and smart kitchen, will be implemented. to prove that our approaches are independent of one technology we are using a minimum of two different technology stacks for each use case, e.g. a common router-based stack (internet router and a smart home middleware), and a smart meter gateway based technology stack (see fig. 2 ). first, the use cases will be implemented in laboratories and afterwards in real-world environments like future living berlin [15] .to describe our approach more precisely we want to follow a request through our foresight platform. the service provider is a company in the housing industry. when a new tenant rents a flat, a picture and fingerprints of the tenant are captured and this data is stored in a database and transferred to the iot and ai module, so that the available smart door can be updated with new data. the tenant wants to enter the door and uses his fingerprints and the camera at the door captures a small video sequence. this video is sent to the ai module and the iot module will receive a reply if the person is verified. to ensure interoperability there is a wot-based data model available in the iot module and a corresponding openhab connection that both systems can communicate with each other to transfer semantic information. each time there is a data transfer from one module to another module, a privacy and security filter will be applied to ensure that only authorized actions will occur. this paper focuses on the iot module, so the ai module and service engineering module will not be described in detail. the ai module of foresight offers so-called base services which are important for common ai use cases like object identification. otherwise, there are complex use cases of the housing industry like a tenant change process. such use cases benefit enormously by intense ai support. to simplify service engineering for service providers we will offer guidriven configuration tools, that companies are able to describe their digital business models easily. the service provider does neither need to consider technical details of the ai module nor the iot module or the complexity of different smart home middleware systems like openhab.as stated before, openhab needs to be extended to fulfill an adequate iam mechanism. in doing so, we decided to use a sidecar approach (see fig. 3 ). that means, openhab is handling its core functions and as a sidecar, we use a proxy server and the tool auth-router, so common logging functions and configuration options will be available for the system by using these third party tools. the sidecar approach will simplify the consideration of existing systems, for example, logging and tracing.besides adequate logging functionality, user and group management need to be addressed as well. we decided to use rbac as a strategy to add iam to openhab. rbac is minimizing configuration effort during the system's maintenance because necessary changes can be done by changing one specific role or group. this mechanism can be understood by tenants, which is important for accepting such safety-relevant systems in their own home. furthermore, it is possible to combine this strategy with the sidecar approach. additionally, rbac does not need to change openhab's core data model, so it is possible to extend openhab by developing such a binding. we created this binding, which offers auth-router functionality to the user openhab's backend. the procedure for creating a user is shown below (see fig. 4 ). for openhab it is then possible to generate one specific sitemap for each role and so iam of systems' resources are ensured. the routing ensures that no user can access sitemaps which are generated for different roles. our openhab binding considers user management as well.foresight considers the concept of tos that combine aspects of three research areas: smart environments (i.e. the physical infrastructure such as sensors, actuators and networks), ambient intelligence (an intelligent network of sensors, radio modules, and computers to proactively but sensibly support people in their lives [16] ), ai (agent systems, machine learning techniques). tos represent physical as well as virtual objects. they aggregate and abstract sensor data of devices to deduce value-added services to users. several tos such as sensors, actuators, and lighting in a building can be combined to execute a coordinated activity, e.g. to guide residents through a building.we developed an openhab extension to connect to the wot-based iot module of foresight [17] . this extension will be continuously improved and maintained. beside the wot binding we added user management support for openhab by generating and calling exact one sitemap for each role and restricting the access for non-authorized users. the foresight platform with all of its submodules is currently being developed until the end of 2022.challenges of semantics and interoperability have long been known in the era of the iot, especially if different subsystems should work together flawlessly without an overlying de-facto standard. our approach of trying to offer a wot-based cloud application, where an ai module and different smart home middleware systems are allowed to connect seems promising for us: we are confident to fulfill all requirements european laws are demanding. furthermore, we think that it is possible to create a holistic iam from cloud-driven systems which are often offering capbac strategies to smart home middleware systems, that need to be extended in relation to their specific software architectural patterns. therefore, we need to create strategies to integrate other smart home middleware systems besides openhab as well, either advanced approaches like universaal or existing systems like homekit or z-wave. it is important for foresight that lots of existing smart home middleware systems are becoming part of foresight, so that foresight can achieve its goal to play an important role in the smart living domain.extending openhab by rbac was helpful to improve access control for tenants in that chosen scenario for a first proof of concept. hopefully, we will be able to switch from the sidecar approach to a native openhab solution. currently, the openhab developer community seems to work on such strategic ideas for the upcoming major update (version 3.0).investigaciones biol ogicas clemente estable, montevideo, uruguay. 32 institute of microbiology, technical university of braunschweig, braunschweig, germany.we have recently argued that, because microbes have pervasiveoften vitalinfluences on our lives, and that therefore their roles must be taken into account in many of the decisions we face, society must become microbiology-literate, through the introduction of relevant microbiology topics in school curricula . environ microbiol 21: 1513 -1528 . the current coronavirus pandemic is a stark example of why microbiology literacy is such a crucial enabler of informed policy decisions, particularly those involving preparedness of public-health systems for disease outbreaks and pandemics. however, a significant barrier to attaining widespread appreciation of microbial contributions to our well-being and that of the planet is the fact that microbes are seldom visible: most people are only peripherally aware of them, except when they fall ill with an infection. and it is disease, rather than all of the positive activities mediated by microbes, that colours public perception of 'germs' and endows them with their poor image. it is imperative to render microbes visible, to give them life and form for children (and adults) , and to counter prevalent misconceptions, through exposure to imagination-capturing images of microbes and examples of their beneficial outputs, accompanied by a balanced narrative. this will engender automatic mental associations between everyday information inputs, as well as visual, olfactory and tactile experiences, on the one hand, and the responsible microbes/microbial communities, on the other hand. such associations, in turn, will promote awareness of microbes and of the many positive and vital consequences of their actions, and facilitate and encourage incorporation of such consequences into relevant decisionmaking processes. while teaching microbiology topics in primary and secondary school is key to this objective, a strategic programme to expose children directly and personally to natural and managed microbial processes, and the results of their actions, through carefully planned class excursions to local venues, can be instrumental in bringing microbes to life for children and, collaterally, their families. in order to encourage the embedding of microbiologycentric class excursions in current curricula, we suggest and illustrate here some possibilities relating to the topics of food (a favourite pre-occupation of most children), agriculture (together with horticulture and aquaculture), health and medicine, the environment and biotechnology. and, although not all of the microbially relevant infrastructure will be within reach of schools, there is usually access to a market, local food store, wastewater treatment plant, farm, surface water body, etc., all of which can provide opportunities to explore microbiology in action. if children sometimes consider the present to be mundane, even boring, they are usually excited with both the past and the future so, where possible, visits to local museums (the past) and research institutions advancing knowledge frontiers (the future) are strongly recommended, as is a tapping into the natural enthusiasm of local researchers to leverage the educational value of excursions and virtual excursions. children are also fascinated by the unknown, so, paradoxically, the invisibility of microbes makes them especially fascinating objects for visualization and exploration. in outlining some of the options for microbiology excursions, providing suggestions for discussion topics and considering their educational value, we strive to extend the introduction the ubiquity of microbes, their manifold activities and pervasive influence on the health of all life, local environments and the planet, necessitate an understanding of relevant microbial processes for informed, evidencebased decision-making at all levels of society. these range from the individual (e.g. relating to diet, hygiene, vaccination, pet ownership, choice of domestic cleaning products) through to governments and international organizations (e.g. provision of clean water, managing climate change, food security, monitoring and controlling the spread of pathogens and antibiotic resistance) . microbial products and activities are pivotal to remedying major societal problems (e.g. by degrading toxic pollutants and waste, attaining increased crop yields, producing biodegradable plastics, ensuring the supply of new medicines, including antibiotics, and providing sustainable fuels), and so are key to policy decisions aimed at achieving sustainable development goals (see editorial by timmis et al., 2017a, and papers in the associated special issue of microbial biotechnology), including the provision of opportunities for entrepreneurship, economic growth and employment generation (timmis et al., 2017b) . microbes provide lifesupporting services to the humans, other animals and plants that they inhabit, and constitute earth's life-support system by driving biogeochemical cycles. consequently, microbiology is an exceptionally dynamic research field, with major discoveries being made at frantic speed. new understanding thereby acquired constitutes an increasingly reliable foundation that can aid decision-making at all levels, but, in order to connect understanding and decision-making, the attainment of microbiology literacy in society is needed.at the heart of the advancement of microbiology literacy is the education and inspiration of children, who typically have a voracious appetite for knowledge and are readily stimulated by the dynamism and excitement of the topic. realization of the existence of their own microbiomes, and the intimacy of the relationships children have with their microbial friends, will captivate them, stimulate their natural curiosity and fire their imagination and passion.however, there exists a major impediment to teaching children about microbes, namely their microscopic size, which prevents them being portrayed by the teacher and noticed in the environment when children are out and about (exceptions include fungal fruiting bodies, lichens, eutrophic waters and biofilms). microbes are thus essentially abstract entities that are not apparent as being majority partners of the communities in which we live, and responsible for the many processes occurring in and around us. it is paramount that we enable children to conjure up mental images of microbes, in order to establish and appreciate the links between natural and humanmanaged microbial processes, on the one hand, and the underlying microbes and their activities, on the other hand.young children's emotional attachment to 'cute' animals and teddy bears is predicated on their being visible and in most cases touchable/cuddlable. of course, mushrooms, as macroscopic manifestations of microbial subunits, are generally more recognizable, with mushroom-mimicking decorative objects and furniture being ubiquitous in children's play areas (fig. 1 ), but this is the exception.and, as we have stated , it is essential for microbes to 'transit from abstraction to pictorial perception and substance, and take up their rightful position in the human psyche. visual aids will thus take centre stage . . .. and the exploding arena of microbial art will stimulate the imagination. . ..as microbes transit from the abstract and take form, they will become real; children will have their favourites! cuddly teddy bears and woolly sheep will be joined by steamy methano, wily wolbo and prickly diatoma, who all have their individual (anthropocentric) characters assigned by agile toy manufacturers'. real but invisible microbes become visible, cuddlable toys with names. they may even become characters in storybooks and tv cartoons, with goodies and baddies drawn from the real microbial world.while toys and artwork will bring microbes to life and give them form for younger children, and in some cases inform about individual microbial functions, natural and managed microbial activities will remain essentially abstract. in order to remedy this deficit, it is crucial to expose children to tangible, readily comprehended examples of important microbial activities. time-honoured mechanisms for this are class experiments and organized class outings/excursions, which allow children to personally experience and investigate objects and processes in their natural settings. class excursions are a particularly enjoyable means of creating links between microbes and their activities, of making microbial activities tangible and of immersing children in microbiology. by introducing children to workplaces, operational plants or field sites, excursions can demonstrate the integrated nature of topics and bring reality to learning, thereby stimulating natural curiosity (see knapp, 1996; behrendt and franklin, 2014) , which may be especially pronounced in those who do not thrive in the traditional classroom (ofsted, 2008) . microbiology excursions may reap extra benefits when taking place in natural surroundings, for which there is growing evidence of improved learning, as well as encouragement to develop a sense of responsibility for environmental stewardship (ballantyne and packer, 2002; kuo et al., 2019) . introducing children to microbiology beyond the classroom via organized events also provides a bridge to, and enriches, their informal learning from everyday environments and activities (bell et al., 2009) , such as watching television (e.g. images of the sea: remembering microbes make up 65% of marine biomass; bar-on et al., 2018) , going for a walk (e.g. noticing the diversity of the lichens on walls and roofs) and visiting the shops (e.g. yeast made that baguette!) or a museum (e.g. the dark patches on that old document might be fungal growth). exploring hypersaline environments and extremely halophilic microbes. their vivid colours, extreme adaptations, biotechnological applications and ease of growth make halophiles very attractive to children. the manufacture of sea salt, with its pivotal role in food preservation, helped regions and civilizations to flourish. thus, the interconnectedness of microbes, food and history can be explored by visiting hypersaline environments or when buying sea salt and salted foods from local shops a. satellite view of the salterns in bhavnagar, india, showing vivid red, orange and green ponds in which seawater evaporates leaving behind salt (field of view is~10 km 2 ). the colours are due to the pigments of the halophilic microbes in the brines of different salinity. the red/orange pigments of haloarchaea and dunaliella salina (see d) encourage the absorption of solar radiation leading to increased rates of evaporation, resulting in more rapid salt production. b. a teacher and her class wade into great salt lake (utah, usa) to collect samples to study under field microscopes. c. a student investigates the biofilms that form stromatolite-like structures in great salt lake, impressive calcium carbonate deposits precipitated by the actions of cyanobacteria. d. microscopic image from the hypersaline lake tyrrell, australia (salinity> 20% w/v), in which we can tentatively identify the eukaryotic chlorophyte, dunaliella salina (grown commercially for the carotenoid, b-carotene, which is widely used as a natural food colorant as well as a precursor to vitamin a), living alongside the haloarchaeon, haloquadratum walsbyi, which has flat square-shaped cells with gas vesicles that allow flotation to the surface, most likely to acquire oxygen (scale bar is 5 lm). e. gypsum crust from the bottom of a shallow saltern pond (~20% w/v salinity) in eilat, israel, showing layered microbial communities of phototrophic microbes. the orange-brown upper layer is most likely dominated by unicellular cyanobacteria; the green layer by filamentous cyanobacteria; and the purple layer by anoxygenic purple sulfur bacteria. these microbes use light as a source of energy, and their layering is explained by differential tolerance to ultraviolet light and oxygen, and their capacity to use light of different wavelengths in photosynthesis. the anoxygenic purple sulfur bacteria are adapted to use light at the far-red end of the spectrum, which is less attenuated than visible light in sediments, and they benefit by living in close proximity to anaerobic sulfate-reducing bacteria (grey layer directly beneath the purple layer), which produce hydrogen sulfide. this compound is split to form oxidized sulfur in a similar way to which the oxygenic phototrophs, like cyanobacteria, produce oxygen from water. such layering of microbial communities can trigger discussions about chemistry (the electron donors and products), physics (diffusion of oxygen and hydrogen sulfide, and the electromagnetic spectrum), geology (microbial fossils in gypsum) and ecological concepts (interspecies interactions and niche partitioning). f. a laboratory-made salt (halite) crystal coloured red due to the presence of haloarchaea trapped inside small pockets of brine within the crystal (the central crystal is about 0.5 by 0.5 cm). this is a survival strategy used by haloarchaea to avoid desiccation. they remain viable inside the halite, and evidence suggests that some haloarchaea can survive over geological time inside buried halite. some haloarchaea play a major role in hydrolysing biopolymers in salty environments, such as those used in the production of fish sauces. when we consume the sauces or sea salt, we consume haloarchaea! g. during an excursion, students can collect samples from which they can inoculate media (in this case to grow extreme halophiles) after returning to the classroom, bringing the field-collected microorganisms into the laboratory and further connecting students to their environment. photograph a by nasa https://earthobservatory.nasa.gov/. photographs b, c and g by great salt lake institute. photograph d by mike dyall-smith. photograph e by andreas thywien.class excursions are not only educational and fun events for children and teachers alike, but also invaluable introductions to future professional options, which can lead to career orientation, summer jobs, internships and contacts. they also provide a different educational environment and expose pupils to new "teachers" with a diversity of personalities and teaching styles, which can be enriching.bringing microbes to life through class excursions can strongly stimulate children's imagination and emotions by teachers exposing some of the more exceptional or extraordinary features of microbes and their manifestations, such as: being the first forms of life to evolve on, inhabit and populate, the earth (and likely the last); their ability to grow in extreme environments (hot springs, ice, deep subsurface and inside salt crystals; fig. 2 ) and the question of whether they may exist on other planets (and, indeed, whether life on earth could have been 'seeded' from such microbe-populated planetspanspermia?); the ubiquity and tenacity of microbes and the fact that they follow us into space, on our bodies and space craft; microbes contributing to about half the oxygen we breathe, driving evolution of 'higher organisms'the eukaryotesand thus humans (e.g. via mitochondria and chloroplasts); their presence in and on humans in vast numbers, roughly equal to the number of human cells (and influencing our well-being); inherent beauty (e.g. thiomargarita namibiensis, one of the largest known bacteria; schulz 2002); unusual adaptations (e.g. magnetospirillum magneticum that contains nanomagnets to navigate using earth's geomagnetic field; chen et al., 2010) ; and other enigmatic forms (e.g. flat, square archaeal species, haloquadratum walsbyi; fig. 2 ).with this editorial, we strive to promote class excursions in practical microbiology and, to both facilitate this end and encourage teachers to consider available options, provide a non-exhaustive list of possible excursions and microbial processes or products to explore. local knowledge, along with an understanding of the role of microbiology in the processes listed below, is obviously key to identifying the most stimulating school trips and activities. we also provide some suggestions on the preparation of excursions, to maximize enjoyment and information acquisition by the class, and optimize class-venue interactions.during the preparation of this editorial, sars-cov-2 started to make its own global excursion into and through the human population with devastating consequences, causing many thousands of deaths in the process. obviously, social distancing measures put in place to slow the spread of the virus make school excursions at the time of writing undesirable and, in most countries, impossible (perhaps making this the most untimely of editorials!). nevertheless, the pandemic will pass, leaving children with many questions about how pathogens are transmitted across species and from person to person, how transmission can be reduced or interrupted, why infected people are affected to different extents, and how disease can be prevented or treated. it is certain that the covid-19 pandemic will have a major impact on children, from many different angles, and create a generation of youngsters who are much more aware of, and curious about, microbiology. it is therefore more important than ever to harness this curiosity by providing opportunities to get a balanced view of the microbial world.the suggestions given below for class excursions are sorted for convenience into seven categories (fig. 3 ), but many activities and associated discussion topics will be applicable across multiple headings. moreover, identifying associations between categories should be encouraged.food manufacture and supply, including local markets and food storescontext. an adequate supply of good-quality food is essential for human health, and 'end hunger, achieve food security' is a key un sustainable development goal (willett et al., 2019) . furthermore, food and drink contribute to human culture, civilization and joie de vivre. and, not entirely irrelevant for this discourse, food is a topic of passionate interest for most children. for many foods, microbes play a pivotal role in their manufacture, enhancement of nutritional value, preservation, and potential spoilage or transmission of food-borne disease.and, in turn, our diet greatly influences our microbiome, with consequences for our health (kolodziejczyk et al., 2019) . thus, there is the critical food-microbes-health nexus to explore and the personal decisions that result from it. then, there is a growing awareness of the link between food choice and global crises like climate change, the livestock-greenhouse gas production-global warming nexus, leading to decisions about changes in behaviour, such as reducing meat consumption. children are of course engaged, sometimes passionately, in the global warming debate, and some are leading efforts for policy changes. many of them are aware of the foodclimate connection and so are motivated to learn about food, the contributions of microbes in the food industry, interactions between food and the gut microbiome and their ecophysiological health consequences.fermented foods were probably the first processed foods. they proved to be a key element of human development and expansion, owing to their capacity to preserve cereal grains, legumes, vegetables, milk and meat, often improving nutritional value and providing food year-round. out of necessity, and no doubt an element of chance, grew a plethora of fermented foods and drinks, with a diversity of fascinating flavours, textures, colours and smells that became part of the cultural heritage of a society or region. cheese is a particularly instructive example, with its enormous range of variations and combining historical (cheese manufacture is thought to have originated at least 7500 years ago), cultural, culinary (there are many ways of using cheese in food preparation) and olfactory aspects. fermented foods can readily be used in school teaching, to understand not only the underlying microbiology, but also their importance in diet and human culture, and the key issues of food preservation and safety. suggestions. visits to local markets, food stores and food companies will allow children to explore a wide range of products (in addition to fermented foods) and ingredients that derive from microbes or their processes, including microbes as food (fungal quorn, cyanobacterial spirulina), diverse microbial metabolites (kallscheuer, 2018) that are added to food (amino acids, vitamins, extracellular polysaccharides, acetic acid and citric acid) and enzymes (raveendran et al., 2018) (fig. 4) . in addition to the organizations listed below, universities and research centres with specialists in food microbiology (see section 5) could be visited or contacted to request advice about food manufacturers in the local area. manufacturers of fermented food: dairy products, such as yoghurt, cheese, kumis and kefir meat products, such as salami, nem chua and kargyong  (shell)fish products, such as fish sauces (nam pla, jeotgal, nuoc cham, ngari and worcestershire sauce) and fish (surstr omming and hongeo-hoe) vegetables, such as kimchi, sauerkraut and olives  roots, such as cassava products (mocaf and fufu) legumes, such as soya bean pastes/sauces (tempeh, miso, doenjang, natto, kinema and soy sauce), pastes from the african locust bean tree (soumbala and iru) and others (lupin tempeh)  manufacturers of food and drink additives, such as flavours and flavour enhancers (e.g. glutamic acid and vanillin), colours (e.g. carotenoids and riboflavin), antioxidants (e.g. citric acid) and thickeners (e.g. xanthan gum and glycerol) manufacturers of high-fructose corn syrup  food microbiology quality control laboratories (e.g. of food manufacturers, abattoirs, food processors, food importers and food safety agencies) food standard agencies (e.g. pathogen detection, detecting food crime and food provenance) some discussion topics. during a visit to a food store, children can be challenged to identify the microbial contribution to the food's production process and its ingredients (fig. 4) . for example, peering at the fresh/ frozen pizza offering provides considerable opportunity to explore microbial involvement in the production of this favourite food (yeast in the rising of the dough base, lactic acid bacteria in cheese production and salami ripening, sliced mushrooms and microbial fermentation of olives). the issue of sourcing food more locally and rejuvenation of the traditional preservation methods of fermentation, which add nutritional value and limit food waste (campbell-platt, 1994; br ussow, 2007; katz, 2012; tamang et al., 2016; el sheikha, 2018; willett et al., 2019) , are fascinating topics to explore with children. specifically, they can be asked to identify various means, in addition to fermentation, of reducing microbial spoilage (i.e. pickling with vinegar, adding sugar or salt, drying, freezing, refrigerating, vacuum packing and canning) and to discuss how they work. this exercise can be followed up at school with relatively simple experiments to test student-led hypotheses about the methods that best preserve the food while maintaining its nutritional value. a wonderful way to learn about microbial fermentation, along with aspects of culture and food safety, is to make fermented food in the classroom, ideally accompanied by creating hypotheses and designing experiments to test them, e.g. testing what happens if the starter culture is not added (mel endez, 2019; verran et al., 2019) . while sugar may serve to preserve certain foods, it is all too often added in excess to attract consumers, impacting on health in many ways, e.g. tooth decay, obesity and diabetes. in particular, controversy surrounds the use of high-fructose corn syrup (hfcs), a sweetener commonly added to processed foods and manufactured by a multistage process driven by microbial enzymes (crabb and shetty, 1999) . discussions can consider the cold war as a spur for the development of hfcs in the united states due to reduced sugar cane supplies; the types of enzymes involved and why/how some are sourced from extremophiles (particularly thermophiles); and, since fructose intolerance/malabsorption is relatively common, issues of intestinal discomfort, the gut microbiome and food choice.the carbon footprint associated with food, particularly meat production, has led to renewed discussions about alternative food sources, including microbe-based food, feed and supplements. the thought of eating microbes may initially be viewed with trepidation by many children, until they discover those microbes and microbial products that they may be consuming already, such as mushrooms and those in yoghurt, cheese, salt, fermented foods, yeast extract, quorn or spirulina. students should be encouraged to consider which microbes may be safe to eat, what biopolymers microbes are made of, and whether they could satisfy animal nutritional requirements. the economics and energy requirements associated with cultivating microbes should be a prime consideration, which may lead to discussions about the diversity of microbial metabolic processes and their capacity to grow using cheap feedstocks. in this respect, the possible use of autotrophic, aerobic, hydrogen-oxidizing bacteria to generate protein as a food supplement provides and informative case study (sillman et al., 2019) .context. agriculture uses vast swathes of land, provides jobs and livelihoods for many millions of people and, together with aquaculture, produces most of the food needed for the survival and growth of the world's human population, our working animals and companion pets, as well as renewable materials for direct use (e.g. for clothing or construction) or conversion to useful chemicals or energy. food production via aquaculture is increasing rapidly, now supplying more than half of the world's fish and shellfish for human consumption (fao, 2016) . but, the need to feed a growing human population requires further enhancement of output, through sustainable intensification of agriculture and aquaculture (i.e. increased food production with reduced environmental impact; godfray and garnett, 2014; cavicchioli et al., 2019) . increasing food production in the face of relentless reduction in the available area and quality of agricultural landthe soil crisisis a mounting challenge. decision-making in agricultural policy and practice is a difficult, complex and sometimes contentious undertaking, due to, for example competition between food and renewable production, as well as agricultural practices and global warming-related extreme weather events causing loss of soils and agricultural acreage. then, there is the conflict between high yield and sustainability, for example: the use of growth promoters and antibiotics in livestock leading to pollution and the spread of antibiotic resistance; fertilizer run-off resulting in eutrophication of lakes, rivers and inshore seas; and pesticides polluting soils and water bodies, including those which supply our drinking water, with consequences for non-target insects (e.g. pollinators and ecosystem engineers) and other animals including humans, plants and microbes. plant and animal microbiomes contribute enormously to the health of their hosts and hence to the yields of crop plants and food animals in agriculture and aquaculture (mueller and sachs 2015; martin et al., 2017; trivedi et al., 2017) . furthermore, agricultural soils need diverse and active microbial communities to maintain soil structure, outcompete pathogens, increase nutrient availability, provide resistance to stress and generally promote plant growth (reid and greene, 2013; mcnear, 2013; lee et al., 2020) . similarly, diverse microbial communities are required to maintain healthy water bodies used for aquaculture (dittmann et al., 2017) .despite their crucial influence on animal and plant productivity, microbial contributions are usually lacking from considerations of agriculture and aquaculture policy and practice, and the resulting decisions, so the base of available evidence of such decisions is incomplete and hence flawed. microbiology literacy acquired through childhood education is essential for development of evidence-based policies and decisions in agriculture and aquaculture relating to feeding world citizens, conserving productive soils, reducing environmental pollution and eutrophication and minimizing oxygen depletion of waters and its resulting lethal consequences for aquatic wildlife and thus sustainability. therefore, excursions to agriculture, horticulture or aquaculture operations can be both fascinating for children to personally experience the origins of the food that appears on their plates, and important for increasing awareness of global grand challenges and their microbiology components. fig. 4 . a trip to the food store or a meal can become an adventure of microbiological discovery a. breakfast at tsukiji market, japan. the miso in miso soup is a traditional japanese paste produced by fermenting salted soya beans with k oji, which is also made by fermentation of rice or barley with the fungus aspergillus oryzae. soy sauce is made by fermenting salted soya beans and wheat by a complex community of hydrolytic fungi and bacteria, as well as lactic acid bacteria. sushi rice is prepared with a sweet rice wine vinegar (mirin) to give it a delicate, sweet but sharp flavour. vinegar can be prepared from almost any sugary solution by an alcoholic fermentation followed by an acetic fermentation. in japan, vinegar traditionally derives from rice and k oji-fermented rice. b. salami and brie baguette with pickles. nearly all the foods in this image require microbes for their production: bakers' yeast (saccharomyces cerevisiae) makes the dough rise for the bread; penicillium species and lactic acid bacteria are among the microbes involved in both salami and brie production; acetic acid-producing bacteria make the vinegar from alcoholic drinks for the pickles. c. the drive towards reducing meat in the diet has opened a market for a range of meat-free products, leading to a resurgence in the sales of quorn, which is made from filamentous mycelium of the soil fungus fusarium venenatum. d. dry-cured hams in a bar in salamanca, spain. spanish ham is traditionally cured in brine with sea salt, often with added sodium nitrate, to lower the water activity to an extent that prevents the growth of spoilage organisms. e. kimchi, a staple food in korea, is becoming popular worldwide. cabbage, along with numerous variations of vegetables and spices, is salted and undergoes fermentation dominated by lactic acid bacteria. the health benefits of this tangy, salty and often spicy product are widely reported (tamang et al., 2016 ). f. stilton cheese, which, in addition to requiring lactic acid bacteria and other microbes in its manufacture, is inoculated with penicillium roqueforti to produce the blue veins that contribute to the distinctive flavour. g. chocolate from the lindt factory in cologne, germanyan enjoyable way to learn about the history and microbiology of chocolate. h. chocolate is moulded into a multitude of artistic forms that titillate the senses, especially of children. the example shown is that of the geneva 'marmite', a chocolate representation of a soup cauldron containing marzipan vegetables, made each year for the festival of 'escalade', the celebration of the defeat of an assault on the city in 1602. legend has it that an old lady (catherine cheynel or m ere royaume), who was making vegetable soup at night, spotted the attackers who were scaling the city walls, sounded the alarm and threw the hot soup cauldron at them. incidentally, marmitethe yeast extract spread putatively developed by a german scientist, justus von liebig, using leftover yeast from the brewing of beer in burton upon trent, ukderives from the french name 'marmite', as it is sold in pots with a similar shape to the cauldron. suggestions. below, we outline some of the ways in which microbes influence the environment and food production, which can be explored by contacting the relevant landowners to arrange visits to farms (arable, livestock, shellfish and fish), forests and horticultural centres. many universities, agencies and research centres (see section 5) may be visited to obtain a more intimate understanding of the underlying microbiology. there are also industries that supply the agriculture and aquaculture sectors, providing microbial cultures that are added to soils to promote the health and growth of plants (biofertilizers), and to aquaculture waters as probiotics or to recycle excess nutrients from faeces and dead organisms (mart nez-c ordova et al., 2015). finally, school or community farms provide an excellent way for children to become more invested in soils, plants, animals, including (shell)fish, and their microbiomes. where space and cost are at a premium, edible fungi can be grown by inoculating bags of compost with spores. this can also serve as the basis of an agricultural experiment, for example by testing the effect of moisture and temperature on the rate of fruiting body formation. arable farms, mushroom growers and horticulture facilities, to explore: nitrogen fixation: rhizobial root nodules on legumes  animal waste and the circular economy: biogas production and spreading manure, slurry, digestate from anaerobic digestion, which recycles n and p fertilizers and enriches microbial diversity of soils  methods to reduce the microbial load from filterfeeding molluscs, e.g. by depuration (fig. 5)  identifying and protecting against pathogens of fish and shellfish some discussion topics. numerous learning opportunities arise from investigating microbes in agriculture. for example, root nodules on legumes are visible manifestations of invisible microbes mediating an exceptionally important activity, namely nitrogen fixation by symbiotic bacteria that provide plants with nitrogen in a form that can be used, e.g., for the production of proteins, thereby facilitating plant growth (fig. 5) . similarly, observations of fungal hyphae in close association with plant roots may serve to introduce the roles of mycorrhizal fungi. teacher-guided discovery by children of root nodules and plant-associated fungi can elicit discussions about plant-microbe symbioses in the rhizospherethe intimate microbiome interface between the plant root and its soil mediumwhere crucial microbially driven physiological processes unfold that determine the availability of: a) nutrients, like nitrogen and phosphorus, essential to plant growth, b) hormones that stimulate plant growth, and c) pathogen inhibitors that suppress microbes causing root disease. root microbiomes have also been shown to protect plants against drought, extreme temperatures and other stresses.visits to farms and garden centres can be linked to education about land use and soil as a resource, the 'soil crisis' (koch et al., 2013) , and the beneficial roles of microbes in forming/maintaining healthy and productive soil. for example, in addition to contributing to soil formation by rock weathering (napieralski et al., 2019) and soil fertility, some soil microbes 'glue' together soil particles and reduce soil loss by wind and rain, and others degrade pollutants, including agricultural pesticides. the processing of crops grown as sources of renewable energy or chemical production often involves microbial activities, on-site or off-site, which can be discussed. the concept of the circular economy can be introduced and issues explored, such as spreading of animal waste on agricultural soils and the potential to unintentionally spread antibiotic-resistant microbes and pathogens that may also infect humans (berendonk et al., 2015) . plant diseases caused by rusts, blights, wilts, galls, and their visible manifestations, on crop and non-crop plants, can be stimuli for discussions about the causes of disease and different means fig. 5 . the beneficial and deleterious effects of microbes can be investigated on an excursion to a farm, horticulture centre or aquaculture facility a. depuration tanks holding pacific rock oysters (magallana gigas, formerly crassostrea gigas) harvested from the colne estuary, uk, by colchester oyster fisheries. the incoming water is treated with ultraviolet light to reduce its microbial load. this process provides time for the filterfeeding oysters to flush out any pathogens that they may have accumulated while they were in the estuarine waters, before being sold. in addition to providing a potentially sustainable source of protein, bivalves are important ecosystem engineers. for example, they help to ameliorate eutrophication directly by taking up nitrogen and phosphorus for shell and tissue growth and indirectly by creating anoxic sites that encourage denitrifying bacteria that convert soluble nitrate to nitrogen gas (van der schatte olivier et al., 2018). b. nodules housing nitrogen-fixing bacteria on the roots of southern pea, also known as cowpea (vigna unguiculata), an important food crop in the semiarid tropics. c. peach tree (prunus persica) with crown gall, a cancerous growth caused by the bacterial species agrobacterium tumefaciens. d. aspergillus flavus, an opportunistic pathogenic fungus, growing on maize. a. flavus is the main producer of aflatoxin b1, the most carcinogenic mycotoxin yet known (gasperini et al., 2019) . e. visible microbiota on a 50-year-old mango tree (kolkata, india). the various colours on the bark largely reflect different microbial communities (e.g. algae, fungi and lichens) colonizing those habitats to which they are best adapted. key factors that influence microbial distribution include exposure to the sun, availability of water and secretions from the tree. thus, trees present a living illustration of the microbial biosphere across a series of environmental gradients. f. silage bales for year-round animal feed are wrapped in plastic (pink and blue wrappers were used to raise awareness of breast cancer and prostate cancer, respectively) at g aseberg sheep farm, lysekil municipality, sweden. before wrapping the hay in plastic, its moisture content is optimized and then checked regularly to maintain ideal conditions for lactic acid fermentation while diminishing the risk of spoilage. the consumption of oxygen by aerobic microbes, followed by the production of acidic conditions by lactic acid bacteria (as part of a diverse community of microbes), minimizes the growth of spoilage organisms. l ubeck and l ubeck (2019) of prevention or treatment, as well as their role in contributing to famine and influencing human history. a visible infestation of crops by aphids can be used to introduce the topic of the insect's dependence (and vice versa) on its endosymbiotic bacteria, buchnera species, and more broadly, it can serve to introduce the topic of microbial control agents in agriculture, such as the insect-killing bacterium bacillus thuringiensis (bt), used primarily to kill larvae of lepidoptera (bravo et al., 2011; engel and moran, 2013) . cattle farmers can explain the problem of bovine tuberculosis, which can lead to microbiology-informed debate about disease transmission and the pros and cons of badger culling.and, not to forget, soils are a major repository of microbial diversity and hence the major source of microbiome diversity maintenance (in humans and other life forms), which is crucial for the health of most species in the biosphere ('let them eat dirt'; finlay and arrieta, 2016) , which is also an interesting topic for children to explore.a visit to a marine or freshwater aquaculture facility, quite apart from the interest in seeing the process of fish/mollusc/crustacean rearing, and the different developmental stages, provides an excellent platform to explore food webs (e.g. phytoplankton (and their associated beneficial heterotrophic microbes)zooplanktonfish) and thus the interconnectedness of life, as well as the problems of the use of growth promoters and nutrient/faecal pollution that can lead to eutrophication and oxygen limitation of water bodies.context. microbes are central to the environmental and industrial biotechnology sectors, which contribute a burgeoning array of products and processes for sustainable economic growth (timmis et al., 2017) . these range from municipal wastewater treatment plants to biotechnology start-ups, and include long-running chemical giants that have switched to using biological processes. these enterprises can be identified through local knowledge, directories, internet searches, asking school children and colleagues where family members work and contacting local universities and research centres.societal responsibility necessitates that everyone learns what happens to the wastes we produce, so that we transit from an out-of-sight, out-of-mindwastewater treatment plants as an opportunity to see microbes as the ultimate recyclers a. colchester wastewater recycling plant run by anglian water. the image shows part of the activated sludge treatment, whereby flocs are encouraged to form, due to the activity of myriad microbes, including the extracellular polymer-producing bacterial species zoogloea ramigera. the organic microbe-rich flocs are allowed to settle (see b): some will be recycled to seed the activated sludge tanks, and the rest can be used to make biogas (see c). b. the right-hand bottle illustrates how activated sludge settles, thus separating the solids and leaving behind reasonably clear liquid with reduced organic load. the left-hand bottle shows incomplete settling due to a suboptimal activated-sludge microbial community. c. the upstream part of the anaerobic digestion facility at colchester wastewater recycling plant. the sludge from the plant and surrounding locales is subjected to heating, pasteurization and hydrolysis, before the anaerobic digestion step, driven by methanogenic archaea. the resultant methane is used to generate electricity and can be stored in the biogas dome shown on the left. photographs by terry mcgenity. mentality when we flush the toilet or empty rubbish into the dustbin, to an awareness of the processes, needs and costs of what is thereby actioned. an excursion to a wastewater treatment plant/recycling facility can provide a particularly interesting and wideranging microbiological experience, and almost every town has one (fig. 6 ). water companies are often accommodating to visits, and they may have specialized outreach professionals/microbiologists available. the olfactory component ensures a memorable visit, and the change in smell while progressing through the treatment plant demonstrates that the underpinning microbiological processes are working. wastewater treatment eliminates much of the waste we produce and channel into the wastewater disposal system. it also removes a major fraction of the pathogens present in wastewater and thereby enormously reduces disease transmission and our infection burden. currently, wastewater treatment focuses not only on waste destruction but increasingly on recovery of resources (notably the macronutrients nitrogen and phosphorus, but potentially gold and other precious metals), the recuperation of energy in the form of methane gas from anaerobic digesters and the creation of added-value products like biopolymers, and hence plays a central role in a number of facets of the circular economy and societal development. industrial wastewater treatment plants can additionally demonstrate the destruction of wastes, such as polluting chemicals, produced by commercial operations.suggestions. wastewater/sewage treatment/recycling facilities: activated sludge, trickling filters, anaerobic digesters producing biogas and digestate, etc.; also low-tech alternatives, e.g. septic tanks, simple bioreactors, constructed wetlands, composting facilities, nutrient removal/recovery and creation of added-value products (  biofoundries  government institutes and regulatory agencies some discussion topics. diverse topics of microbiology in action can be addressed during a visit to a wastewater treatment plant, depending on the age group and interests of the students and teachers, such as floc formation/biofilms, nutrient cycling, the water cycle, aerobic versus anaerobic processes, pathogens, antimicrobial resistance, anaerobic digestion and the formation of biogas and digestate (fig. 6) . a close look at trickling filter beds can reveal a zoo of micro-and macroorganisms contributing to the wastewater treatment process, leading to discussions about food webs. protozoa and microbial metazoa grazing on bacteria and archaea make for good viewing under the microscope. even without a microscope, children can see chironomid midge larvae which feed on the microbial biofilms, thereby keeping them continually growing and optimally active, as well as preventing the filters from becoming clogged. at landfill sites, children can explore microbial aspects of: the sources of the smell and how microbes can also be used to remove smelly volatile compounds, differential rates of degradation of different materials, biodegradable plastics, pollution from leachate and microbial remediation, coastal erosion and the impact of landfill waste entering the sea, generation and harnessing of methane from landfill. and, since sites for landfill compete with other uses, like agriculture and housing, the need to reduce landfill expansion and the key issues of separation, recycling, resource recovery and microbial involvement in these provide discussion topics for lifestyle decision-making, which should encourage future generations to value and conserve resources.when visiting petroleum companies or their field operations, or those organizations providing services to the petroleum industry, children can be taught about the role of microbes in cleaning up oils spills, including gasoline released from leaking storage tanks at petrol stations, as well as a range of other microbially driven processes, such as: in-situ depletion of sulfide in oil reservoirs by encouraging nitrate-reducing microbes, biodesulfurization of crude oil and coal, microbially enhanced oil recovery and prevention of microbially induced corrosion of metal structures. the impact of fossil fuel industries on climate and the extent to which petroleum-based fuels and other products should still have a place in society are pertinent topics for discussion. however, when considering alternative energy and chemical sources, e.g. when visiting bioethanol or other biofuel plants, in addition to learning about the underlying biological process, the sources of the feedstock should be considered and the environmental and societal cost of its production deliberated, i.e. the fuelversus-food debate. then, the children can consider why it is preferable to produce sugar (as precursors for some biofuels) from alternative sources, particularly waste lignocellulosic material (e.g. waste paper, straw), followed by discussion of the types of microbes that degrade lignin and cellulose, where they can be found and how to harness their activities.context. children, for reasons of inter alia immunological naivety, overly hygienic upbringing in their early years, and classroom confinement, are particularly susceptible to infections. the physical and mental suffering caused by microbial disease affects children considerably, not least because of school absences and the stress of catch-up, and frequently motivates them to want to learn more about, and sometimes to choose a career in, microbiology or medicine. poorly evidenced propaganda about supposed negative effects of vaccination has led to the re-emergence of some well-contained, or almost eliminated, microbial diseases (e.g. measles and polio). outbreaks of pathogens causing diseases characterized by high mortality rates (e.g. ebola virus) or high infectivity enabling epidemic or pandemic spread (e.g. sars-cov-2 causing covid-19) occur regularly. crucially, the global increase in antimicrobial resistance in previously treatable pathogens means that many infections have now become life-threatening and are predicted to become a major cause of global morbidity and mortality in the future.on the other hand, there are exciting advances linking the human microbiome with well-being, which promise to lead to new paradigms for diagnosis, prevention and therapy of both physical and mental health conditions originating from microbiome perturbations. the, by now, classical example of perturbed microbiota restorationthe successful use of faecal microbiota transplants to treat recurrent or refractory clostridium difficile infections promoted by antibiotic therapyis encouraging the assessment of similar interventions for other conditions (mullish et al., 2018) . and bacteriophage therapy, another ecological strategy to deal with bacterial infections, is making a comeback (br ussow, 2017; gordillo altamirano and barr, 2019; fig. 7) .some of the obvious and interesting places to learn about the medical sector may not be practical for school excursions, especially for younger children, e.g. hospitals to learn about hygiene procedures in surgical and intensive care units and the importance of immunosuppression, and primary healthcare clinics to discover diagnostic procedures, what clinical samples reveal, and what tests will be carried out. however, others, especially teaching hospitals, may have educational facilities that can accommodate class excursions, and some primary healthcare clinics may also be amenable to organized visits, so it is worth enquiring. health clinics and hospitals can be associated with physical and/or emotional discomfort, causing some children to view them with apprehension, so visits in a learning capacity can be very useful to establish familiarity and create a more positive, balanced perception. some diagnostic laboratories may be amenable to school visits, and public health agencies often have outreach divisions, and may also allow/encourage visits. academic centres, learned societies and museums all provide opportunities to learn about the role of microbes in health and disease, and health workers often visit schools to talk about microbiological topics, such as sexually transmitted diseases. opportunities offered by healthcare-system outreach programmes, and by the availability of enthusiastic health professionals for outreach activities, can significantly enhance the educational benefits of healthcentric excursions and in-school follow-ups.suggestions. some organizations for health-related microbiology-centric excursions are given below: hospitals  clinics  public health agencies  pathology and diagnostic laboratories, including drugresistance testing  veterinary laboratories/surgeries  pharmaceutical companies: research laboratories, production facilities and quality control laboratories, e.g. involved in new medicines based on microbial metabolites  manufacturers of enzymes used in medicine  companies developing diagnostic kits for detecting pathogens or their effects some discussion topics. in order to ensure a balanced narrative, before discussing pathogens and disease, it is helpful to remind students of the ways in which microbes promote health or reduce risk of disease, such as: microbiome steering of immune-system development in infants, microbiome inhibition of pathogen colonization and reproduction on body surfaces, biotechnological use fig. 7 . diagnostic and public health laboratories allow students to investigate different ways of growing, detecting and viewing microbes, and learning about treatment of pathogens a. viral plaque assay to quantify influenza virus. dilutions of the sample are added to a human cell line and incubated. the purple stain shows cells that are not infected with the virus, while clear zones (plaques) indicate viral infection and cell lysis. b. some laboratories may perform electron microscopy, giving fascinating insights into the shape, size and ultrastructure of bacteria and viruses. these images are transmission electron micrographs of the bacterium, clostridium difficile, being attacked by bacteriophages. left, surface of an intact cell of c. difficile, showing large numbers of attached bacteriophages, most with empty hexagonal heads, representing bacteriophages that have injected their dna into the bacterium. right, part of a c. difficile cell that has burst open due to the proliferation of bacteriophages within, which produce enzymes that lyse the cell membrane. the height of both images is~800 nm. c. throat swab sample inoculated on a blood agar plate, showing colonies of streptococcus pyogenes, the causative agent of tonsillitis and other diseases, identified by b-haemolysis (the production of clear zones around bacterial colonies, resulting from lysis of red blood cells by the haemolysin produced by the pathogen). d. staphylococcus aureus antibiotic sensitivity testing using the disc diffusion method. s. aureus is an example of a pathogen, frequently acquired in hospital, that has developed resistance to multiple antibiotics. a culture of the bacterium is spread on the agar plate, and discs containing different antibiotics are then placed on the plate. during incubation, a bacterial lawn develops. a zone of clearing in the lawn around a disc indicates that the bacterium is sensitive to the corresponding antibiotic, thereby contributing to diagnosis as well as informing treatment strategies. e. staining teeth biofilms (plaque) with plaque-disclosing tablets provides a visual and memorable way to drive home the importance of good dental hygiene to remove plaque and thus prevent dental caries and periodontal disease (note the different meanings of the term 'plaque' here and in a). of microbes and microbial products to create vaccines and therapies, destruction of pathogens by microbial activities in wastewater treatment, preservation of food by fermentation, enhancement of crop yield and degradation of pollutants.children enjoy learning about disease and benefit from clear, contextualized images of the relevant causative pathogens under discussion, in terms of their size (e.g. relative to something that the particular age group would recognize), type (e.g. bacteria, viruses and protozoa) and source/reservoirs of infection. epidemiological games (e.g. centre for disease control's solve the outbreak), incorporating elements of forensic detective work, provide an illuminating way to illustrate how disease can spread.opportunities to relate infection dangers to everyday life should be embraced. for instance, discussion of modes of transmission and their prevention is particularly interesting to young children who play outside and have pet animals, and may usefully include transmission by biting insect vectors. examples include borrelia burgdorferi, a bacterial species that causes lyme disease and is transmitted by ticks residing in grass, and plasmodium, a protozoal genus with several species that cause malaria, which is transmitted by mosquitoes. zoonosesthe transmission of infectious agents from reservoir animals to humansalso include borrelia, whose primary hosts are mammals, and salmonella serovars, which infect chickens and may be transmitted to us in our food if we do not observe good hygiene and properly cook the meat. and, particularly topical is the genetic evolution of animal pathogens, like hiv, as well as sars, mers and other coronaviruses, to become human pathogens (cui et al., 2019; br ussow, 2020) . all of these topics enable the teacher to discuss relevant practices to help restrict the spread of pathogens, such as washing hands before handling food or eating and after going to the toilet, environmental management (e.g. water treatment for cholera), avoidance (e.g. avoiding physical contacts, like handshaking/hugging, social distancing and quarantining during epidemics like that caused by coronavirus), protection (e.g. spraying with mosquito repellent for malaria and using condoms for sexually transmitted diseases), vaccination and treatments (e.g. whether or not to use antibiotics). these issues can lead to discussion of broader topics, including one health (see who web pages)public health strategies based on the integrated nature of human, animal and environmental healthwhich targets the key health-relevant components in this interactive network. in this context, an important issue for discussion is the spread of antibiotic resistance through the use of antibiotics in farming and aquaculture. moreover, such personally relevant, and sometimes frightening, issues provide an opportunity to consider the dissemination of misinformation via the internet and thus the importance of the scientific method, ethics and communicating research.diagnostic and public-health laboratories can introduce children to the different levels of pathogenicity and infectivity of pathogens, and thus containment needed for safe handling, as well as the different means of detection, typing and quantification (fig. 7) . older children can be introduced to the application of molecular methods for detection of pathogens, e.g. using the polymerase chain reaction (pcr), the underpinning of which was the discovery of the thermophilic bacterium, thermus aquaticus, from colourful thermal springs in yellowstone national park, which was the source of thermostable dna polymerase that made pcr feasible. visits to pharmaceutical companies will focus on the development and manufacture of therapeutic drugs, e.g. for microbial diseases, and the process of drug discovery. inspiration for many pharmaceuticals is often drawn from nature, and it will help children to value microbes if they recognize that they are the source of much of that inspiration or the products themselves. so, it is useful to make connections with everyday sensations, such as the smell of soil after rain caused by geosmin-producing streptomyces species, which are the source of a range of antibiotics and other pharmaceuticals. a natural development to this discussion would be to consider the role that such secondary metabolites play in nature.context. many schools are in visiting distance of an academic research centre, where children can experience the cutting edge of discovery by a variety of means listed below. within academia, outreach activities are generally encouraged, and specific outreach days are often hosted. sound advice to specialists on communicating science to children and the general public is provided by many learned societies and a variety of publications (e.g. bowater and yeoman, 2012; westenberg, 2016; illingworth and prokop, 2017) . academic centres have an advantage over many commercial or industrial settings in that they are likely to have laboratories that can accommodate demonstrations, hands-on experiments and bioinformatics. they can also be a good source of contacts to relevant industry, e.g. via their technology/ science parks and research connections. in addition, visits to an academic centre can often facilitate choices of study topics and create contacts helpful for future tertiary education and internships.involving children directly in research activities, for example through joining microbiologists undertaking fieldwork, provides first-hand experience of what being a microbiologist is like. as an example of one exercise organized by the danish technical university and supported by industrial sponsors, school children collected samples to isolate lactic acid bacteria and made headline news with the discovery of 10 new species. such activities, and larger-scale citizenscience or mass-experiment projects, give direct experience of the scientific method, including hypothesis setting, experimental design and problem solving. importantly, this will promote enthusiasm for microbiological research, and the principles learned can be applied to tackle complex problems encountered in later life.schools can be involved in a range of citizen-science activities, many of which do not require a visit to a nearby academic centre, as instructions and materials may be provided or otherwise easily obtained. the 'small world initiative', developed at yale university as a citizen-science programme in which students isolate microbes from their local environment and identify antibiotics produced by them, has grown into a wider research programme (davis et al., 2017) . it has also been adapted in several other countries, e.g. to encourage the involvement of school children and include aspects of service learning (valderrama et al., 2018) , i.e. combining learning objectives with community service (webb, 2017) . another example of service learning is provided by rutgers university graduate students, who run a mobile laboratory, from which, among other activities, they introduce school children to the spread of microbial infections (irizarry- barreto et al., 2018) . dtu bioengineering also has an effective model, whereby students run an organization named the biotech academy, which provides outreach and teaching in schools.the long-running initiative called 'discover the microbes within! the wolbachia project' enables students to see what it is like to be a scientist by participating in research. it is premised on the facts that arthropods represent about 85% of all animal species, and the bacterial endosymbionts, wolbachia spp., occur in at least 40% of all arthropod species. therefore, immersion microbiology in this symbiotic world is accessible to all students and classrooms across the world. this project allows a wide selection of arthropods and habitats to be investigated and involves children in the search for wolbachia symbionts and their bacteriophages.suggestions. learned societies, charities and foundations fund and host events, and support and mobilize scientists, with the remit of engaging schools and the public in science. teachers and pupils can take advantage of these events by being members themselves and/or subscribing to the relevant mailing lists. nearly all academic centres, and/or the departments within them, have personnel responsible for outreach activities, who can provide information about what they can offer from among the following: showcasing research activities, including case studies of research with broad societal impact, as part of a school visits, courses or public open days  providing links to associated science/technology parks, giving insight into spin-out companies and small-to-medium-size enterprises that are carrying out early-stage research and development in many of the areas listed in previous sections  organizing and/or supporting field-based projects, hands-on wet laboratory and bioinformatics experiments (where appropriate, with a follow-up visit to the school class to present the results and discuss interpretations) providing seminars and interviews remotely (e.g. webinars and interviews by video conference), especially in response to high-impact scientific publications  preparing and providing teaching resources (e.g. websites, games and videos) and loaning equipment (see 'importing excursions into school, and virtual excursions' below) advising about activities associated with microbiological promotional days/weeks (e.g. international microorganism day, uk fungus day, world microbiome day and world antibiotic awareness week) supporting large-scale projects with the public as sample collectors, observers, analysts, experimenters and/or direct subjects of enquiry, e.g.: american gut (debelius et al., 2016; mcdonald et al., 2018)  belly button biodiversity (hulcr et al., 2012)  wild life of our homes (barber an et al., 2015)  big compost experiment (run by university college london) tea bag index, measuring microbial biodegradation (keuskamp et al., 2013)  discover the microbes within! the wolbachia project (bordenstein et al., 2010)  small world initiative (davis et al., 2017)  tiny earth (run by university of wisconsin-madison) the microcosmos community of foldscope users (cybulski et al., 2014; see section 6)  foldit (cooper et al., 2010)  supporting projects that benefit from expert advice, primarily for students in higher education, but also open to older school children, e.g.: ocean sampling day (kopf et al., 2015; schnetzer et al., 2016)  international genetically engineered machine (igem) competition (smolke, 2009) some discussion topics. points to discuss will depend on the research area presented and can be guided by the microbiology expert, and/or ideas should be available on the relevant websites. for example, the 'big compost experiment' invites the public to select bioplastic packaging and test their biodegradation, which encourages learning about the chemistry and (micro) biology of different types of bioplastics as well as the composting process (fig. 8) . the discussion could readily be extended to include the wider issue of plastic pollution as outlined in the next section.context. an advantage of field excursions is that they can take place in accessible local environments, including urban sites and the school grounds, thereby reducing cost, limiting disruption to timetabled classes and allowing repeat visits (howarth and slingsby, 2004) . and, although the individual microbial agents underlying the activity to be experienced cannot be seen with the naked eye, clusters/networks of cells, biofilms and slimes may be visible, and the activities themselves can be experienced by the senses, visually, and in some cases, by touch, smell, taste (for known foods!) or sound (see the discussion).children are thrilled to discover previously invisible animate beings and inanimate objects, and are captivated by new microscopic worlds in the samples they have taken. thus, we stress the importance for each school to have at least one microscope. however, a child's curiosity may dwindle on the walk from the field site to the classroom or in the queue for the microscope, which makes portable and affordable tools like the foldscope extremely valuable for microbiological excursions. by assembling their personal, or team, foldscope beforehand, children appreciate the technology behind the optical microscope. moreover, the sense of ownership of their foldscope, together with the ability to view their samples immediately, will enhance children's enjoyment and sense of discovery. the mantra 'small is beautiful' translates into reality as invisible microbes are revealed, become tangible, enter the memory of the child, to be automatically recalled and linked to a relevant microbial habitat and/or activity. then, sharing their achievements and experiences with the global foldscope community is fun and reinforces the interest and reward of their studies: they become active members of a worldwide network of discovery of the microscopic unknown!in some situations, it may be possible for teachers to incorporate simple field experiments into excursions, involving observations and perturbations, with or without simple measuring devices. this has the virtue of extending class experiments to field experiments and revealing the essential link between the two in obtaining a realistic picture of microbial functioning and contribution to environmental processes. a wide range of microbial manifestations is explored in the wonderful book 'a field guide to bacteria' (dyer, 2003) and the excellent website 'exploring the invisible'. a few ideas out of hundreds of possibilities are presented here.microbes and their activities are often more obvious than we realize, and the urban environment with its building stones/materials, wooden structures, monuments and cemeteries provides opportunities to explore the roles of microbes in everyday life as architects of both construction and decay (see 'this is microgeography' website and fig. 9 for example). microbial builders include species used to repair monuments by facilitating calcium carbonate cement formation (gao et al., 2019) . it has also been proposed that the extracellular polymeric substances (polysaccharide-rich slime) produced by microbes degrading cellulose serve as a binder in the construction of mud buildings (vissac et al., 2017) . no surface is free of microbes, and microbial colonies may be visible on buildings, headstones, monuments and rocks in the form of melanized fungi, green algae, multicoloured lichens and microbially formed minerals (manganese and iron oxides, and calcium oxalate) on stone, mortar, plaster or stucco (gadd, 2017; fig. 9 ). such biofilms, crusts and patinas may lead to deterioration (e.g. via acid-producing bacteria, archaea and fungi) or protection (e.g. by hydrophobic biofilms keeping out water) (gadd, 2017) . thus, everyday stone objects provide the basis for visualizing microbes, their interactions and the effects of their various activities.fossilized calcium carbonate shells of eukaryotic microbes (especially coccolithophores and foraminifera) are the main component of chalk, which serves as a building material (e.g. parts of westminster abbey in london) and is still used for writing on blackboards in many classrooms across the world. children are fascinated when they realize that such everyday objects, the rock beneath their feet and iconic natural formations, such as the white cliffs of dover (fig. 10) , are the remnants of microbes that bloomed in the oceans. the rock dolostone is a widely used building material, with examples including york minster (uk) and the western wall in jerusalem. unlike chalk, the shells derive from larger, multicellular organisms, but microbes, specifically anaerobic sulfate-reducing bacteria in marine sediments, are understood to be responsible for much of the formation of dolostone's main mineral, dolomite (camg(co 3 ) 2 ) (krause et al., 2012) . many other remnants or signs of microbial activity appear in the rock record, such as microbialites and banded iron formations (fig. 10) .two diverse and distinct eukaryotic groups, fungi with their hyphal networks and fruiting bodies (fig. 11) , and slime moulds with their massive multinucleate cells and fruiting bodies (fig. 12) , provide a fascinating visual and often beautiful portrayal of the microbial world. important information about the state of world's fungi is provided by willis (2018) and kew gardens -protecting precious fungi web page, while glime (2019) provides well-illustrated information about slime moulds.fungi are attractive to children given that they are often morphologically distinctive, and the basidiomycete fruiting bodies are steeped in folklore; for example the insecticidal, hallucinogenic, home for elves, amanita muscaria (fly agaric) and fairy rings formed by numerous fungal species. fruiting bodies are also fascinating because they are dynamic, changing form and often colour and odour as they age. they can sometimes be seen releasing vast numbers of spores (e.g. puffballs). fungal hyphal networks can be seen with the naked eye by looking at mouldy bread, degrading wood and beneath forest litter. likewise, fungal rhizomorphs, such as those from armillaria mellea (honey fungus), can be identified in the field. the beauty of ephemeral fruiting bodies, along with the extent and longevity of many fungal mycelia (the largest organisms are fungi: the honey fungus mycelium can extend over several kilometres), fascinate children and can stimulate discussion about fungal life cycles, chemical defence and signalling (and link to production of antimicrobials), positive and negative interactions with plants and roles in biodegradation.suggestions. microbes are all around us, and local universities, wildlife organizations, amateur enthusiasts and field centres/councils are frequently eager to offer advice and tours/activities. here, we list a range of environments where microbiology can be seen in action. old buildings, monuments, walls, etc., with growths of algae, fungi, bacteria, archaea and lichens (fig. 9)  local cemeteries can be visited to introduce lichens, including a discussion on the nature of their symbiosis, their use as indicators of air pollution and how their colony size and diversity may relate to the date when the headstone was erected (samsudin et al., 2012) . fig. 10 . blooming microbes a. satellite image of a milky white bloom of the phototropic coccolithophore, emiliania huxleyi, in the north sea. this eukaryotic microalgal species has a calcium carbonate wall which, when the bloom collapses (due to death caused by virus attack and/or grazing), can sink to the seafloor. thus, coccolithophores play a role in sequestering carbon from the atmosphere and transferring it to marine sediments. the greener bloom at the bottom of the image may be dominated by diatoms, which, owing to their glassy silica walls, can also be manifest in the rock record as diatomaceous earth. b. the white cliffs of dover, uk, made of chalk from the calcium carbonate walls of coccolithophores and foraminifera that settled to the sea floor in the cretaceous period c. the giant bacterium, thiomargarita namibiensis, can be seen in this sediment core from the benguela upwelling system of the coast of namibia. it appears like white 'strings of pearls', i.e. a string of connected cells, which can be seen in the sediment. individual cells are~0.4 mm in diameter, and so, unusually for a bacterium, can be seen with the naked eye. it is non-motile, and so relies on currents to deliver its terminal electron acceptor, nitrate, which it accumulates in a large vacuole. the sulfide, which provides its energy source, is abundant in the deeper anaerobic zone due to its production by sulfate-reducing bacteria. there is also a thick, jelly-like biofilm at the top of the sediment. image width is~5 cm. d. fossilization in action. giant microbialites that have formed over the last several thousand years due to microbial activity coupled with high carbonate concentrations in freshwater laguna bacalar in the yucat an peninsula of mexico. cyanobacteria are the dominant photosynthetic microbes, whose activity raises the local ph, which, together with activities of the associated heterotrophic microbial community, encourages carbonate precipitation. the sticky extracellular polymeric substances produced by the microbes also trap detrital grains. microbialites can have accretionary layers (stromatolites) or a more clotted structure (thrombolites), and both are abundant in the rock record, with some dating back to~3500 million years (predating the evolution of oxygenic photosynthesis, and thus raising questions about the microbes responsible for their formation). the layers or clots typically represent cyanobacterial biofilms or colonies respectively (gischler et al., 2008) . e. banded iron formation at the fortescue falls, australia, with stripes rich in iron (darker bands) and silica (lighter bands) formed from oxidized iron sinking to the seafloor, mainly in the archaean eon. the way in which the ferrous iron minerals were oxidized in the early earth is still under debate. the mechanism may have been oxygenic photosynthesis by the ancestors of modern cyanobacteria or iron-dependent photosynthesis, which neither requires nor produces oxygen (robbins et al., 2019; thompson et al., 2019) .  modern-day stromatolites (ask why they are not as common now as in the past) (fig. 10)  soils raise numerous microbiological questions: what is the microbial role in soil and ped formation, structure and health; which microbes and their volatile compounds are responsible for the smell of soil; which microbes form desert soil crusts (fig. 9) ; and what other macroscopic microbial marks can be seen (e.g. nitrogen-fixing root nodules; fig. 5)  forest/grassland excursions to see and discuss fungi and slime moulds: fungal identification, fruiting bodies and their spores (making spore prints); plant-mutualistic fungi with ectomycorrhizal structures; pathogenic fungi with spots on leaves (powdery mildew, maple tar spot, armillaria rhizomorphs); saprophytic fungi (networks under leaf litter, white and brown rots); and slime moulds as evolutionarily distinct from fungi but often growing in similar habitats feeding on microbes (figs. 11 and 12)  salt marshes, mangroves, mudflats and their microbial mats (distinguish diatoms, euglenoids, etc.; ask whether there are any anoxygenic bacterial phototrophs and use material to make a winogradsky column; and look for white mats of sulfur-oxidizing bacteria) (fig. 13)  the coast, river and soil, e.g. identifying and quantifying plastics, and asking why polymers (bio)degrade at different rates eutrophic/non-eutrophic water bodies (distinguish different eukaryotic algae and cyanobacteria) anaerobic ponds versus aerated streams with constructed weirs (note the smell and bubbles from the sediment) coral reefs (photosynthetic symbiodinium endosymbionts; microbe-rich mucous layer) bioluminescent fungi and bioluminescence at sea caused by free-living eukaryotic dinoflagellates or bacterial endosymbionts of squid and fish (follow this with isolating bioluminescent bacteria, e.g. by swabbing from squid eyes onto marine agar plates) caves with biofilms, biominerals (e.g. moon milk), (fig. 2) , alkaline lakes (with flamingos feeding on the frequently dominant cyanobacterial species, arthrospira platensis), slimy and colourful thermal springs, and pink or red snow, also called watermelon or blood snow (often with the dominant microalgal species chlamydomonas nivalis, which is in the same family as dunaliella salina; fig. 2 ) some discussion topics. while exploring the built environment with children, it is pertinent to ask them: why wooden structures decay more rapidly than those made of stone, why they need more protection from microbes, and why wooden window frames and fascias have largely been replaced with plastic. the role of cellulolytic and ligninolytic microbes in deterioration should naturally follow from these questions (fig. 14) . thereafter, the plastic problem is likely to be a topic of discussion, with questions such as: why are most plastics resistant to biodegradation, what are the global problems caused by non-/slowly biodegradable plastics, from where can we (fig. 8) and thereby lead them to establish cultures to grow polymer-degrading microbes. if age-appropriate, the eternal cycle of life and death, and the involvement of microbes in it, can be discussed during a history trip to a local cemetery. this may usefully lead into a discussion of cremation, carbon footprints of different means of disposing of our earthly remains (including composting), the issue of mercury fillings of teeth and the deposition of mercury downwind of crematoria, mercury resistance in microbes and the application of mercury-resistant microbes in the detoxification of mercury-polluted waste streams (von canstein et al., 1999) . decaying objects can be found in all sorts of environments and provide the basis for discussing the underlying microbiology of decay and nutrient recycling. for example, children can be asked who is eating this rotting boat on the bank of the tidal river deben, near woodbridge, uk, and how they do it, thereby introducing children to extracellular and intracellular enzymes. children can be encouraged to consider where else they encounter rotting and recycling (e.g. leaves in the forest, food in the fridge, fences in the garden, waste in landfill sites), when it is beneficial/damaging and how it can be encouraged/prevented. photograph by kenneth timmis fig. 13 . microbial manifestations of their phototrophic and reduction-oxidation activities a. boulder and pebbles in r o sucio (dirty river) in costa rica are coloured orange due to the presence of schwertmannite, a mineral generated by the activity of iron-oxidizing bacteria, such a gallionella spp., which use reduced iron as a form of energy, oxidizing it to form rusty minerals (arce-rodr guez et al., 2017). b. peel of mudflat sediment showing a thick gelatinous biofilm rich in diatoms (silica-walled eukaryotic phototrophic microalgae) on top of the clay-rich sediment. diatoms are the main primary producers in this ecosystem and, by the production of sticky extracellular polymeric substances, they stabilize the sediment, thus limiting coastal erosion. c. cored sediment from tillingham mudflat, uk (holes are~8 cm diameter), showing the golden mats formed by diatoms on the surface, and the transition to grey-black sediment at depth caused by anaerobic sulfate-reducing bacteria releasing sulfide that reacts with iron to form black iron sulfide. d. extracted sediment core from c, incubated in the light, showing how the diatoms and other phototrophic microbes produce bubbles of oxygen visible at the surface. e. a transverse slice of the sediment shown in d, illustrating how burrowing animals such as the ragworm (hediste diversicolor) can introduce oxygen deeper into the sediment and thus encourage the activity of aerobic microbes, such as iron-oxidizing microbes, leading to a ring of rust around the holes. f. burning methane from the lake at the university of york, uk. the sediment was stirred to release methane bubbles (produced by anaerobic methanogenic archaea), which were collected in a funnel and set alight. this phenomenon can occur without human assistance, with the resultant ghostly light engendering myths and legends worldwide, such as will-o'-the-wisp and ignis fatuus. g. winogradsky columns set up with cellulose and sediment from an essex salt marsh. the left-hand column is dominated by purple sulfur anoxygenic phototrophs, while the right-hand column is dominated by green sulfur anoxygenic phototrophs, both of which are bacteria that use light as an energy source, but instead of splitting water and generating oxygen (as in the diatoms in d) they split hydrogen sulfide. the sulfide is produced by anaerobic sulfate-reducing bacteria found in the black sediment. photograph a by max chavarr a, b by graham j.c. underwood, c, d, e and g by terry mcgenity and f by paul shields and james chong.it is valuable to combine different field activities to obtain a more complete and integrated understanding of a system's ecology, providing opportunities to consider food webs, nutrient cycling, etc. (barber an et al., 2016) . when investigating a rock pool, in addition to using a magnifier to view zooplankton, a microscope can make microbes visible and initiate a discussion about their abundance and importance in diverse ecosystem processes, pointing out that every cubic millimetre (the size of a poppy seed) houses approximately 10,000 viruses (suttle, 2007) , 600 bacteria (including 150 cyanobacteria), nine microalgae, six archaea (karner et al., 2001) and on average less than one protozoan (zubkov et al., 2007) . then, if you were able to sample 100 m below the seawater surface, the relative contribution of archaea would increase greatly, in some locations occurring in the same abundance as bacteria (karner et al., 2001) .freshwater lakes are generally transparent due to relatively low concentrations of the macronutrients, nitrogen and phosphorous, limiting the growth and abundance of phototrophic microbes. but, with a seasonal, or sporadic, input of nutrients (e.g. run-off from agricultural land), the water body may turn a deep, turbid green colour owing to dense blooms of phototrophic microbes, such as cyanobacteria or eukaryotic microalgae, a process known as eutrophication (chislock et al., 2013) . as microalgae die, aerobic heterotrophic microbes consume their organic remains leading to the depletion of oxygen, which may result in the death of oxygen-dependent aquatic animals, including fish. moreover, some microalgae produce toxins that poison animals that live in the lake (fig. 15 ) and, when this happens, children are prohibited from swimming or fishing in the lake. having the flexibility for the class to go out and inspect such a bloom, especially when it is making the local news, can provide multiple educational benefits. not only will such an excursion stimulate a discussion about the underlying microbiological processes, it should also lead to an exploration of the link between our food requirements, farming practices and their environmental effects. moreover, interested families are likely to question their children/siblings about their visit, and thus continue the learning process for the student and their family.context. a core role of most museums is to support school visits, though in many cases they have the 'visible', rather than the 'invisible', on show. however, those with artefacts, ancient or recent, are almost always confronted with issues of conservation, including the mitigation of microbe-mediated deterioration. thus, a visit to such museums may be combined with exposure to microbially based conservation programmes. moreover, there are museums and exhibitions specifically dedicated to microbes and their activities, reflecting the public's fascination with microbes, and museums' remit to promote and contribute to sustainable development goals (mcghie, 2019; fig. 16 ). then, there are zoos, aquariums and botanical gardens, some of which may have expertise in microbial infections, biological control methods and microbiomes; fungi are sometimes showcased in botanical gardens (e.g. kew gardens in london; willis, 2018) , while slime moulds have recently been introduced into the collection of the parc zoologique de paris. visits to livery stables, animal sanctuaries or dog/cat homes fig. 16 . microbial exhibits a. the giant escherichia coli sculpture created by luke jerram was the centrepiece of the bacterial world exhibition. the 28-m-long piece is 5 million times bigger than a real microbial cell and highlights some of its external structures such as flagella and pili. b. 'the hunt for new antimicrobials' created by anna dumitriu in collaboration with maggie smith and nicholas read was part of the bioart and bacteria exhibition. this framed piece is composed of silk, sterilized wild-type and genetically modified streptomyces bacteria, wood, card and glass. both exhibits shown in a and b were on display at the oxford museum of natural history, uk. redfern et al. (2020) provide more examples of exhibits that aim to highlight the issue of antibiotic resistance. c. the fermentophone, designed by joshua rosenstock, consists of jars of fermenting fruits and vegetables producing co 2 bubbles, which are picked up by submerged microphones and converted to different sounds, creating a relaxing and aesthetically pleasing, as well as edible, display. moreover, visitors can make their own ferments and add them to the living exhibit, shown here in action at harvard museum of natural history, usa. d. the broad street pump replica outside the john snow public house in london, uk, is an example of microbiology historywhere the field of epidemiology was founded. by meticulous detective work, the yorkshireman, john snow, identified the pump as the source of a cholera outbreak in 1854, saving lives in the short term by the removal of the pump's handle and in the long term by recognizing the role of sewage as the source of the waterborne disease. there are famous microbiologists and microbiological stories associated with many towns, which teachers can include in an excursion to enliven the subject. photograph a by andr e antunes, b by carol verheecke-vaessen, c by joshua rosenstock and d by mairi mcgenity. however, for such excursions the expertise in microbiology will most probably have to come from the teacher or an outside recruit.suggestions. the school liaison officer in local museums, zoos, aquariums or botanical gardens should be able to advise on microbiological research, exhibits or activities that could form part of a school visit. here, we highlight some microbiology-focused museums and exhibitions. as the home of so many microbiological innovators, and some of the more unusual museums, it is unsurprising that the netherlands hosts the world's biggest museum dedicated to microbiology; the micropia museum in amsterdam is a rarity among museums in focusing on microbiology in such an engaging and impactful way. another can be found at the instituto butantan in brazil. the wellcome trust collection, london, uk, has for many years revealed to the public the role of microbes in human disease and health, and there is growing adoption of itinerant microbiological exhibits and activities in other museums, such as the bioart and bacteria exhibition, and the bacterial world exhibition with its giant inflatable escherichia coli (fig. 16) , the microbiota exhibition at la cit e des sciences in paris, france, the outbreak exhibition at the smithsonian museum of science and the world in a drop: photographic explorations of microbial life in harvard museum of natural history, usa. the eden project (cornwall, uk) has a focus on invisible worlds. the bioluminescent photograph booth was a touring interactive exhibition using bacterial bioluminescence to enable ghostly images of the human subjects. an innovative, immersive exhibit at the exploratorium science museum in san francisco, usa, used the lightsensitive behaviour of a euglena species to give the impression that the eukaryotic microbe was dancing with visitors while in reality avoiding their shadow (lam et al., 2019) . more unusually, microbial metagenomics data sets have been set to music (larsen, 2016) , and bubbles from fermentative microbes have been used to play relaxing tunes in an interactive exhibit called a fermentophone (fig. 16) . importantly, there are also museums associated with inspirational microbiologists, e.g. beijerinck museum in delft (the netherlands), museum at the robert koch institute in berlin (germany), alexander fleming's museum in london (uk) and louis pasteur's house in arbois (france).some discussion topics. children tend to be aware of the value of higher organisms, such as honey bees as pollinators, and recognize the power and beauty of endangered sentinel species like amur leopards. older children also understand the wider value of biodiversity and its conservation. thus, a visit to a zoo, aquarium, botanical garden or a museum provides an ideal opportunity to encourage debate about the contribution of microbes to the health and conservation efforts of animals (bahrndorff et al., 2016; trevelline et al., 2019) and plants (berg and raaijmakers, 2018) . the difficulty in keeping some animals in zoos, such as three-toeda. an adult weevil on a lichen-covered tree (in alta floresta, mato grosso state in the southern section of the brazilian amazon) infected with the fungus ophiocordyceps curculionum. the objects that look like antennae with orange/red ends are actually fungal fruiting bodies. ophiocordyceps species are parasites of beetles and other insects. the behaviour of the infected beetle is changed to make it land at a certain height (~1 m) on a tree trunk. when infecting ants they modify their host's behaviour, turning them into 'zombies' that move along the vegetation, locking their mandibles into precise locations on the underside of leaves where fungal development is optimized. the infected, fixed ants are generally positioned above foraging trails so that spores from ophiocordyceps are likely to infect other ants (ara ujo and hughes, 2019). b. a male brown-throated three-toed sloth with green fur. sloths' hair has unique transverse cracks that retain moisture and thus support the hydroponic growth of a diverse range of eukaryotic microalgae and cyanobacteria. the highly digestible and lipid-rich microalgae are eaten by sloths, supplementing their poor diet which otherwise consists exclusively of leaves (pauli et al., 2014) . photographs by margaret adams. sloths, has been attributed to obtaining the right diet to support their specialized internal and external microbiomes (dyer, 2003; pauli et al., 2014; dill-mcfarland et al., 2016; fig. 17 ). three-toed sloths are fascinating from another microbiological standpoint: they carry around in cracks in their fur portable microbial 'vegetable gardens' which provide valuable nutrients on demand (fig. 17) . flamingos in zoos may lose their pink pigmentation, as they are not feeding on their usual carotenoid-rich cyanobacteria and microalgae (directly or indirectly), which impart the pink colouration in their natural habitat (dyer, 2003) .emblems for schools, towns, states, etc., can deliver powerful messages about issues of local importance and serve as sources of civic pride. new jersey has antibiotic-producing streptomyces griseus as its state microbe, while oregon, famous for its craft beer production, has saccharomyces cerevisiae, so microbes have been adopted as important emblems. a microbiology excursion may thus be enhanced by asking children to think about which microbe deserves to be considered for their school, town or state emblem. older children can be challenged to consider which microbe they would most want to conserve and why, e.g. because of its rarity, beauty or value to humans. this question is sure to evoke a response that can be explored further by discussing why we are innately less likely to want to conserve small organisms, yet why we should do so.it will be informative to consider the consequences of microbial extinctions and how to conserve microbes; for example, by focusing on habitats, the habitats' genetic resources or on cultured microbes (cockell and jones, 2009; paul and mormile, 2017) . in the case of protecting or preserving habitats, which is of course key to protecting endangered species of plants and animals, children can/should be encouraged to develop a sense of pride in their local ecosystems as they start to learn about the microbes within. when considering preservation of microbial cultures, children can be introduced to the valuable roles played by microbial domain biological resource centres (antunes et al., 2016) , which can also make for an interesting excursion.finally, most zoos have ants, usually tropical leafcutter ants, which can elicit discussions about their interactions with microbes, notably the different ways that they farm fungi, and the role of associated antibiotic-producing bacteria (chomicki and renner, 2017; whitaker and stolzmann, 2019) . children are particularly fascinated by interactions that induce weird behavioural changes in animals, for example the fungus ophiocordyceps sp. that uses carpenter ants as a vehicle for reproduction and dispersalcreating so-called zombie ants (hughes et al., 2011; ara ujo and hughes, 2019; fig. 17) . and, of course, this can trigger discussions about the varied behavioural effects that wolbachia species have in diverse insect hosts (see section 5).useful advice on running and evaluating activities, including site visits and field trips, is given by behrendt and franklin (2014) and the council for learning outside the classroom (lotc). there is a large body of evidence to show that active learning promotes student performance (freeman et al., 2014) . therefore, in order to get maximal benefit from excursions, it is important for the host to develop age-appropriate and engaging activities. when teaching microbiology to young children, the focus should be on discovery, the wonder and amazement of microbes, nurturing respect for microbes and understanding that they are members of the natural world like all other more familiar organisms. then, children can be introduced to the roles that microbes play and services that they render, such as recycling and degrading. for older children, there can be more focus on global issues and the networking/integration of microbial processes.the following points provide some general, and some microbiology-specific, tips that may be helpful when preparing for an excursion.1. inform yourself about the availability of excursion possibilities of microbiological interest within a practical radius of the school (excursions further afield may also be noted for special occasions or joint excursions with other schools). 2. decide whether only one excursion or more can/will be made. 3. familiarize yourself with the microbiologically relevant processes. 4. contact multiple organizations and ask questions, such as: a. whether an excursion is possible b. which topics are to be covered c. whether they have hosted school groups previously and, if so, who were the lead teachers.one or more of these should be contacted for an assessment and advice on how benefits might be maximized. d. whether logistical issues exist, the size of rooms to be visited are adequate for the numbers in the group (a room with a capacity for eight is not useful for a class of 30, which will spill out into the corridor and not see/hear what is going on) e. whether anything else of interest can be shown/ discussed. 5. decide which of the possibilities are the best options for the class, select the best and have at least one in reserve. check out at least two, as indicated below, to obtain a comparison. 6. make an appointment to meet the person(s) hosting/leading the on-site visit. ask if it would be possible to also meet any replacement staff who would take over, just in case illness or anything else prevents the person being available on the day. 7. during the visit, try to see first hand what will be shown and explained to, or experienced by, the class, and determine: a. how they prepare a class visit b. what specifically will be introduced and explained c. whether the age and knowledge level of the children is appropriate for the visit, and whether the information to be presented during the excursion matches the requirements of the group d. what opportunities exist for hands-on activities e. the proposed presenter:student ratiostry to have small groups to maximize interactions f. what safety issues need to be considered in order to complete a thorough risk assessment g. whether the facilities and necessary adjustments for any students with disabilities or special needs will/can be available. 8. stress the value of: humour, interactivity and enthusiasm in presentations/explanations, hands-on activities and allowing sufficient time for questions, discussions and moving around the site 9. assess the ability of the presenter(s) to engage the children, communicate and create excitement and enthusiasm for the topic: outgoing, humorous (boisterous) typesentertainersare to be preferred over quiet, academic types, and those unable to throw their voices to the back of the group. 10. ask for possible excursion dates compatible with your own class schedule. 11. after checking more than one option, discuss the potential visits with colleagues who have experience of class excursions and/or microbiological expertise. 12. select the one that will be the most informative, attractive and entertaining for the class, then fix the date and time of the visit. confirm details of the topics to be presented to the class and check that replacement staff will be on stand-by in case the responsible person(s) is(are) unavailable. 13. in a follow-up discussion with the selected host:a. explore any additional or alternative topics and approaches triggered by the visit that may be valuable for the visiting children b. to prepare for the excursion, request literature, ideally including a lay summary, and explore online videos that deal with the microbial processes to be shown (several may be made available as part of the microbiology literacy initiative). 14. before the excursion, as far as possible teach the relevant microbiology to the class, discuss the visit and ask the children to prepare/suggest questions. 15. design worksheets or obtain material from your host to be used during the visit, and include the opportunity to draw images under the microscope if relevant. then explore follow-up investigations after the visit. 16. consider allowing the children to take home a microbiological memento, e.g. by making postcards or calendars from images of their agar cultures or micro-/stereo-scopic images. 17. enjoy! 18. afterwards, assess what went well and what could be improved for a future excursion.while the novelty of excursions provides unparalleled learning benefits, they are clearly associated with a logistical and financial cost. where the logistics are inhibitory, or funds are lacking for this purpose, alternatives are available. the most obvious strategy is to invite into the classroom a speaker working in a microbiological area. a former student, especially if charismatic, who can easily relate to the class and local circumstances, can be particularly valuable. such external speakers should use pictures, videos, props and, where possible, replace/intercalate a talk with practical activities, as appropriate for the age group; for example, couto (2017) provides an imaginative way to introduce biofilms to 4to 6-year-old children, and vrentas et al. (2011) take students on an imagined microsafari. such hands-on and interactive activities (and more, e.g. an insect's head with ophiocordyceps growing out of it (fig. 17) , smelly food (fig. 4) , settling activated sludge (fig. 6 ) and making electricity from microbes and mud) are particularly memorable and can evoke long-lasting interest in microbiology. speakers and teachers can use a plethora of resources, especially via the internet (e.g. guarner and nio, 2016) , to draw students into the world of microbes. some videos illustrate important concepts that would be much more difficult to convey by other means. for example, large-scale experimental design and the clever use of time-lapse imaging resulted in a very powerful demonstration of bacterial evolution in action by use of the microbial evolution and growth arena (mega) plate (baym et al., 2016) . national and international microbiological societies, together with many academic centres, provide excellent resources on their websites, and, moreover, given the importance of microbes to all scientific disciplines, other learned societies and organizations, from astrobiology to zoology, have microbiologyfocused resources. for example, the international ocean discovery program (iodp) has useful resources for educating children about the deep biosphere. public health england's e-bug initiative provides excellent material for school children of different ages, including lesson plans on antimicrobial resistance, the value of which in improving understanding of the issue by children in india has been shown (fernandes et al., 2019) .social media, together with other media outlets, feature microbiology news stories that can precipitate class debates on topical and/or controversial issues. social media also provides a vehicle for teaching microbiology, using a range of approaches from informative cartoons to interactive courses (l opez-goi et al., 2016) . comics, with their visuals, narrative and metaphors, are an enjoyable way to learn about microbiology (scavone et al., 2019) . there is a growing availability of games, such as top trump-style games, like comic bacteria's micro-match and the eden project's invisible worlds, as well as online games, such as those developed by public health england's e-bug initiative (farrell et al., 2011) , the centre for disease control (solve the outbreak) and the american museum of natural history (bacteria in the cafeteria). foldit is a citizen-science game (aimed at older children and adults) that takes advantage of human pattern recognition and puzzle-solving skills to determine protein structures (cooper et al., 2010) . a current challenge is to design protein structures that would block the coronavirus spike protein's interaction with host cells, as a step towards antiviral drug development. reference to the use of microbiology in science fiction or popular culture can spark the interest of children, but should generally be considered as a starting point for discussion, e.g. what are the microbes in the pink salt lakes that are the subject of a 'go jetters' episode? however, the improbability of humans being infected with ophiocordyceps sp. and turning into zombies, as imagined in the video game 'the last of us', may need reinforcing.visiting speakers enable interaction of children with professional microbiologists, especially in standard classes rather than large assemblies. however, many more school children can be reached if more microbiologists prepare and share educational videos. the educational benefits could be enhanced by the involvement of production companies and teachers to assist with the aesthetic and content. such online videos hand more control to the teachers, who can embed the video material into the curriculum at the most appropriate time, pause the video and discuss key points (or deal with discipline issues). the topic of such videos could include microbiology excursions and present a phenomenon around which the rest of the presentation pivots, e.g. how to get fuel from your faeces. engagement of commercial enterprises in the production of visual aids will require financing from grant agencies and philanthropic sources, who are encouraged to dedicate resources for such purposes.on the other hand, interaction with scientists can be achieved remotely, which is particularly valuable for isolated communities. notable mechanisms for doing this are 'i'm a scientist get me out of here' and 'skype a scientist'. both mechanisms give the opportunity to ask questions, better understand what being a scientist is like and learn that scientists come from all walks of life, thereby raising aspirations of children. the latter matches scientists with classrooms across the globe and could be used to integrate the scientist as a virtual participant into parts of a school field trip.some field locations are remote or difficult to access, in which case live feeds, e.g. via facebook, can instil some of the excitement of the microbiological activity. for example, a highlight of a recent postgraduate training school on the deep hypersaline biosphere (funded by the eu cost action medsalt) was a descent of over a kilometre into boulby salt mine and boulby underground laboratory (fig. 18) . the visit coincided with the mine analogue research (minar) event at which tools were being tested in the salt mine's 'mars yard' for future planetary exploration. subterranean interviews and demonstrations were shared using live feeds to schools and colleges across the world, illustrating children's intrinsic interest in astrobiological research (cockell et al., 2019) . oceanographic research institutes often film and make freely available, sometimes in real time, their research trips, including deep-sea dives by submersibles (fig. 18) .in future, more field expeditions into unusual microbial habitats should, where possible, be financed, planned and executed in such a way that an educational component can be accomplished, and the excitement and scientific achievements of the expedition shared with children of different ages. virtual reality and augmented reality are now feasible, extrasensory options for schools, as simple viewers costing $5-10 apiece, coupled with free virtual reality apps on smartphones, allow an immersive experience of expeditions, either ready-made (e.g. from google expeditions) or home-made (minocha et al. 2018) .a basic knowledge of microbiology is an essential enabler of some of the new policy decisions that will be necessary to attain sustainable development of human societies and to reverse current unsustainable practices entrained by previous inadequately informed decisions, so it is imperative that society becomes microbiology-literate . for society to attain microbiology literacy, relevant aspects of microbiology must become an essential component of basic education. happily, the breadth, depth and excitement of microbiology, along with its dynamic research advances, and especially new discoveries about our microbiomes, make it a perfect topic for stimulating curious young minds. microbes are pervasive in their influence on us and our environment, and the results of microbial activities are highly tangible for childrenwitness the number of products in shops that have a microbial origin or component. almost certainly as a consequence, there is a considerable body of experience that testifies to the fact that exposure of children to microbiology can ignite a veritable passion for the subject. the primary goal of this editorial is to promote class excursions as a powerful means of nurturing interest in microbes, through enabling children to experience and engage with the microbial world in a very individual, personal and intimate manner. fig. 18 . remote field locations and research facilities can be brought to life for children, e.g. by using live feeds to schools a. students visiting the stfc boulby underground laboratory, where the focus is low background radiation science, including the search for dark matter. in addition, the laboratory contains clean rooms in which the concentration of airborne particles (including microbes) is minimized, together with a deep underground astrobiology facility. b. students measured methane flux in salt-saturated ponds constructed in the salt mine's 'mars yard'. c. living community at hydrothermal seeps on the mid-ocean ridge at a water depth of 3,030 metres. this diverse animal community relies on microbes, primarily bacteria, which grow by using gases that emanate from hydrothermal vents. for example, bacteria use sulfide (or hydrogen) to gain energy and carbon dioxide to produce biomass and organic matter that support the food web. such microbes are often found living symbiotically in the gill chamber of the clams and shrimp. this type of symbiosis between animals and chemolithoautotrophic microbes is very common, not only in unusual environments like hydrothermal vents (where geothermally heated water and gases escape from fissures) and cold seeps (where the efflux is more diffuse and cooler than in hydrothermal vents), but also more normal environments like intertidal marine sediments (dubilier et al., 2008) . new techniques provide unprecedented visual insight at the micrometre scale into such host-microbe symbioses and their metabolic interactions (geier et al., 2020) . however, other, equally important goals are: to engage teachers and stimulate them to consider the value of class excursions, to recognize and encourage those academics already involved in bringing microbiology to children in diverse settings, to induce others to participate in the introduction of microbiology in basic education, and to support schools in their endeavours (redfern et al., 2013) . with this editorial, we seek to motivate schools to expand their portfolio and frequency of excursions, and academic microbiology groups to share more ideas, resources and time to allow a wider audiencechildren and adultsto experience microbes and microbiologists in action.the examples provided in this editorial may be centred on microbiology, but none will be exclusively so, and nor should they. excursions afford the opportunity to explore societal, cultural and civilizational issues, both global (e.g. feedstocks used in the processes discussed, and issues surrounding their trade, transport and carbon footprint) and local (e.g. regional pride in the products, local employment opportunities and environmental impact of the processes), all of which are key components of any geography syllabus. indeed, excursions can demonstrate how integration of knowledge and understanding from a range of other disciplines are essential for successful businesses, drawing on: engineering, physics, mathematics (e.g. design and construction of fermenters for production and recovery of microbial products such as enzymes and amino acids, calculating/controlling hydrodynamics of water flow in wastewater treatment), chemistry (e.g. identifying flavour compounds in food microbiology), biology (e.g. human health, the mode of action of drugs, how enzymes work, molecular biology tools such as gene editing and the polymerase chain reaction, created through innovative microbiology research), economics (e.g. long-term economic viability of companies and diversification, by turning waste into profitable material), history (e.g. the role of the industry in the growth and identity of the region; how microbial infections have contributed to past events, including the eradication of civilizations), social sciences and psychology (e.g. the nature and role of stakeholders in all sorts of issues, such as the use of growth promoters in food animal husbandry and impacts on drug resistance in pathogens, human behaviours in response to pandemics, societal and logistical challenges associated with testing for pathogens), technology (e.g. how key infrastructure, such as clean rooms and fermentation tanks, works and is controlled), art and design (e.g. how a product is marketed, degradation and restoration of art objects from ancient manuscripts to cinematographic film), and ethical issues (e.g. industrial carbon footprint, animal testing and welfare). excursions should thus imbue children with a sense that the most rewarding jobs will require them to be adaptable and integrate ideas from a range of subjects. the corollary of this is that microbiological understanding collaterally supports understanding in a range of other disciplines. consequently, excursions that are not primarily designed to have a microbiology focus can still present the excitement of the invisible world of microbes to children, as exemplified in a number of the discussion topics associated with the suggested excursions.most importantly, and especially because microbiology excursions can incorporate multiple topics, they can expose/elevate awareness of local issues and global grand challenges, provide unique opportunities to explore and discuss them, instil a sense of community-global responsibility and encourage participation in collective efforts that seek solutions.it is well known that stimulating multiple senses enhances learning (shams and seitz, 2008) , and excursions provide ideal situations in which microbes and their activities can be seen, touched, smelled, sometimes tasted, and occasionally heard. visual manifestations of microbial agglomerations and their activities are of central importance in learning about microbiology, and many examples are scattered throughout this editorial. but, there are more ways by which microbes and their activities can stimulate our senses, as outlined here.sight. the microbes within a school pond, for example, will only really come alive for children when they can see them at the single-cell level under a microscope or stereomicroscope, i.e. when they can discover microbes' relative sizes, cell division, motility and how they are eaten by protozoa and small invertebrates. children usually love visual actionthe more frenetic, the better and there are few examples in nature with more frenetic action than the microbial goings-on in pond water. microscopic examination of glass slides left in a pond over time will enable children to observe microbial colonization and biofilm production, and thus explore ecological concepts such as succession, which is normally exemplified by larger organisms. it is also enjoyable and educational for children to observe microbial colonies of different forms, textures and colours growing on agar plates inoculated with samples they have taken during an excursion (fig. 19) .touch. touching a slimy pebble from a pond or stream should initiate discussions about biofilms, including which microorganisms create them, what is the chemical nature of the slime, what benefits the slime provides for the microbes producing it and perhaps other microbes embedded in it. any disgust exhibited by some children may be tempered (or perhaps enhanced) by pointing out that they will certainly have eaten microbial slime with considerable pleasure. for example, the texture of many varieties of ice cream is enhanced by xanthan gum, a high molecular weight polysaccharide produced by the bacterium xanthomonas campestris. children may then consider where else they find biofilms: trickling filters in wastewater treatment plants, air pollutant biofilters, snottites in caves (macaldy et al., 2007) , the bottoms of shower curtains, taps and unwashed sinks, the surfaces of drainpipes, teeth and catheters. the discussion could be extended to consider the ubiquity of biofilms, their benefits to the environment and health (e.g. the 'second skins' of plants and animals that protect against pathogens, biofilms in waste and pollution treatment) along with their harmful effects (e.g. steel corrosion, tooth decay, as well as housing pathogens and protecting them against antimicrobials and disinfectants).smell and taste. children have an acute awareness of smell, so exploration of microbial odours is a powerful way to relate microbes to sensory perception. in some cases, it could be interesting to ask children 'what are smells and how do we detect them?'. odours are volatile chemicals that are recognized by olfactory receptors in the nose (it has been suggested that we can distinguish up to one trillion different odours; bushdid et al., 2014) . volatiles are not only important for us to anticipate and appreciate a nice curry or react to unpleasant or dangerous situations, such as food that has gone bad or a gas leak, but are used by microbes to communicate among themselves and with other organisms, in order to orchestrate some joint action (ryu et al., 2003) . to get children involved, it can be helpful to pose the question: 'can i smell microbes?' and then to ask them to identify smells they are familiar with, perhaps categorized into nice and unpleasant odours, and then discuss which of these has a microbial origin. body odours (also from pets) emanating from poo, flatulence, old sweat, smelly ('cheesy') feet (see comments on propionibacter and brevibacterium, below) and bad breath are all produced by microbes when they metabolize chemicals in the particular body sites they inhabit. volatile chemicals produced by microbes from secreted oils in the axillae have been considered to have pheromone properties, and so the microbiome may act like an invisible puppet master in attracting mates. volatiles in breath are currently being actively investigated as biomarkers of disease for non-invasive diagnostic procedures. outside, we have the nice smells of rotting leaves on the ground in autumn and compost heaps all the yearround and, of course, the smell of soil after rain, caused by geosmin-producing streptomyces species, to which we alluded above. the bad-egg smell derived from stirring up the black mud at the bottom of a pond will likely evoke a memorable response from children. here, it is informative to discover which microbes produce the smell (sulfate-reducing bacteria), what is the chemical involved, how it may be created (for older children having done some chemistry), where the responsible microbes live and why they may be beneficial or harmful in different scenarios. this activity may be coupled with digging a small pit, in which the redox zonation in sediments may be seen in the form of microbially induced changes in the colour of iron minerals, from aerobic (rusty) to sulfate-reducing/sulfidogenic (grey-black) (fig. 13) . the evocative smell of the sea can serve as the basis for a discussion on biogenic volatile chemicals, primarily dimethylsulfide (dms), which is produced by microbial breakdown of dimethylsulfoniopropionate, a multifunctional metabolite found in many marine microbes that can serve as an osmolyte, antioxidant and cryoprotectant. discussions could then turn to the role of dms in cloud condensation and potentially global cooling, and even how seabirds use dms as a directional olfactory cue (steinke et al., 2011) .in the home, there are well-known odours produced by microbes, including those coming from food, like cheese (see below), sauces obtained by fermentation, vinegar and pickles of all sorts, and fermented meats. the same smells can be experienced in restaurants and food stores. shops and stalls selling fish may have the typical odour of fish that is not super fresh. this is trimethylamine, a pungent chemical produced by microbes living on/in the fish from trimethylamine oxide, a versatile chemical made by fish to protect against the protein-destabilizing effect of urea, salinity and high pressure (yancey, 2005) . the flavours of food definitely provide an enjoyable way for children to learn about microbes. cheeses, for example, derive from coagulated milk, yet they can taste and smell differently and have a range of textures and skins, reflecting the different microbes and processes used in their manufacture. the microbial communities that develop are a consequence of, inter alia, the microbial inoculum, the cheese 'environment', e.g. humidity, salinity, temperature and ph. the fungus, penicillium roqueforti, grows in the cracks made in cheeses like stilton (fig. 3) and roquefort, giving the distinctive earthy flavour and blue veins (kindstedt, 2014) . microbial fermentation products give interesting flavours and textures, e.g. the bacterium propionobacter sp. produces co 2 (the holes) and acetate/propionate in typical swiss alpine cheesesthe same microbial genus also contributes to the unwashed smell in humans. similarly, brevibacterium linens that grows on the surface of some cheeses also grows under our toenails, producing a distinctive smell common to both. thus, from cheese, the discussion can turn to the microbial origin of the human aroma and its influence in attracting a mate.sound is not a sense we commonly associate with microbes. however, the fermentophone (fig. 16) harnesses bubbles from colourful fermentations to create music. bubbles can also be seen and sometimes heard to pop when escaping from the water column to the atmosphere. children will often ask what causes the bubbles and the answer will depend on various factors including illumination. but, in a stagnant muddy pond it is likely that bubbles from the sediment are formed from methane, which can stimulate discussions about methane's role as a greenhouse gas. showing children videos of burning methane emanating from a pond is highly recommended, with the common outcome of conversations turning to personal methane production and its egress, thus providing a link between the individual and their microbiome, specifically in this case their archaeome (fig. 13) .indirectly sensing microbial activity. measuring the temperature of a school compost pile over time provides another means of sensing microbial activity that can feed discussions about energetics, decay and microbial interactions with other species, such as compost worms, which may be considered to be environmental engineers, and their all-important gut microbes which carry out many of the compost digestive processes (medina-sauza et al., 2019) . children could use a thermometer to accurately record changes in temperature or simply use touch to sense microbial activity by feeling the warmth of a metal rod inserted into the compost heap. there are other tools to detect microbial activity; for example the mudwatt (magical microbes; jude and jude, 2015) provides a cheap yet very effective device to observe metal-reducing microbes in sediments/soils making electricity and generating light.for all excursions, learning can be reinforced in the classroom with follow-up activities: designing posters, presenting news reports, building models and other artwork and including agar art, which involves developing images using microbes inoculated onto agar plates (charkoudian et al., 2010; adkins et al., 2018; fig. 20) . the significance of a visit to a bakery, for example, would be enhanced by investigating gas production (a) (b) fig. 21 . classroom activity making lupin-based tempeh. tempeh is a fermented indonesian food, usually made from soya beans. here, the soya beans have been replaced with lupin beans, e.g. from lupinus angustifolius. the fungus, rhizopus oryzae, makes a white mycelial network knitting together the lupin grits into sliceable tempeh, ready for marinating or frying. these slices contain vitamin b 12 thanks to the use of a co-culture of the rhizopus oryzae with the vitamin b 12 -producing food-grade bacterium propionibacterium freudenreichii, thus making this specific type of lupin tempeh an excellent replacement of meat (wolkers-rooijackers et al., 2018) . children can inspect the spores of rhizopus oryzae before using them to inoculate the soaked lupin grits. it takes 3 days of incubation before the 'tempeh burgers' are ready for cooking. (using balloons) and ph change (using indicators) in yeast cultures back in the classroom. after exploring microbial contributions to foods in shops, manufacturing facilities or research laboratories, it is fun and instructive for children to make their own fermented foods, such as tempeh (fig. 21) . samples transported back to the class can become the subject of observation/investigation/experimentation. these activities are facilitated by tools like the foldscope (cybulski et al., 2014) , together with a range of open-source technology and products, such as centrifuges (bhamla et al., 2017) and nephelometers (wijnen et al., 2014) . samples of sea salt, salted fish or salt-rich fermented food can be enriched in medium to grow extreme halophiles, such as halobacterium salinarum, which is readily cultivated, safe to work with and is a striking red colour (baxter et al., 2012; dassarma et al., 2016; fig. 2) . winogradsky columns provide another relatively simple means of exploring the different ways in which microbes obtain energy, their interactions, succession and niche partitioning, using mud and water from local environments (anderson and hairston, 1999; fig. 13 ). the microbiology in schools advisory committee (misac), which has been established for 50 years, provides outstanding and wide-ranging educational resources, many of which have been adopted worldwide, for those keen to teach microbiology in schools. obviously, any classwork involving the cultivation of microbes should be carried out according to good microbiological laboratory practice (see the online guide by the microbiology society).there is an urgent need for society to acquire literacy in microbiology, and the education and inspiration of children lie at the heart of this endeavour. pivotal to this are actions that will enable children to 'see' invisible microbes, by experiencing their activities and consequences of such activities. here, we have discussed the importance of class excursions to experience and explore microbes in action, provided a range of examples, and have suggested some organizational issues that may be helpful for obtaining maximum benefit from such excursions. to advance the goal of initiating class excursions in microbiology, we make the following recommendations: schools to implement an explicit policy of class excursions, during which microbial activities can be experienced and relevant topics explored  school heads to incentivize teachers to arrange excursions and interactions with scientists, especially with a view to raising students' aspirations  policymakers to support schools in developing exciting and educationally valuable excursions, by providing flexibility in the curriculum and the modest enabling financial resources  government education ministries to ensure all schools are equipped with microscopes  commercial organizations, or clusters of organizations, government agencies and departments, and ngos that require a microbiology-literate workforce, to contribute financially, materially and politically to support microbiology education in schools, e.g. following the model of https://novonordiskf onden.dk/en/projects-and-initiatives/life/  universities, agencies and organizations to introduce/implement explicit support and reward for employees (e.g. by including outreach as a promotion criterion) who embark on activities that improve science/microbiology literacy, especially with a view to widening participation  microbiology practitioners, academics and teachers to coordinate and enhance dialogue, leading to the development of free online educational materials that best fit with student and teacher needs (e.g. via microbiology society conferences) universities and research institutions to be encouraged to set up microbiology-related (mobile) exhibitions/activities or themed museums for education  broadcasters to accelerate the inclusion of microbes into wildlife documentaries commensurate with their importance to the planet, taking on board the numerous ways by which they act on the senses described above, together with exceptional advances in imaging (fig. 22) .tjm acknowledges support from the following ukri grants: stfc 'trace gas bio-signatures: implications for nomad' st/s001425/1) and nerc 'fused -functionality of urban soils supporting ecosystem service c. fluorescence in situ hybridization image of coral reef biofilms using confocal microscopy. samples were hybridized with the cy5-labelled bacteria-specific probe (eub338), the cy3-labelled gam42a (for gammaproteobacteria), the fluorescein-labelled alf1b (for alphaproteobacteria) and the cy3-labelled arch915 (for archaea). cells which appear magenta are gammaproteobacteria, cyan cells are alphaproteobacteria, blue cells are other bacteria, and red cells are archaea. large autofluorescent algal filaments can also be observed interspersed with the smaller bacterial and archaeal cells. the scale bar is 100 m. d. helium ion microscopy image showing t4 phage infecting e. coli. some of the attached phage have contracted tails indicating that they have injected their dna into the host. the bacterial cells are~0.5 m wide, equivalent in size to the small dots seen in c. for more information, see lepp anen et al. (2017). time-lapse imaging and videos of live organisms (e.g. a), rotatable images (e.g. c), and realistic graphics coupled with high-resolution imaging to demonstrate relative position and very fine detail from nanometre to micrometre scales (brilliantly exemplified by using cryo-electron microscopy to illustrate cell surface structures in caulobacter crescentus by von k ugelgen et al. (2019)), all add an extra dimension that can help to attract children to the wonder of microbes, their structures, activities and interactions. goodsell et al. (2020)  mean temperature of last two weeks (when b 3c) was positively associated with newly confirmed covid-19 cases.  1c rise in the mean temperature of last weeks (when b 3c) was associated with a 4.861% increase in the daily confirmed cases.  there is no evidence supporting that case counts of covid-19 could decline when the weather becomes warmer.a b s t r a c t a r t i c l e i n f ocoronavirus disease 2019 , caused by the novel coronavirus, was first discovered in wuhan city, china (chen et al., 2020; lu et al., 2020) . subsequently, it spread rapidly to other provinces, although the government has taken timely measures to shut down the science of the total environment j o u r n a l h o m e p a g e : w w w . e l s e v i e r . c o m / l o c a t e / s c i t o t e n v traffic (du et al., 2020; kupferschmidt and cohen, 2020) . as of 29 february 2020, data from the national health commission have shown that n79,000 confirmed cases have been identified and over 2800 deaths in the whole of china. besides china, other countries and regions are also affected by covid-19, which has become a serious public health problem globally (sohrabi et al., 2020; xu et al., 2020) . covid-19 infection could cause severe respiratory illness, similar to severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus (sars-cov) xu et al., 2020) . generally, fever, cough, and myalgia or fatigue are common symptoms at the onset of illness . early studies have demonstrated person-to-person transmission of covid-19 through direct contact or droplets (chan et al., 2020; lai et al., 2020; wang et al., 2020) . specifically, a study reported that presumed person-to-person hospital-associated transmission of covid-19 was suspected in 41% of patients .in addition to human-to-human contact, both epidemiological and laboratory studies have shown that ambient temperature is an important factor in the transmission and survival of coronaviruses (bi et al., 2007; casanova et al., 2010; chan et al., 2011; tan et al., 2005; van doremalen et al., 2013) . for example, temperature could increase or decrease the transmission risk by affecting the survival time of coronaviruses on surfaces (casanova et al., 2010; chan et al., 2011; van doremalen et al., 2013) . therefore, it is reasonable to explore the effect of temperature on the spread of this novel coronavirus. to provide useful implications for policymakers and the public, our paper aimed to investigate the relationship between daily mean temperature and newly confirmed covid-19 cases in 122 cities from china.our study included 118 prefecture-level cities and 4 municipalities that covered the majority of the chinese mainland (19.1to 51.4n orth latitude and 83.4to 131.6east longitude). fig. 1 shows the locations of these 122 cities and the cumulative confirmed cases in each city as of february 29, 2020. we focused on these cities since the meteorological data we have obtained was limited (not including all cities in china).daily confirmed cases were collected from the official websites of health commissions in corresponding provinces or cities between january 23, 2020 (i.e., the lockdown of wuhan) to february 29, 2020. we obtained the data after the closure of wuhan to minimize the potential inclusion of imported cases in this study.meteorological data during the same study period for each city were collected from national meteorological information center (http://data. cma.cn). meteorological factors included daily mean temperature, relative humidity, air pressure, and wind speed.the generalized additive model (gam) is a semi-parametric extension of the generalized linear model (glm), which is useful to explore the nonlinear relationship between weather factors and health outcomes liu et al., 2020; peng et al., 2006; talmoudi et al., 2017; wu et al., 2018) . because the temperature effect could last for several days and the incubation period of covid-19 ranges from 1 day to 14 days (reported by national health commission in china), it is a reasonable choice to use a moving-average approach to account for the cumulative lag effect of temperature (duan et al., 2019; li et al., 2018; lu et al., 2015) . therefore, in this study, a gam with a gaussian distribution family (hastie, 2017; liu et al., 2020) was applied to examine the moving average lag effect (lag0-7, lag0-14, lag0-21) of mean temperature on daily confirmed cases of covid-19. the model was defined as follows:in the model, log(y it ) is the log-transformed newly covid-19 counts in city i on day t (added one to avoid taking the logarithm of zeros) . a is the intercept and s() denotes a thin plate spline function with the maximum 2 degrees of freedom to avoid overfitting wang et al., 2018) . meantem il is the (l + 1)-day moving average term (lag0-l) of daily mean temperature in city i. we also controlled the relative humidity (rhu il ), air pressure (prs il ), and wind speed (win il ) during the same period for the possible confounding effect. log(y i,t1 ) is the log-transformed covid-19 counts lagged one day in city i to account for potential serial correlation in the data (hunter et al., 2019; liu et al., 2020) . city i is the city fixed effect variable and day t captures day fixed effect (amuakwa-mensah et al., 2017) .according to the results from the gams, then we used a piecewise linear regression to determine the relationship between mean temperature and covid-19 confirmed cases in detail duki et al., 2012; kim et al., 2016; qian et al., 2008) . in the sensitivity analysis, we first excluded wuhan city from our data because it was the worst-hit region in china and the number of confirmed cases was much larger than that of other cities. second, we changed the maximum degree of freedom for the spline function to 3 to examine whether our main results were robust.gams in our analysis were implemented via the "mgcv" package (version 1.8-28) of r software (version 3.5.2). the statistical tests were two-sided, and p b 0.05 was considered statistically significant. table 1 summarizes the descriptive statistics for covid-19 confirmed cases and meteorological variables. this study included n58,000 cases during the observation period (january 23, 2020 to february 29, 2020) and the average number was 12.726. average daily mean temperature, relative humidity, air pressure, and wind speed were 3.118c, 67.48%, 964.931 hpa, and 2.116 m/s, respectively. table 2 shows the correlation coefficients among the meteorological variables. mean temperature had significantly positive correlations with relative humidity (r = 0.354, p b 0.05) and air pressure (r = 0.163, p b 0.05). however, mean temperature was negatively correlated with wind speed (r = 0.053, p b 0.05).the exposure-response curves in fig. 2 suggested that the relationship between temperature and covid-19 confirmed cases was significantly nonlinear (lag0-7: p b 0.001, lag0-14: p b 0.001, lag0-21: p b 0.001). specifically, the relationship was approximately linear in the range of b3c and became flat above 3c, indicating that the single threshold of the temperature effect on covid-19 was 3c. based on results from gams, a piecewise linear regression was adapted with a threshold at a 3c to quantify the effect of temperature above and below the threshold. as showed in table 3 , each 1c rise in mean temperature (lag0-7) led to a 3.432% (95% ci: 2.277-4.586) increase in the daily number of covid-19 confirmed cases when mean temperature was below 3c. this positive effect is largest at lag0-21 (percentage change = 6.953%, 95% ci: 4.681-9.225). when mean temperature was above 3c, the negative effect of temperature was not statistically significant.the nonlinear relationship was robust after excluding wuhan city from our data (fig. 3) . we also used a piecewise linear model to quantify the effect in this sensitivity analysis (table 4) . below the threshold 3c, the confirmed cases increased by 6.949% (95% ci: 4.692-9.205) for every 1c rise in mean temperature (lag0-21). our main finding was robust when we changed the maximum degree of freedom for the spline function to 3 (figs. s1-s2)in this paper, we explored the nonlinear relationship between ambient temperature and covid-19 confirmed cases by using a generalized additive model. the exposure-response relationship was positive linear when the mean temperature below 3c and became flat above 3c, indicating that higher temperature may not limit the transmission of this novel coronavirus.previous studies have showed that temperature is also an important factor in the survival and transmission of other coronaviruses, like sars-cov and mers-cov (bi et al., 2007; casanova et al., 2010; chan et al., 2011; tan et al., 2005; van doremalen et al., 2013) , so we compared our main findings with results in these studies. tan et al. (2005) found that the optimum environmental temperature related to sars cases was from 16c to 28c based on data from hong kong, guangzhou, beijing, and taiyuan. moreover, bi et al. (2007) reported that temperature had a negative relationship with sars transmission in hong kong and beijing in 2003. a laboratory study using surrogate viruses to investigate the effect of temperature on coronavirus survival on surfaces showed that viruses were inactivated more rapidly at 20c than at 4c (casanova et al., 2010) . another laboratory study found that coronavirus on smooth surfaces was stable for over 5 days when temperature at 22c-25c, and virus viability was rapidly lost at higher temperatures (e.g., 38c) (chan et al., 2011 ). van doremalen et al. (2013 also observed that mers-cov was less stable at high temperature. in brief, most studies showed that there was an optimum temperature for coronavirus and high temperature was harmful to its viability. however, this paper could not observe a negative effect of high temperature on covid-19 infection. a possible reason may be that the study period was limited in winter, with maximal mean temperature 26.9c. further laboratory studies also need to be conducted to determine the underlying mechanism.our study has some implications. first, the nonlinear relationship between ambient temperature and covid-19 confirmed cases showed covid-19 may not perish of itself without any public health interventions when the weather becomes warmer. so, the public and governments could not expect the high temperature to eradicate this novel virus. additionally, increasing temperature in regions or periods below 3c is related to the high risk of transmission, which provides useful information for policymakers if the novel coronavirus coexists with human for a long time.  p b 0.05. fig. 3 . exposure-response curves for the effects of temperature on covid-19 confirmed cases after excluding wuhan. the x axis is the mean temperature (7-day, 14-day and 21-day moving average). the y axis indicates the contribution of the smoother to the fitted values. however, several limitations should be acknowledged. first, we could not conduct subgroup analysis by gender and age group to explore the sensitive population because there was a lack of patient information. second, although the government has established a good disease surveillance system, under-reporting may still occur and could affect our main findings, especially at the beginning of covid-19 outbreak. third, our data only covered cities in china. further studies on the effects of temperature on covid-19 transmission in other countries are needed.to the best of our knowledge, this is the first study to investigate the nonlinear relationship between ambient temperature and daily covid-19 confirmed cases. our results indicate that mean temperature has a positive linear relationship with the number of covid-19 cases when the temperature is below 3c. there is no evidence supporting that case counts of covid-19 could decline when the weather becomes warmer, which provides useful implications for policymakers and the public.the authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.a1111111111 a1111111111 a1111111111 a1111111111 a1111111111the seasonal and geographic distributions of infectious diseases are currently among the best indications of an association with weather and climate. the literature on climate effects is expanding in response to concerns about global climate change. the significance of the methods and data available is not only confined to the technical procedural aspects; methods and data also impact on the formulation of the specific scientific questions, their selection, and the development of hypotheses. although our understanding of how weather and climate affect diseases has improved, the wide range of research methods applied make it difficult to get a robust overview of the state of research.the relationship between climate/weather and infectious diseases is complex (e.g. [1] ), as shown in the example illustrated in fig 1. investigating the effects of weather and climate on infectious diseases requires the ability to: i) disentangle concurrent modes of transmissions (e.g. environmental from human-to-human transmission); ii) tease apart the individual effects of multiple exposures at different temporal and spatial scales; iii) identify and separate socioeconomic drivers and behavioural causes; iv) integrate all these different processes into a unified perspective; v) attribute changes in disease to observed environmental changes (such as climate change); and vi) quantify infectious disease burden resulting from current social, economic and environmental conditions which can help to project the future disease burden resulting from these changes. these are difficult methodological and conceptual demands, and the scientific and public health community could benefit from a critical overview of the available research methods and the challenges ahead.in this paper, we focus on the particularly important, especially in developing countries, class of infectious diseases associated with water (including those classified as neglected tropical diseases (ntd) according to the world health organisation (who) [2] the us centers for disease control and prevention (cdc) [3] ) and the journal plos ntd [4]) ( table 1) . according to who estimates, 1.1 billion people globally drink water that is of at least 'moderate' risk of faecal contamination [5] , and 842,000 annual deaths are attributable to unsafe water supply, sanitation and hygiene (including 361,000 deaths of children under age five), mostly in lower income countries [6, 7] .infectious diseases associated with water are classified as follows: "water-system-related" infections (i.e. via aerosols from poorly managed cooling systems, e.g. legionellosis), "waterbased" infections (i.e. via aquatic vectors or intermediate in hosts, e.g. schistosomiasis), "water-borne" infections (i.e. via bacterial, parasitic and viral oral-faecal infection through ingestion, e.g. cholera), and "water-washed" infections (i.e. infections arising from poor hygiene due to insufficient water, these can also include oral-faecal infection, e.g. hookworm) [8] (see table 1 ). here and throughout, we use the expression "water-associated" to refer to these latter classes of diseases. of note, we excluded diseases arising from ingestion/contact with inorganic and other chemical compounds (e.g. arsenic) and vector-borne infections linked with water (e.g. malaria, rift valley fever, river blindness) from the "water-associated" diseases.this review is not a prescriptive guideline of available methods for a range of problems. we reviewed and summarised the methods used to investigate the effects of weather and climate on infectious diseases associated with water, with the objective of identifying the challenges that scientists are facing when develop new analysis methods. we focused on quantitative analytical approaches, such as: mathematical models, statistical analysis, computational techniques, numerical simulations, epidemiological models and computer-generated agent based models. we excluded purely descriptive observational studies [9] .discriminating between studies which build explanatory models versus create predictive models is particularly important in statistical modelling [10] . we however avoided this way of grouping. the dichotomy explanatory vs predictive models might be clear from an epistemological point of view [10] , nevertheless, we have found it really challenging to rigorously separate papers according to this classification. for most papers, a formal distinction is often impossible as the causal relationships are inferred/discussed from the patterns captured from predictive models, and vice versa the hypothetical-deductive models (e.g. driven by causal relationships), could both be able to predict a range of future scenarios.the methods for the systematic review followed the guidelines developed by the cochrane collaboration [11] . we searched for english language articles published from 2000 to april 2015. the following databases were searched: scopus, medline, embase, cinahl, cochrane library, global health and lilacs bibliographic databases. the literature after april 2015 was also monitored using a daily email alert tool provided by google scholar (searching for "water borne disease" and "water related disease") to identify potential papers adopting newlydeveloped methods not covered by the initial search.we used search terms related to water-associated diseases (e.g. "water transmission" or "contaminated fresh water" or "unsafe water supply" etc.) and quantitative methodologies (e.g. "mathematical epidemiology" or "simulation") and weather and climate. the full list of table 1 . organisms causing diseases related to water (excluding vector borne diseases). the symbol challenges with methods for water-associated disease search terms is in the supporting information, s2 text. papers were reviewed by two people (gl and gn). as the pool of returned papers was quite large, we decided to not use additional specific search terms for pathogens (e.g. 'cholera', 'rotavirus') or diagnosis/symptoms (e.g. 'diarrhoea', 'gastroenteritis'), as this would require a subjective list of potential pathogens and introduce unnecessary bias in the selection of the papers. we included articles that: i) were published in peer reviewed journals; ii) included an infectious disease in human beings; and iii) developed new methods and/or applied established methods to investigate the effects of weather and/or climate on infectious diseases (including papers for which weather and climate variables were among other equally important factors driving disease transmission). the final set of papers was archived in endnote (see supporting information, s1 table) . we identified specific questions related to the nature of the methods, their range, applicability and limitations ( table 2 ) that we wanted the review to address. we then created a spreadsheet consisting of records (rows) corresponding to each paper in our final database, and columns to address the specific questions. analysis was done in r open source analytic software [12] .papers were clustered according to the methodology used. more precisely, for each paper we identified the list of technical keywords associated with the methods, including both general concepts (e.g. "time series analysis") and sub-analysis terms (e.g. "partial autocorrelation function"); the full list of technical keywords is presented in the supporting information, s1 table. papers that share the same keyword are often connected. consequently, analytical 2) what methods have been used? ascertain the key epidemiological methods developed and used so far. classify the methods in terms of general approaches: such as descriptive phenomenology, process based models (e.g. mechanistic compartmental models or agent based models), statistical analysis of empirical data (e.g. time series analysis) etc.3) is the method applied to investigate the effect of climate change or weather or both?assess if the method is actually or potentially applied to climate change and/or weather 4) does the type of method depend on the disease/pathogen under investigation?1. ascertain if there is a preferential use of the methods towards particular disease/pathogen and identify possible explanationswhat are other key features of the methods? identify the specific environmental factors that the method is focusing on (e.g. temperature and rainfall). ascertain if the method take into account: 1. temporal variations (e.g. seasonalities and el nio weather cycles) 2. evolution of pathogen 3. human behaviour and/or social and political scenarios (e.g. national economic factors, conflicts, food production, human mobility, demography etc.) 4. any kind of heterogeneity (e.g. spatial variation, age group, household income)an explicit model for the pathogen dynamic in the reservoir 6) how were the results assessed? establish if and how the method has been validatedwhat are the limitations of the method according to the authors? methods that are likely to be used together in the same papers tend to cluster. analysis was done by using the "igraph" package in r [13] .overall, 102 papers were included in the analysis (fig 2) . analysis of the findings and synthesis of the challenges in formulating new methods are summarised below.analysis: seven particular scientific questions addressed by the review 1) what are the main water-associated pathogens investigated and where do they occur? fig 3 shows the frequency of pathogens in the final set of papers. vibrio cholerae has been studied most for climate and weather effects. a significant proportion (approximately 20% of papers) focused on unspecified water-associate pathogens and these studies were mostly theoretical process-based models. the next significant categories of studies were papers that looked at diarrheal illness as a broad category based on health service data that did not include pathogen-specific information. in terms of pathogen -specific outcomes, the following pathogens were most studied (after vibrio cholerae): cryptosporidium spp., leptospira spp., schistosoma spp. giardia sp. and salmonella spp. many of these are classified as ntd [2-4] e.g. vibrio cholerae, leptospira spp., schistosoma spp. giardia sp. (table 1) .fig 4 shows the countries where the studies were based. a good proportion of these theoretical process-based models did not link their study with any data for diseases occurring in a particular country (therefore, the outcome was listed as "general" in fig 4) . the country with the most studies (about 10% of papers) was bangladesh, mostly in relation to cholera, followed by studies on disease data collected in us, china and canada (fig 4) .thus, the pathogens reported in these studies reflect geographic (origin of infections) and socio-economic (quality of data) features: studies on cholera were associated with low and middle income countries, while cryptosporidium spp. and campylobacter spp. were more likely reported in high income countries that have good laboratory-based passive surveillance systems (fig 4) .2) what methods have been used? the set of all technical keywords describing the methods used in at least two papers is displayed in a keyword network in fig 5 ( a high-resolution image for the methods used in each paper can be found in the supporting information, s1 fig, see also s1 table) . the figure suggests that the most commonly used methods can be grouped into two main clusters: process-based models (pbm), which are typically described by mechanistic compartmental models [14] , time series and spatial epidemiology (ts-se) such as time series and regression analysis [15] and spatial methods typically based on geographic information system (gis) [16] .these clusters can overlap. for examples, instances of spatial compartmental models have been developed. fig 5 is perhaps the most objective way of representing the methods used in the reviewed papers as it is based simply on the technical keywords recorded by their authors. as the technical keywords can be very specific, the next exercise was to identify the general methods used in the papers. a list of the most common general methods is shown in fig 6 and in s1 table in the supporting information. the entries in fig 6 and s1 table do not reflect an established"taxonomy" of the methods (which is not available in the literature); they are mainly guided by the patterns which emerged from keyword network ( fig 5) and selected based on their potential relevance for the study of the effects of weather and climate. for example, a close inspection of fig 5 suggests that a substantial number of papers in the pbm clusters employed "dose-response model" (which often use environmental variables, such as temperature as inputs); we therefore identified "models comprising exposure-response relantionship" as a general method.the same principle guided the structure of table 3 , which presents some key features of the clusters of methods. in table 3 , however, we did not discuss methods such as "descriptive statistics" and "survey/surveillance/sampling" since these were too generic in terms of their use challenges with methods for water-associated disease each dot corresponds to a reviewed paper; the brown bubbles correspond to the keywords describing the techniques. a connection between a paper and a keyword occurs when the related technique is used. the size of the bubble increases (logarithmically) with the number of papers citing the keyword. for visual purpose only, i) the bubbles are displayed with different shades of brown and ii) the technical keywords (listed in s1 table in the supporting information) describing methods used by only one paper are not displayed (the full set is shown in s1 fig in the supporting information). the graph was produced by using the i-graph package [13] in r.https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pntd.0005659.g005challenges with methods for water-associated disease for investigating the effect of weather and/or climate change on water-associated diseases. conversely, the table contains additional entries that did not emerge from the patterns from fig 5, but we recognized that they are important for such use (e.g. "investigation of seasonality" and separation of "time series regression" in short and long term studies).process-based methods (pbm). most pbm are based on compartmental models, i.e. a subdivision of the entire population into relevant epidemiological categories, such as susceptible, infected, and recovered people [14] . the population dynamics of each category is usually governed by a system of non-linear differential equations (with each single equation corresponding challenges with methods for water-associated disease [14] . when the models are applied to water-borne diseases, often include an additional compartment describing the dynamic of the pathogen population in the environment. this category is usually indicated by w (water) or b (bacteria). infections occur when a susceptible individual comes in contact with this additional category of with the infected category (for human-tohuman transmission). infected people can excrete pathogens, and feed back into the environment compartment. the acronyms (sir, seir, sib etc.) reflect the specific epidemiological compartments considered. these models typically uses differential equations to estimate the number of individuals in each compartment at any time, but other techniques such as agent based models or difference equations could be employed.these models are fully specified by a set of parameters (e.g. transmission, recover, mortality rate etc.) that regulate the transition from one compartment to another. many of these parameters depend on environmental variables such as temperature. when the functional form of the parameter vs. the environmental variable is known, investigation of the effect of weather and/or climate change on the epidemics is straightforward.models comprising exposure-response relationship the keywords describing approaches for exposure-response relationship ("beta-poisson models", "dose-response models", "exposure model") also belong to the cluster pbm. in fact many papers that employ exposure-response relationship are integrated with compartmental models as a separate module governing the pathogen dynamics in the environment compartment. in the present context, exposure-response relationships relate the magnitude of a stressor (e.g. concentration of a pathogen in the water reservoir) to the response of the receptor (e.g. probability of getting infected). the effect of weather/climate on the exposure-response curve can be direct (e.g. an increase in water load due to rainfall results in a diluted concentration affecting the response) or indirect (e.g. when the functional form of the exposure-response curve depends on weather/ climatic variables)stability analysis all papers employing stability analysis (identified by keywords "global stability", "local stability", "bifurcation") are connected within the cluster pbm. this is not surprising as standard cms are based on sets of differential equations, which is the appropriate environment for stability analysis [85] .stability analysis studies if all sufficiently small disturbances away from the equilibrium solution (e.g. a fixed or periodic population), damp out in time [86] .this property depends on the parameter of the system and a variation of a parameter of the system can lead to a transition from stability to instability (bifurcation). in the present context, a change in the environmental parameters (e.g. mean temperature, rainfall) might lead to a transition from disease free equilibrium to an endemic situation or to a variation in the periodicity.compartmental model calculating basic reproductive number all papers calculating the reproductive numbers ("basic reproductive number", "effective reproductive number" etc.) use pbm approaches. this is usually done analytically from the set of differential equations or by using the next generationmatrix approach [87] .the reproductive number, i.e. the number of secondary cases arising from a primary case under certain conditions, depends on the set of parameters. the approach can be used to investigate which range of the relevant environmental parameters might result in the reproductive number below or above one (i.e. the disease fades out or it establishes)human mobility human mobility is often neglected in epidemiological models, however, a small proportion of pbm-papers incorporate human mobility, for example, in the form of "gravity model" [88] . all the reviewed papers, however, focus only on short-term human mobility human mobility will be likely affected by changes in the environmental and socioeconomic factors arising from climate change [89] , with an impact on formation and severity of the spatio-temporal epidemic patterns.hydrodynamics model and network analysis the detailed water flow of rivers, estuarine, pipe network etc. can be incorporated in pbm to assess spatio-temporal exposure to contaminated water. this is usually done by employing hydrogeological models or abstract network theory (see e.g. [90] ) where the nodes of the graph represent communities and links represent their connection (hydrological but also due to human mobility).hydrodynamics models can take into account variations, due to e.g. rainfall, in the spatio-temporal exposure to the pathogen caused by variations in the contact with contaminated water or in the concentration of the pathogen dispersed in the water.compartmental model with person-toperson transmission and also person-toenvironment transmission person-to-person is an additional mode of transmission of many water-associated diseases, e.g. cholera. many pbm address these processes by allowing infection transmission when a contact between a susceptible and infected person occur. furthermore, the infected population can excrete pathogens back to the environment, for example via the sewage system. the process can be reproduced by letting the rate of growth of the pathogen population in the environment increases with the number of infected people. the effects of climate and weather can have an indirect impact on these additional modes of transmission, for example by changing the population size (e.g. due to increased urbanization) and the rates of contact among people, and by altering the patterns of contact at people-environment interface (for instance, socioeconomic factors impacting sewage treatment).only a few studies employed agent based models. these are general methods mimicking the bio-physical processes with a computationally-aided set of autonomous, interacting agents. a key advantage is their ability to resolve heterogeneity in a population (which is not necessarily grouped into compartments). apart the potentially high computational costs, agent based models are extremely flexible to incorporate specific effects of climate and weather for a variety of situations (e.g. changes in human behavior). these are particularly useful when the mathematical approach is less tractable.(continued) investigation of seasonality these studies seek to describe patterns of disease by season. cosinor and spectral analyses may be used, but also simple tabulation of rates by season. however, in this review we did not find this particular type of studies.can give strong indirect information on dependence of disease on weather, but may be misleading if any other risk factors also vary seasonally (e.g. holidays).time series regression with auto-regressive models (disease forecasting studies) these studies, often using box-jenkins methods such as (s)arima, and sometimes incorporating preceding weather as predictors, seek a method to obtain a forecast of disease in the short term future given the series up to the present.those forecasting studies that explicitly incorporate weather variables can indirectly provide information on weather-disease associations, but may not separate components that are causal from those due to co-varying factors (e.g. holidays)time series regression i (studies of short term associations) these studies seek to directly explore the dependence of disease patterns over time on preceding and concurrent weather. their methods are based on standard glms (or occasionally gams), in particular poisson and negative binomial models [15, 91] . most studies control bias from temporal trends and seasonal patterns not necessarily due to weather, and other measured time-varying risk factors. some allow for residual autocorrelation either using (s)arima or ad hoc approaches (see time series regression with auto-regressive models).dependence of disease on weather in the explicit focus of these studies. however, it is unclear how much they could be relied on to predict impact of climate change. one relevant limitation is that they largely ignore the complexity of the dependence as explored in the pbms. for example very few allow for the variation in susceptible persons due to people becoming immune after contracting the disease.time series regression ii (studies of longer term associations) studies have explored in particular the association of medium-term weather cycles such as enso with disease. methods options are as for other tsrs, though specifics not.these have some advantages over tsr of short term associations in being closer to studying association of climate change on health, although they are subject to similar potential biases and their time scales are below the many-decade scale of anthropogenic climate change.spatial analysis (cluster analysis, geographic information systems (gis)) most spatial methods cover three main areas: descriptive or visual presentation of data (choropleth maps, gis), tests for global or local clustering (moran's i, spatial scan statistics) and analysing point data to estimate the intensity of spatial processes (kriging, splines) [92] [93] [94] .gis allows disease data to be linked to datasets (for example, meteorological data) on the basis of geographical location and time. these methods allow the examination of disease risk in relation to space, time and space-time and also allow the interpolation of data points from limited sampling data.spatial time series regression spatial time series regression (also called spatio-temporal regression) explores the dependence of infectious disease outcomes with weather when both are measured in units varying over both space and time.spatial time series regression maximises contrasts in exposure (variance) when data with both space and time are available. its main challenges are to control for both spatially and temporally varying confounding variables and autocorrelation.other hybrid time series-pbm studies. a few studies employed hybrid time series-pbm studies. these are applications of "time series susceptible-infectious-recovered (immune)" (tsir) pbms incorporating dependence of force of infection on weather [24] overlap with tsr models [15] . we believe that these approaches have promise to inform dependence of disease on climate and climate change.bayesian approach/markov chain montecarlo an introduction on markov chain monte carlo (mcmc) methods, usually associated with bayesian analysis, is presented in [95, 96] . these methods are becoming increasingly popular as they allow estimations of parameters and associated uncertainties for large classes of complex models for which standard estimation is difficult if not impossible. availability of open source software e.g. winbugs [97] has largely promoted their use. these methods are particularly suitable in the presence of complex mechanistic or statistical approaches with many unknown parameters (mirroring the complex impact of weather and/or climate change on water-associated diseases). an important limitation is the computational power required for some models.https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pntd.0005659.t003challenges with methods for water-associated disease to the rate of change of each compartment). this class of models has been extended to stochastic, spatial and age-specific models. the compartmental models in our review included an additional compartment describing the dynamic of the pathogen population in the environment (e.g. the concentration of the pathogen in the water reservoir) which is then linked in some way to temperature and/or rainfall factors (e.g., rainfall affects the volume of the water reservoir, which determines the dilution of the pathogen and, thus, the probability of contracting the disease; temperature affects the growth and survival of many free living pathogens, such as e. coli, in the water reservoir). an infection occurs when a susceptible person comes in contact with this additional category. infected people can excrete pathogens, and feedback into the environment compartment (included in the majority of the pbm-papers), although for some infections there is no excretion and thus no feedback into the environment (e.g. legionella).ten percent of pbm-papers also included person-to-person transmission via contacts between susceptible and infected persons. the cluster pbm also contained sub-clusters: "exposure-response relationship", "stability analysis", "human mobility", and "network analysis" (fig  5) . important features of the clusters are discussed in table 3 .cluster ts-se. time series regression (tsr) analysis [15, 17] is one of the most common methods used by the papers reviewed to analyse temperature and rainfall exposures as they can vary over time. many studies used generalized linear models (glms) and generalized additive models (gams) often included terms allowing for over-dispersion. terms to control for seasonality (time stratified model, fourier terms, spline functions) and autocorrelation terms are often included. in most cases, residual variation in the response variable (e.g. daily counts of disease occurrence) was modelled as a poisson distribution, followed by negative binomial. the most common exposure factors were temperature and rainfall. socio-economic indicators were often included in the analysis.as noted in the systematic review of imai and hashizume [15] , only a few studies included variations in the susceptible population over time, due to, for instance, changes in immunity following disease recovery. autoregressive models (e.g. arma, arima, sarima, arimax), which intrinsically take into account correlation, were used in some studies (fig 6) , although many studies in the regression tradition used ad hoc approaches for this. these methods were often used to investigate the temporal lag between the exposure and the response variable (e.g. daily counts of disease occurrence).spatial methods for linking datasets use geographical information systems (gis) to link disease data with information on socio-economic indicators, temperature and rainfall (or proxy indicators), and vegetation and land use data within the same geographical framework. georeferenced environmental data can be collected by remote sensing [16, 18] and ground-station data.other less commonly used analytical methods included wavelet analysis [19] , and the social science approach of participatory modelling [20] .3) is the method applied to investigate the effects of climate or weather? most of the reviewed papers (49% of the papers explicitly emphasized this application in the abstract) investigated the effects of weather (i.e. short-term changes in the atmosphere, such as daily or weekly exposures to rainfall) on infectious disease. only 9% of the reviewed papers applied the methodology to study the effects of climate, i.e. long-term averages of weather such as el nio cycles (these applications are not mutually exclusive); and 7% used modelled future climate projections. collinearity of exposures, i.e. highly correlated predictor variables in regression models, is an important limitation in weather and climate studies but was only explicitly identified as a limitation in 7% of studies).approximately 50% of papers investigating vibrio cholerae employed methods based on compartmental models, followed by time-series/regression analysis and spatial/gis analysis using cholera case observations. similar patterns were observed for unspecified water-associated pathogens. as expected, for generic diarrheal pathogens (for which there is much more uncertainty about the causes), spatial/gis and time-series/regression analysis were the most commonly used methods (but see discussion in [1] and [21] ). 5) some key feature in the methods: e.g. what are the independent variables in the models? does the model take into account seasonality? more than 70% of studies included observed or modelled temperature and/or rainfall/precipitation data in their analysis. a smaller proportion of studies included (the inclusion is not mutually exclusive) other environmental factors (e.g., relative humidity, vapor air pressure, evaporation) and socio-economic indicators (e.g. access to water, index of poverty, age, education, human mobility) in the analysis (fig 7) .around 40% of the methods explicitly included the effects of seasonality (intra-annual climate variability). a small proportion of papers (7%) included the effects of el nio/southern oscillation (enso) and north atlantic oscillations (nao). almost 40% of the methods took into account spatial variation. only a small proportion of the methods explicitly modelled the pathogen dynamics in the wider environment or the specific water reservoir; a proportion of these studies (typically, theoretical works for a proof of concept) developed general methods without focusing on specific environmental variables, but the method could be potentially applied to investigate their effects.the statistical methods used to fit a model with the observed data were assessed with information criteria (such as akaike information criterion, aic and bayesian information criterion, bic) in almost 20% of cases. in a significant proportion of papers (10%), the validation of the method was based on out-of-sample predictions, i.e. a subset of the data were used to train/calibrate the method (e.g. to estimate model parameters), and then the method was applied to the rest of the data. in some cases, there was no assessment of the methods. situations where the methods did not require comparison with real data (e.g. theoretical works requiring solely logical demonstration of theorems) were also present.the lack of inclusion of relevant factors in the methods was the most common limitation acknowledged by the authors. these included: spatial and socio-economic heterogeneity, seasonality, changing immunity, and other environmental drivers. in almost 20% of papers, the authors identified reporting bias as a key limitation. examples of reporting bias were: sample collections not properly designed (e.g. not stratified by age); voluntary internetbased survey reflecting survey respondents' idiosyncrasies; and health-seeking behaviours and socio-economic factors affecting access to health facilities.the poor quality of the data was another important source of limitation according to the authors, and this was explicitly mentioned in around 30% of reviewed papers. typical examples of poor data quality were: low spatio-temporal resolution of the exposure data (e.g. environmental exposure covered a wide geographic area or linked to a single weather stations); lack of longitudinal data (only cross-sectional surveys were undertaken); and low accuracy of the data (e.g. reliance on proxy data, missing data due to asymptomatic or unobserved infections).in 10% of cases, the methods were not able to explain the observed patterns in the disease outcome. the authors identified the absence of underlying mechanistic explanation as a problem in about 10% of the studies. in 10% of papers, the authors highlighted that the methods were calibrated only for a specific situation (e.g. a limited region), and the findings were not generalizable.synthesis: seven challenges in developing methods for quantifying the effects of weather and climate on water-associated diseases 1) disentangling multiple transmission pathways and identifying the bio-physical mechanism of how weather affects disease and seasonality. in general, the spread of many pathogens is subjected to concurrent modes of transmissions, as exemplified in fig 1. for instance, cholera can be acquired from contamination of household water storage containers, food preparation, direct person-to-person contacts, and/or via contact with environmental reservoir with long pathogen persistence [22, 23] . identifying a potential signature for the particular pathways in the patterns of diseases is perhaps the ideal goal. in particular, to separate person-to-person transmission from other modes of disease transmissions a range of methods have been proposed, including nonlinear time series approaches linked with wavelet analysis [24] and mechanistic compartmental approaches [22, 23] . despite such efforts, isolating the contributions of person-to-person transmission on the burden of these diseases is a compelling problem not only for water-associated diseases but all infectious diseases [25, 26] .different transmission pathways can be strongly affected by weather and/or climate. for example, temperature may have direct effects on salmonella bacterial proliferation at various stages in the food chain (including bacterial loads on raw food production, transport and inappropriate storage), and indirect effects on eating behaviours during hot days [27] . rainfall might increase person-to-environment transmission of cholera, by facilitating the contamination of fresh water from the sewage system. rainfall might also dilute the concentrations of the pathogens, reducing environment-to-person transmission [28] . compartmental models have also been used to investigate the effects of pathogen dilution due to the seasonal variation of water volume (e.g. with monsoons) and the potential interactions with other environmental drivers (e.g. temperature [29, 30] and the effects of human mobility) [31] .the key challenge ahead are increasing the awareness of the drivers of disease and a deeper integration with fields such as microbiology (e.g. identifying dose-response curves to use as input for modelling, potential coexistence of human-to-human transmission), social science (e.g. to identify and include in the methods social contacts, patterns of mobility, adaptation, etc.), and ecology (e.g. to understand and incorporate the dynamics of free living organisms in water).2) reducing uncertainty in reporting. measuring the 'true' incidence of disease, and therefore morbidity and mortality rates, is a common problem in epidemiology. this includes: the under-ascertainment arising when not all cases seek healthcare; under-reporting due to failure in the surveillance system; and reporting bias [32, 33] . community-based studies have been employed to reduce the uncertainty in reporting a range of diseases, including waterassociated diseases [34] . these methods usually involve the acquisition of data, e.g. by questionnaire possibly accompanied by biological sampling (e.g. serological surveys), in a representative population such as a retrospective cohorts or a population cross-sections. these methods can be integrated with statistical and mathematical approaches to estimate incidence. for a review of these methods, see [34] and references therein.a common problem with these methods is that they are sensitive to the particular situation under investigation, such as country, age and social group. in addition, the climate and/or weather can have a direct impact on reporting. for example, impassable roads reducing the ability to seek medical care, and therefore detection, during the rainy season might explain the apparent seasonality of incidence of lassa fever in humans in sierra leone [35] . this last example underscores the importance of integrating a variety of approaches including not only serology, lab-based sampling and statistical/mathematical models, but also participatory modelling and ethnographic research [36] to assess perceptions of risk, approaches to hygiene, health-seeking behaviour and accessibility; and how economic and social factors affect the reliability of data collection by, or reporting to, the surveillance system [35] [36] [37] .a key task is often to detect the main risk factors or disease determinants, and quantify their impacts. a closely related problem is collinearity (also called multi-collinearity), i.e. the situation where two or more predictor variables in a statistical model are linearly related. collinearity might generate numerical problems, i.e. instability of parameter estimates and inflated variance of the estimated regression coefficient. in particular, collinearity often makes it impossible to attribute the effects on the response variable to the individual predictor variables [38] . this is part of the wider epistemological problem of association vs. causation, which is not discussed here and we refer the interested reader to, for instance, the bradford-hill guidelines [39] .in our context, a common source of collinearity is the highly correlated climatic variables such as temperature and rainfall. in some cases, collinearity can have a limited impact on inference, if the correlation between variables remains unchanged [40] . patterns of collinearity between climatic variables, however, strongly depend on geographic location and environment (e.g. eco-zones) [38] ; and they might vary in time due to climate change. this prevents meaningful interpretation/extrapolation of the findings beyond the geographic or environmental range of sampled data.we share the view of dormann et al. [38] that without a mechanistic understanding of the biophysical process, collinear variables cannot be separated by statistical means alone. this requires an understanding of the relationships between the different predictor variables, e.g. the dependence of humidity on temperature and rainfall, e.g. [41] , or between the response variable and one or more predictor variables, e.g. the dependence of salmonella growth on temperature.such mechanistic insights are not always available and one must rely on solely statistical approaches. under this scenario, dormann et al. [38] conducted a systematic review of methods to deal with collinearity and a simulation study evaluating their performance (in absence of mechanistic understanding) with regard to robust model fitting and prediction.the methodologies assessed in [38] , for detecting and removing collinearities include clustering (e.g. principal component analysis-based clustering, iterative variance inflation factor analysis), cluster-independent methods (e.g. selection of uncorrelated variables, sequential regression), latent variable regressions (e.g. principal component regression, partial least squares, dimension reduction techniques), and a range of approaches that may be less sensitive to collinearity (e.g. penalised regressions, machine-learning methods, collinearity-weighted regression). fourier analysis is another approach that, from each time series of predictors, extracts a set of orthogonal data to be used as new descriptor uncorrelated variables [18, 42] . bayesian network analysis is another promising tool to identify statistical dependencies between multiple variables, and to separate these into those directly and indirectly dependent with one or more response variables [43] . this data-driven statistical tool produces a graphical network, whose structure describes the interdependency between variables [43, 44] . in contrast with path analysis [45] , bayesian network analysis does not assume any causal relationships although this can be introduced by appropriate prior distribution for the structure of the graphical network. in particular, the method has been applied to investigate socioeconomic determinants for diarrheal diseases and the role of weather in animal diseases [43, 46] . another method, applied to the 1993 milwaukee cryptosporidium outbreak [47] , integrates population dynamic models with profile likelihood approach [48] . the problem of collinearity is removed by fixing the value of one or more parameters, and then estimating the remaining ones by maximizing the (log-) likelihood of the associated model; the approach is then repeated for a range of values of the fixed parameters. the method, which is suitable for a limited subset of the parameters, provides a better understanding of the relationship among different parameters. 4) identifying and quantifying the different sources of the temporal lag from the start of the pathway to infection to disease detection. the effects of the different meteorological, climatic, environmental and socio-economic factors on occurrence of disease are not instantaneous. fig 1 illustrates some of the complexity. sources of the temporal lag include the time required for potential growth of pathogen population in the environment, exposure dynamics, incubation period, and delays in reporting.further complications can arise from feedback from the infected population to the pathogen reservoir (e.g. rainfall facilitating contamination of fresh water from the sewage system). the required time t res , for the pathogen population in the reservoir to replicate and reach a sufficient value to cause infections, depends on a range of environmental and microbiological factors specific to the pathogen under investigation. methods to estimate this time and its distribution are beyond the scope of this review; here we simple mention some mechanistic approaches and a separate published review for temperature-driven bacterial growth in food and in water drinking systems [49] [50] [51] [52] [53] . the required time t exp , for susceptible individuals to be infected after being exposed to the pathogen reservoir, depends on the particular route of transmission and type of exposure.the literature on microbial risk assessment framework (hazard identification, doseresponse relationships, exposure assessment, quantitative risk characterization) represents an important source of methods to estimate the probability of infection and disease resulting from exposure to a variety of pathogenic microorganisms [54] [55] [56] . the effect of exposure events is, in general, distributed over a time interval. a range of approaches, based on time series analysis, has been implemented to study the distributed effects of multiple episodes of exposure on infectious outbreaks (see [57] and references therein). a general statistical framework that can simultaneously represent non-linear exposure-response dependencies (due to, for example, depletion of susceptibles) and delayed effects has been recently formulated [58] .infections are typically revealed after the incubation period, t inc , (the time between infections and symptoms onsets); which is associated with patient's physiology, whose distribution depends on the type of infection (see historical paper of sartwell [59] ). after symptoms start, only a proportion of the infected individuals seeks medical assistance (see issue above on reporting), and for only a proportion of these cases further diagnostic testing will be conducted and recorded in the public health system. this introduces a further time lag, t det , between the time when infected individual approaches the health system and the actual appropriate laboratory detection with diagnosis [60, 61] . even in a simple scenario, the temporal lag between the start of the pathway to infection (which can be challenging to define) and disease detection is a combination the time lags t res , t exp , t inc , t det. these are typically represented by random variables drawn from adequate distributions; for example a log-normal distribution has been proposed for t inc and t det .key challenges include: these distributions are expected to be dependent on a range of factors (patient's physiology, environment, reporting bias), they are not necessarily stationary [61] , and the technical difficulties inherent with the algebra of random variables [62] . estimating the time lag between environmental/climatic variables and infections was a common task encountered in this review, however, none of the methods used distinguished the different sources of time lag, and in most cases the assessment was based on trial and error methods (typically, searching for high correlation between the time series of incidence and the time series of temperature and/or rainfall at 1,2, etc. weeks before the date of reported case) followed by some significance tests or selection criteria (e.g. p-values, aic [63] ).involving the wider community via community-based studies and citizen science could help in identifying the different sources of the temporal lag from the start of the pathway to infection to disease detection. this information could be used as inputs for agent based models (abm) to simulate controlled processes in epidemics, and to assess the capability of these models to identify the multiple sources (physiology, environment, behaviour) of time lags and their statistical distributions. 5) studying the evolution of pathogen in response to climate change/variability. very little research has investigated the potential effect of observed climate change/variability on the evolution and adaptation of pathogens [56] , that is changes in the climate (e.g. mean temperature and rainfall, patterns of seasonality, etc.) on over decadal time scales. in particular, seasonality is expected to be an important driver of pathogen evolution (see [64] [65] [66] and references therein), as periods of high transmission are followed by population bottlenecks reducing strain diversity and causing rapid genetic shifts. furthermore, external periodic perturbations (e.g. seasonality in temperature, rainfall) can resonate with the natural frequencies of the ecosystem, promoting emergency or suppression of particular strains of the pathogen [66] . apart from the theoretical work of koelle et al [67] which might explain the cholera strain replacement in bangladesh due to changes in monsoon rainfall patterns, we are not aware of further research investigating evolution of water-associated pathogens in response to climate change.6) investigating the effects of time-varying factors on transmission patterns. the importance of and challenges in understanding the effects of seasonal drivers and climate variability on the dynamics of infectious diseases are largely recognized [24, 64, [68] [69] [70] [71] and not repeated here. further challenges arise from potential changes in seasonal patterns of the drivers, for example due to control measures, and aperiodic time-varying factors [72] . stability analysis for seasonal systems, i.e. studying the conditions for pathogen invasion and establishment in systems characterized by fluctuating environmental forcing (based for example on floquet analysis [30, 73] ), represents an interesting area for future research. 7) dealing with different spatio-temporal scales. the mechanistic approaches reviewed here were in most cases deterministic compartmental models, which are strictly only valid for large epidemics. water-associated disease outbreaks could be point-source, affecting a relatively small population. for this situation, stochastic process-based models coupled with local weather and environmental variables could be beneficial. quantitative methodological studies applied to longer term climatic effects are limited. extreme events, such as prolonged droughts (months or years) and heavy rain events (days or weeks), are expected to have a major impact on the dynamics of infectious diseases [74] [75] [76] [77] . the papers reviewed here focused on the intensity of the events alone, not their frequency. furthermore, there is no consensus on the definition of extreme weather events [77] .none of the reviewed paper investigated the long term effect of human adaptation to climatic change. the effects of earth atmosphere range from short term weather events, to intermediate time periods events like enso, to longer term climate change. we are not aware of any unified approach linking together the effects of the different time-scales on water-associated infectious diseases and their spatial distribution. spatial analysis was often performed on a temporal snapshot (cross sectional study), usually to find correlation among different variables on different locations. only a small proportion of spatial studies included temporal dynamics, for example to study the spread of cholera in a particular region due to rainfall. longer term changes, such as land use changes, were rarely incorporated.a range of diverse methods are used to study the effect of weather and climate on water-associated diseases. most of these methods can be connected to two main groups: (i) process based models (pbm), and (ii) time series and spatial epidemiology. in general, pbm were employed when the bio-physical mechanism of transmission of the pathogen was known (as with vibrio cholerae, the most studied pathogen). pbms describe the progression of the infectious diseases by mimicking the bio-physical processes, typically, in terms of non-linear differential equations [14] . in contrast, statistically-oriented approaches (such as regression analysis over space or over time) tended to be used when the roles of specific environmental drivers were unclear and the methods needed to find potential correlates between environmental and/or socio-economic variables and patterns of infections.the two clusters resemble the groups of explanatory and predictive models. although we recognize the importance of the debate in the philosophy of science about these two groups of models [10] , we avoided a formal grouping of the studies according to this classification. applying the guidelines provided by shmueli [10] in a rigorous and objective manner was particularly challenging in our contest. for example, many modelling studies (e.g. [78] ) provide maps of the risk of a disease, i.e. they make predictions, by calculating the basic reproductive number, which is a typical tool in explanatory compartmental models as built on "first principles". should these models be classified as predictive or explanatory?the use, or potential use, of the reviewed methodologies to investigate the effects of weather and/or climate is discussed in table 3 . most of the studies focused on the short-term effects of weather as these time series of health data are more readily available.teasing apart the individual effects of multiple abiotic factors (e.g. weather, climate, environmental, demographic, and socio-economic) on the incidence of water-associated infectious diseases is the main challenge. additional challenges include many other methodological problems arising from the limited understanding of the complex bio-physical mechanisms, concurrent effects of many correlated factors, poor data quality and reporting bias, and uncertainty in the knowledge of relevant parameters; these are all intrinsic limitations of the methods and the data available. addressing these challenges would enable the formulation of a framework to understand the overall effects of weather, climate, and possibly other environmental and socio-economic factors on water-associated infectious disease. this research has the common limitations of any systematic review. an important one is the possibility we have missed relevant studies, for example due to the failure of the search engine or studies written in languages other than english. this problem could be overcome, at least in part, by the application of snowballing procedures, i.e. recursively pursuing relevant references cited in the retrieved literature and then adding them to the search results [79] . this technique is less feasible when the initial pool of documents is as large as in the current case.nevertheless, considering the high number of studies included in this review, we expect that the general patterns in our findings are robust. we recognize that there are methods developed and applied to other different classes of infectious diseases (e.g. vector-borne diseases) potentially relevant to our context which were not included in our analysis. the protocol of our review was chosen to ensure the objectivity and reproducibility of the results and the research question we identified.the choice of a particular method in a study is driven by many factors, including the scientific background of the scientists involved (anecdotally, we noticed that most pbm are employed by scientists working in engineering or physics departments); the ease in implementing the methods (e.g. using freely available statistical packages); and probably the tendency to use already widely used methods, a phenomenon known as the matthew effect [80, 81] . the choice of the methods ought to be driven by many factors, i.e. the scientific questions, the availability of data, the transmission pathways, and the bio-physical and socio-economic mechanism, as well as the state of the art of the methods. these should be critically assessed on a case-by-case basis, and not based on oversimplified, prescriptive guidelines. the findings of this review can assist scientists in the critical selection and development of methods for quantifying the effects of weather and climate on water-associated diseases.tackling the many challenges. important data and theoretical challenges emerged with implications for the surveillance and control of water-associated infections. the inter-connections between human health, the environment, and also animal health as advocated by the one health holistic vision [82] , are increasingly recognized. being aware of these connections and the potential bio-physical mechanisms occurring at different spatio-temporal scales is crucial to separate out the multiple transmission pathways, to understand and quantify the different sources of the temporal lag, and to deal with collinearity. incorporating information on human behaviour and socio-economic factors can help to reduce reporting bias, and improve understanding of the potential effect on infectious diseases of anthropogenic climate change and interventions.collecting and linking long term, high-resolution, epidemiological, socio-economic, environmental and climatic data. the integration of infection data with long-term, national-scale, environmental and land use data is an important growing approach [83] . for example, the national communicable diseases database of public health england has collected data from microbiology diagnostic laboratories (as well as patient's addresses in the last five years) for england and wales since 1989. the location of the diagnostic laboratories, or the patient residences, could be used to link cases to local weather parameters supplied by the uk met office in a confidential manner. these cases could also be linked with the spatial density of livestock data. the utility of these datasets could be further improved, as most current datasets are one-off surveys. data on the spatio-temporal infection prevalence in livestock are also important information.the paucity of this kind of information is much more pronounced for data on wildlife; with the exception of voluntary based schemes (such as citizen science [84] ), we are not aware of a systematic collection of such data. involving the wider public via community-based studies and citizen science could help in reducing the uncertainty in reporting and in identifying the different sources of the temporal lag from the start of the pathway to infection to disease detection. for example, surveys could be used by public health institutions to gather data on patient behaviour, symptom onset, food and water exposures, the likelihood of seeking medical advice, and the location of the potential sources of infection, etc.integrating bio-physical and socio-economic mechanisms of infectious disease. the emergence, risk, spread, and control of infectious diseases are affected by many complex bio-physical, environmental and socio-economic factors [1] . these include climate and environmental change, land-use variation, and changes in population and human behaviour. for example, the abundance of long term, high-resolution, surveillance data (e.g. reported infectious diseases from public health england) linked with local weather parameters allows the analysis of the subset of epidemiological cases when all environmental variables (except one predictor, referred to as 'test variable') are fixed; in this way, the problem of collinearity is naturally removed. this exercise provides a family of curves of the rates of infection, which are function of the test variable and conditioned to all other fixed predictors. from the family of curves, the potential relationship between the predictors and the rate of infection can be inferred and potentially elucidate the bio-physical mechanism.conversely, functional relationships between epidemiological measures (e.g. incidence) and weather parameters arising from process-based models could be used as inputs for statistical models (e.g. by providing a particular relationship for the link function in a glm). feedbacks from community-based studies on human behaviour could also be integrated with process-based and statistical methods to design more realistic mathematical models, which in turn can assist with making policy decisions [35] . las infecciones respiratorias bajas son una causa importante de morbilidad en el nio y engloban a las bronquitis, las bronquiolitis y las neumopatas; el conjunto se rene bajo el trmino de bronconeumopata. la determinacin del agente etiolgico y, en concreto, su naturaleza viral o bacteriana, sigue siendo difcil. el papel preponderante de los virus se ha ido definiendo de manera progresiva desde hace 30 aos; su identificacin tiene una relacin de verosimilitud positiva que oscila alrededor de 20; dicha relacin es mucho menos importante en la identificacin de una bacteria, porque la flora comensal reduce en gran medida la especificidad (cuadro i) [1] .a menudo, los resultados de los estudios estn sesgados porque la seleccin en el hospital ha privilegiado casos de dificultad respiratoria marcada o complicada; otras veces no diferencian la semiologa clnica de las afecciones respiratorias.el muestreo y la edad de la poblacin estudiada, las fechas de recogida de los datos (epidemias invernales), las zonas geogrficas (condiciones socioeconmicas y polticas vacunales), el nivel de las exploraciones radiolgicas y microbiolgicas (convencional, experimental, exhaustividad respectiva de la bsqueda virolgica y bacteriolgica) y, sobre todo, la naturaleza de las muestras analizadas (aspiraciones o escobillados nasofarngeos, secrecin bronquial con o sin expectoracin inducida, lavado broncoalveolar, muestras de sangre, etc.) dan buena cuenta de la falta de homogeneidad de los resultados e, incluso, de la variabilidad de las interpretaciones. incidencia, morbilidad, mortalidad, gentica se estima que las infecciones de las vas respiratorias bajas constituyen el 30% de las enfermedades respiratorias agudas; las neumopatas slo representan el 5% de estas infecciones respiratorias bajas, pero el temor de que se pueda tratar del neumococo justifica una antibioticoterapia probabilstica rpida. la falta de un estudio prospectivo reciente no cuestiona la pertinencia de ciertas referencias antiguas. en una cohorte de aproximadamente 7.000 nios, se ha calculado que la frecuencia de las bronconeumopatas es de 134/1.000 nios [2] . la edad tiene una gran influencia: la incidencia es de 240/1.000 en los lactantes menores de 1 ao, baja a 75/1.000 en nios de 6-8 aos y es de slo 34/1.000 en los mayores de 15 aos. en los menores de 6 aos, existe un predominio masculino con una sex-ratio de 1,58. la incidencia anual de las neumopatas extrahospitalarias oscila entre 36-40 episodios/1.000 nios antes de la edad de 5 aos, y entre 11-16 episodios/1.000 nios entre 5-14 aos [3, 4] . el predominio masculino tambin est aqu presente en los menores de 5 aos [5] , con una sex-ratio de 1,43. en europa, entre un 3-18% de los ingresos hospitalarios se deben a infecciones de las vas respiratorias inferiores [6] . la neumona, con definiciones radiolgicas diferentes segn los pases, tiene una incidencia media de 10-15 casos por 1.000 nios, y su tasa anual de hospitalizacin es de 1-4/ 1.000 cada ao.la evaluacin de la morbilidad sigue siendo difcil; sta debera incluir la duracin de los sntomas, el absentismo escolar, el tiempo de hospitalizacin, la carga teraputica, las complicaciones y los plazos para un completo restablecimiento. un reciente estudio estadounidense con 154 nios hospitalizados de edades comprendidas entre 2 meses y 17 aos revela algunos indicadores [7] . la duracin media de los sntomas preadmisin era de 5 das, y el 40% haba recibido una antibioticoterapia oral durante las 2 semanas precedentes. en el 60% de los nios, fue necesario recurrir a oxigenoterapia durante una media de 3 das. la duracin media de la hospitalizacin fue de 5 das. la morbilidad de los casos tratados en rgimen ambulatorio es imprecisa por la falta de datos publicados.las neumopatas extrahospitalarias siguen siendo una de las causas importantes de mortalidad en el nio, en especial entre los menores de 5 aos. esto es mucho ms significativo en los pases en vas de desarrollo, en los que la incidencia es 10 veces ms elevada que en los pases desarrollados [8] . en el ao 2000, se contabilizaron cerca de dos millones de fallecimientos por una infeccin aguda de las vas respiratorias en nios; ms del 50% haba nacido en frica y en el sudeste asitico. la epidemia provocada por el virus de la inmunodeficiencia humana ha contribuido al aumento de las muertes relacionadas con neumopatas extrahospitalarias, sobre todo en el frica subsahariana. la disponibilidad de terapias antirretrovirales en estas regiones permitira reducir la mortalidad relacionada especficamente con las neumonas; sta es, hoy da, entre tres y seis veces ms elevada que en un nio no infectado [9] . la mortalidad de los nios sanos en los pases desarrollados es infrecuente; en inglaterra, el 75% ocurre antes de la edad de 4 aos, con una tasa de 1,6/100.000 [10] . durante estas seis ltimas dcadas, la disminucin de la mortalidad ha sido constante, primero por el uso de la penicilina y, despus, por un mejor acceso a la asistencia sanitaria de los medios desfavorecidos. el pico de 1957 se atribuy a una pandemia de gripe [11] .varios estudios se han ocupado de los beneficios de distintas estrategias que permiten disminuir la incidencia de las infecciones de las vas respiratorias inferiores. entre ellas, la prevencin vacunal tiene un impacto favorable que ya no hace falta demostrar, aunque su espectro de eficacia no sea tan amplio como el deseado. en el nio de 0-14 aos, la gripe provoca un exceso de ingresos hospitalarios, evaluado en 214/100.000, que podra evitarse con la vacunacin antigripal [12] . la vacuna conjugada antineumoccica es eficaz contra infecciones invasivas, bacteriemias y meningitis; permite reducir las neumonas en un 11,4% [13] . en el reino unido, se ha calculado que las muertes anuales por neumona neumoccica potencialmente evitables con esta vacunacin ascenderan a 22, y las hospitalizaciones por esta misma causa, a 2.548 [10] . tambin se ha calculado el impacto de la vacuna conjugada anti-haemophilus b en la prevencin de las neumonas; con al menos una dosis, hay una disminucin del 22% de las neumonas definidas por criterios radiolgicos [14] . lamentablemente, no existe una vacuna antivirus respiratorio sincitial (vrs); tan slo se dispone de una inmunoproteccin pasiva con palivizumab, anticuerpo monoclonal dirigido contra la glucoprotena f del vrs. su coste limita su uso, que se reserva para situaciones bien definidas. se ha demostrado una disminucin significativa de las hospitalizaciones en los grandes prematuros y en los lactantes portadores de cardiopatas congnitas ciangenas [15, 16] .hoy da existen varias pruebas que demuestran ciertas predisposiciones genticas para las infecciones respiratorias. adems de los dficit inmunitarios, existe todo un espectro de transmisin hereditaria de la predisposicin a infecciones, a veces graves. recientemente, un equipo ha demostrado, a partir de una base de datos del estado de utah que inclua 4.855 personas fallecidas entre 1904-2004, que tanto la familia cercana como la lejana de individuos fallecidos por gripe presentaba un riesgo significativamente mayor de morir de gripe, lo cual subraya la exposicin compartida y los efectos genticos [17] . este riesgo era superior al 54% para los familiares de primer grado, en concreto de un 74% para las hermanas y hermanos, del 37% para los padres y del 59% para los nios. era un 22% superior para los familiares de segundo grado y de un 16% para los de tercer grado. algunos autores han estudiado los genes implicados en la respuesta innata a las infecciones bacterianas. la lectina de unin a la manosa (mbl) pertenece a la familia de las colectinas e interviene en la defensa innata antibacteriana. se han descrito tres polimorfismos nucleotdicos (polimorfismo nucleotdico simple: snp) que afectan a la estructura terciaria de mbl. para estas mutaciones, la heterocigosidad u homocigosidad resultan en una expresin menor o nula, respectivamente, de mbl funcional; por esta razn estos alelos han sido denominados 0 mientras que los alelos normales se denominan a. tambin se han descrito varios polimorfismos en el promotor del gen mbl2 que influye en la concentracin srica de mbl. algunos estudios han demostrado que los pacientes que padecen mucoviscidosis y que producen menos mbl (homocigotos o heterocigotos para el alelo 0 de mbl2) tenan un pronstico ms desfavorable y moran antes. un estudio reciente con 117 enfermos de mucoviscidosis parece confirmar estos datos [18] . el papel desfavorable de un dficit de mbl tambin se ha puesto de manifiesto en una poblacin no seleccionada de lactantes; el efecto es mayor en el nio de 6-17 meses de edad con un riesgo relativo aproximado de 3 de presentar una infeccin aguda de las vas respiratorias [19] . la exploracin de estas interacciones gen-ambiente es difcil por el gran nmero de genes implicados en la respuesta antiinfecciosa e inmunoinflamatoria.  particularidades peditricas de los medios de defensa del aparato respiratorio la depuracin y la esterilidad del rbol traqueobronquial estn garantizadas por dos sistemas de defensa: el escalador mucociliar y el tejido linfoide asociado a las vas respiratorias.con excepcin de los alvolos y de los bronquiolos terminales, la mucosa respiratoria est tapizada en su conjunto por clulas ciliares; el lquido periciliar tiene una composicin de agua y electrlitos regulada por canales de cloruro y de sodio situados en el polo apical de las clulas ciliares. en la superficie de este lquido se encuentran largas protenas fibrilares ricas en radicales tioles en las que quedan atrapadas las partculas. los cilios tienen un movimiento continuo y sncrono que produce una onda; la frecuencia del barrido ciliar es del orden de 15 hz. la progresin de la pelcula mucosa, gracias a esta onda, se lleva a cabo desde los bronquios perifricos hacia la glotis. los factores adquiridos o innatos que alteran el aclaramiento mucociliar son numerosos.los virus neumtropos alteran la fsica y la funcin de los cilios.las bacterias que sobreinfectan las vas respiratorias tienen protenas de adhesin a la mucosa, algunas secretan ciliotoxinas (toxinas que alteran el transporte o la composicin de la pelcula mucosa) y otras, factores de necrosis epitelial [20] .en la mucoviscidosis, se observa una deshidratacin de la fase lquida del moco, con una anomala en la composicin de electrlitos. las discinesias ciliares primitivas forman un grupo heterogneo de variada transmisin gentica que explica la gran variabilidad de su expresin clnica. la afectacin de las vas respiratorias superiores es constante; en alrededor de un 25% de los casos se desarrolla una poliposis nasal y bronquiectasias; su asociacin a una dextrocardia o a un situs inversus completo es menos frecuente, pero caracterstica; a veces, tambin se asocia infertilidad masculina. los defectos en la sntesis del factor surfactante alveolar pueden provocar anomalas funcionales del moco y tambin una afeccin pulmonar intersticial.las formaciones linfoides de la faringe forman una primera lnea de defensa frente a los microorganismos y, mediante sus contactos antignicos, permiten informar al sistema inmunitario. a nivel bronquial, las clulas inmunocompetentes colonizan el rbol respiratorio durante el perodo neonatal y se localizan en la submucosa (tejido linfoide asociado a los bronquios [balt]). las clulas presentadoras de antgenos transmiten las informaciones a los linfocitos submucosos o ganglionares. a nivel alveolar, predominan los macrfagos; en el nio, los linfocitos son ms numerosos que en el adulto.de manera esquemtica, la infeccin viral evoluciona en tres fases: fase de replicacin viral, fase inmunoinflamatoria y fase de reparacin. su duracin respectiva vara en funcin de la naturaleza de los virus. la fase inicial de replicacin conduce a una difusin rpida y progresiva del virus por el epitelio de superficie desde las vas respiratorias superiores hacia las vas respiratorias inferiores para alcanzar los bronquiolos. la afectacin del parnquima pulmonar no es constante.las clulas diana de la agresin viral son sobre todo las del epitelio respiratorio. existe una necrosis epitelial as como una inflamacin parietal y endoluminal. una vez que el virus penetra en la clula epitelial, se replica, libera nuevas partculas infecciosas y activa las secreciones de citocinas y de mediadores lipdicos y peptdicos. las partculas virales liberadas en las vas respiratorias activan tambin otras clulas que residen en su seno: macrfagos, linfocitos y granulocitos. los polimorfonucleares neutrfilos tienen un papel importante en la perpetuacin de la inflamacin (radicales libres, enzimas liberadas) con una amplificacin del fenmeno mediante la accin de la interleucina 8 (il8). durante la fase de curacin, las clulas t citotxicas destruyen las clulas infectadas por el virus y, posiblemente, algunas citocinas como el factor de crecimiento transformante (tgf) b y la il10 juegan un papel en la disminucin de la inflamacin. el aumento del nmero de linfocitos y de polimorfonucleares en las vas respiratorias puede mantenerse durante varias semanas despus de la infeccin viral. la reparacin del epitelio ciliar comienza relativamente tarde, hacia el dcimo da; son necesarias tres semanas para que la mucosa respiratoria recupere su estado normal.el genoma viral tiene una gran diversidad: cido desoxirribonucleico (adn) o cido ribonucleico (arn), doble o simple hebra, segmentada o no, polaridad positiva o negativa, circular o lineal. el tamao de este genoma permite contener tan slo genes que codifican las protenas estructurales y algunas enzimas esenciales, aunque a veces es ms importante e incluye complejos reguladores [21] .los patgenos responsables de epidemias respiratorias importantes pertenecen a esta familia. en los pases en vas de desarrollo, el sarampin persiste con un alto grado de morbilidad respiratoria. no existe una profilaxis vacunal para las infecciones causadas por vrs, virus parainfluenza (vpi) ni metaneumovirus humano (hmpv). ms del 10% de las neumopatas en nios mayores de 2 aos se deben al vrs [22] [23] [24] . la semiologa respiratoria del vpi en el nio hospitalizado refleja una afeccin de las vas respiratorias inferiores en el 75% de los casos (neumopata 5%, bronquiolitis 33%, bronquitis 13%, laringitis 10%, exacerbacin de asma 13%) [25] . el hmpv se ha descubierto recientemente; varios estudios clnicos lo asimilan al vrs; provoca una afeccin que, en el 50% de los casos, se manifiesta por una bronquiolitis, en el 5-10% de los casos por una neumopata y, en el 15%, por una exacerbacin asmtica [26] . el hmpv se identifica en el 5-10% de los nios hospitalizados por una infeccin respiratoria.esta familia est compuesta por los virus influenza a, b y c. el virus influenza a infecta a los humanos y a un amplio grupo de animales, por lo que existe el temor de que surja un virus nuevo, mientras que los virus influenza b y c son exclusivamente humanos y no presentan variaciones antignicas importantes. en el nio sin comorbilidad asociada, los virus influenza se aslan en el 5-15% de las bronquiolitis y en el 10-20% de las neumopatas [27] . lo importante para el mdico es la falta de inmunidad cruzada conferida entre los diferentes subtipos y la utilidad de la vigilancia epidemiolgica mundial para definir la produccin vacunal.los rinovirus (hrv) y los enterovirus (ev) componen esta familia que, en nuestras latitudes, constituye la causa ms comn de afecciones respiratorias. un nio hospitalizado por una infeccin de hrv presenta la siguiente semiologa respiratoria: en un 28%, afeccin de las vas respiratorias superiores (otitis media aguda 16%), en un 55%, afeccin de las vas respiratorias inferiores (bronquiolitis 38%, neumopata 12%, exacerbacin de asma 5%) [28] . a veces, se pone en duda la causalidad del hrv por su capacidad de persistir despus de la fase aguda de la infeccin. sin embargo, sta es transitoria y desaparece por completo en 4-6 semanas [29] . los nios aquejados de mucoviscidosis son particularmente vulnerables; un 28% de sus exacerbaciones se asocia a una infeccin viral que, en el 50% de los casos, se debe a un hrv [30] .durante largo tiempo se han dejado de lado por su gran dificultad para ser identificados, aunque desde hace 40 aos se sabe que dos cepas (229 e , oc43) constituyen la segunda causa de afecciones respiratorias despus de los hrv [31] . desde el sndrome respiratorio agudo grave (srag) y gracias a los progresos en biologa molecular, los coronavirus (covh) han vuelto a estar de actualidad [32] . adems del covh, responsable del srag, se han descubierto recientemente otros virus que causan infecciones respiratorias altas y bajas: nl63 y hku1.desde hace 50 aos se sabe que los adenovirus (adv) tienen la capacidad de persistir en forma quiescente, sobre todo en los tejidos linfoides. las manifestaciones clnicas ms tpicas y frecuentes de la infeccin por adv son la faringitis, las anginas y la fiebre faringoconjuntival. la semiologa respiratoria en el nio hospitalizado por una infeccin adv es florida, muy febril en el 75% de los casos. con algunos serotipos (adv3, 7 y 21) [33] , existe el riesgo de que se produzca una bronquiolitis obliterante secundaria, asociada a dilataciones bronquiales. las infecciones adv sistmicas dependen de la deplecin linfoctica; son de especial gravedad aquellas que aparecen despus de trasplantes medulares; la amplificacin gnica en tiempo real permite su seguimiento teraputico [34] .causan infecciones respiratorias sobre todo en pacientes inmunodeprimidos y, en particular, despus de un trasplante: citomegalovirus (cmv), herpes simple (hsv1 y 2), virus de la varicela-zster (vzv). estos virus comparten la facultad de establecer una infeccin latente y persistir durante toda la vida del husped. durante los perodos de inmunodepresin, se observan reactivaciones e infecciones recurrentes. en este contexto, la afeccin pulmonar por cmv presenta una elevada mortalidad. las tcnicas de amplificacin gnica permiten su cuantificacin y un diagnstico rpido. en una persona sana, la afectacin pulmonar por el virus de epstein-barr es excepcional. la varicela se acompaa con frecuencia de una afeccin pulmonar moderada; a veces, autnticas neumopatas pueden producir dificultad respiratoria, por supuesto favorecida por una inmunodepresin.en el ao 2005, el bocavirus (bovh) fue identificado en suecia en muestras respiratorias mediante tcnicas de cribado molecular; pertenece a la familia de los parvoviridae [35] . varios estudios establecen que su prevalencia es de al menos un 5% de las infecciones respiratorias en nios pequeos. la incidencia parece ser ms elevada en invierno y en primavera. el bovh se detecta muy a menudo asociado a otros virus respiratorios. las manifestaciones de la afeccin son fundamentalmente rinofarngeas, pero tambin se puede observar una afeccin de vas respiratorias bajas, ms o menos febril, a veces grave (bronquiolitis con sibilancias).en pases de nuestro entorno, las infecciones invasivas por neumococo siguen siendo la primera causa de mortalidad por enfermedades infecciosas. el neumococo forma parte de la flora nasofarngea y de las vas respiratorias superiores; en el nio, esta colonizacin es del orden del 40-50% y dura de algunas semanas a varios meses. la transmisin interhumana se efecta sobre todo por las gotitas. es un coco grampositivo; se han identificado ms de 90 polisacridos capsulares distintos, de los que una decena representa el 60% de las cepas aisladas en las infecciones invasivas. el carcter invasivo de un infeccin est ligado sobre todo a la exposicin de un nuevo serotipo antes de que se haya desarrollado la inmunizacin; por esta razn, la epidemiologa es a veces diferente entre el adulto (serotipos 1 a 5, 7 a 12, 14 y 18) y el nio menor de 2 aos (por ejemplo 23, 19 y 6) [36] . estos datos epidemiolgicos relativos a la serotipificacin tienen una especial importancia para evaluar la cobertura de las vacunas polivalentes que slo incluye un nmero limitado de valencias. es difcil calcular la frecuencia exacta de las neumonas por neumococo porque, en el nio, el hemocultivo no se repite o incluso no se realiza, o bien resulta complicado interpretarlo (volumen sanguneo insuficiente). ni la toma de muestras bacteriolgicas perifricas ni los exmenes de laboratorio establecen una causalidad exacta, porque no distinguen la colonizacin secundaria neumoccica de las afecciones realmente virales. segn datos de cohorte de nios hospitalizados por neumona, la incidencia por los hemocultivos sera del 15-20%; sta, por exmenes serolgicos, es del orden del 35-40%. una revisin reciente estima en un 25%, aproximadamente, el origen neumoccico de la neumonas en nios que viven en pases desarrollados [37] . en el curso de una neumona por neumococo, ciertas complicaciones extrarrespiratorias pueden comprometer el pronstico vital. se han descrito varios casos de sndrome hemoltico y urmico, 1-2 semanas despus de la afeccin respiratoria [38] . durante estos ltimos aos, se han detectado cepas resistentes, pero este problema no suele impedir que se recurra como primera opcin al uso de amoxicilina con una dosis adecuada [39] .este bacilo gramnegativo caus en el pasado un gran nmero de infecciones agudas de las vas respiratorias, pero la amplia difusin de la vacunacin anti-haemophilus b ha tenido un gran impacto y ha logrado reducir su importancia. existen otros serotipos, pero son menos virulentos. en los pases en vas de desarrollo, en cambio, la situacin es diferente y casi el 50% de los casos de neumopata extrahospitalaria est relacionada con haemophilus no tipificables [40] .es un coco gramnegativo que con gran frecuencia coloniza las vas respiratorias superiores, puesto que se encuentra prcticamente en uno de cada dos nios sanos. es bastante similar al hib, y tambin produce una betalactamasa. es inusual que provoque neumopatas, salvo en las afecciones por inhalacin.este coco grampositivo est asociado a un amplio abanico de afecciones respiratorias. su presencia asintomtica en la nariz es comn. las infecciones invasivas conducen a la formacin de abscesos en cualquier localizacin. su implicacin respiratoria se observa sobre todo en las traqueobronquitis gravsimas que requieren una intubacin [41] . antes, las neumonas estafiloccicas descritas correspondan al cuadro de estafilococia pleuropulmonar del lactante, con ampollas que, al romperse, daban un cuadro de pleuresa purulenta o de pioneumotrax. en nuestras latitudes, esta forma clsica se ha vuelto infrecuente, quiz en parte por la mejora de las condiciones higinicas. an as, staphylococcus aureus sigue siendo un germen temible en personas que presentan una enfermedad asociada, una inmunodepresin o en el marco de las infecciones nosocomiales. recientemente, se han aislado en neumonas estafiloccicas con una incidencia creciente, cepas que producen una toxina antes poco caracterizada: la leucocidina de panton y valentine [42] . esta leucocidina lisa los polimorfonucleares y los macrfagos y tiene una actividad necrtica sobre los tejidos. el efecto necrosante de la leucocidina de panton y valentine provoca una neumopata masiva hemorrgica y necrtica. los estudios e -4-064-a-10  bronconeumopatas agudas del nio microbiolgicos tienen una funcin esencial para identificar los marcadores de resistencia a los antibiticos, as como la virulencia.esta bacteria no tiene pared; esta caracterstica le confiere una resistencia natural a los betalactmicos. muchas especies de micoplasmas son saprofitos del ser humano. mycoplasma pneumoniae presenta un fuerte tropismo respiratorio. su transmisin se efecta por va area; el contacto debe ser relativamente estrecho. su adhesin al epitelio respiratorio se lleva a cabo mediante un cierto nmero de protenas, entre las que la adhesina p1 es la principal. esta adhesin provoca la interrupcin de la actividad ciliar, as como alteraciones celulares ligadas a la produccin de radicales libres por el germen que no produce exotoxina [43] . mycoplasma pneumoniae induce la activacin de macrfagos y linfocitos, y una produccin de citocinas proinflamatorias. es un patgeno mucoso que posee la capacidad de fusionarse y despus de penetrar en la clula husped, lo cual le permite desarrollar infecciones latentes o crnicas. se trata, sin embargo, de un germen ms paracelular que intracelular. en algunos casos, es difcil establecer la relacin de causalidad, ya que ciertos estudios muestran que, en la identificacin de mycoplasma pneumoniae, un 40-50% de los enfermos presentaba una afeccin de las vas respiratorias superiores o una bronquitis, y que slo un 2% desarrollaba una neumona [44] . las neumonas por m. pneumoniae son excepcionales antes de 1 ao, poco frecuentes entre 1-4 aos, y muy frecuentes entre los 5-15 aos. su incidencia es difcil de establecer; algunos equipos la consideran como la primera causa de neumona extrahospitalaria, con un 60% de identificaciones en nios mayores de 7 aos [45] . las cifras varan segn las series y oscilan entre el 20 y el 40%. las fluctuaciones reflejan un estado endmico asociado a picos estivales, por una parte y, por otra parte, a epidemias cclicas [46] .la familia de las chlamydiaceae, orden de las chlamydiales, incluye dos gneros bacterianos: chlamydia (grupo trachomatis) y chlamydophila (cph.) (grupo psittaci). el gnero chlamydia incluye la especie humana chlamydia trachomatis. la afeccin por el gnero chlamydophila incluye especies de cph. pneumoniae y cph. psittaci (especie aviar).chlamydia trachomatis, bacteria especfica del ser humano, puede causar dos tipos de infecciones: infecciones oculares (tracoma) e infecciones urogenitales que pueden ser asintomticas o presentar graves complicaciones como ceguera o esterilidad. el recin nacido puede infectarse con este germen por transmisin vertical materna y presentar una conjuntivitis neonatal o una neumona disneizante, de aparicin a veces tarda (tos paroxstica seudopertusiana y eosinofilia) [47] . la dificultad para el diagnstico se debe tambin a que con frecuencia no existen sntomas en los padres.cph. pneumoniae fue identificada hace unos veinte aos como patgeno del rbol respiratorio [48] . es difcil precisar su incidencia exacta porque los mtodos diagnsticos no estn estandarizados y adems son poco sensibles. las neumopatas por cph. pneumoniae suelen ser poco graves. distintos estudios peditricos sitan la prevalencia de cph. pneumoniae entre el 7-13% [49, 50] de las neumopatas extrahospitalarias. el empleo de la tcnica de reaccin en cadena de la polimerasa (pcr) eleva las cifras de la prevalencia; sta destaca cuando el anlisis se descompone por edades: <2 aos, 2-4 aos y 5-16 aos, con un 9, 18 y 26%, respectivamente [51] . estas cifras pueden estar sobrevaloradas por la frecuencia de portadores asintomticos. sin embargo, se sospecha que estas infecciones no tratadas podran estar relacionadas con la patogenia de coronariopatas o asma en el adulto, por la instauracin de una inflamacin crnica.la psitacosis (u ornitosis) est causada por la especie cph. psittaci. se trasmite del pjaro (en particular los psitcidos: loros, etc.) a las personas. en los pjaros, la enfermedad se limita a una infeccin intestinal; en el ser humano, en cambio, se manifiesta por una neumona.es una causa excepcional de neumopata extrahospitalaria, pero esta posibilidad siempre se debe tener en cuenta por la gravedad que reviste. en una revisin reciente de la literatura, se refiere una mortalidad del 33%, ms importante todava en nios inmunodeprimidos y en recin nacidos [52] . con frecuencia se detecta un origen medioambiental, en especial una contaminacin del agua potable. en un 25% de los casos, la infeccin se habra adquirido despus de desplazamientos o viajes [53] . las nuevas pruebas diagnsticas (antgeno urinario) y los datos epidemiolgicos constituyen un aporte fundamental para el diagnstico.la etiologa bacteriana es predominante en los pases en vas de desarrollo, mientras que en nuestras latitudes la identificacin de virus es mayoritaria en los nios pequeos. no obstante, la proporcin de patgenos no identificados es a veces superior al 50%, incluso en estudios recientes y bien dirigidos [24] . la exhaustividad en la bsqueda viral pone de manifiesto coinfecciones de virus y bacterias, cuya causalidad respectiva es difcil de establecer; as por ejemplo, en alrededor de un 33% de las bronquiolitis por vrs [54] se detecta un neumococo. las vas respiratorias superiores e inferiores poseen una continuidad anatmica, una estructura mucociliar comparable y mecanismos de defensa similares, que explican la posibilidad de una coexistencia de agentes infecciosos patgenos (cuadros ii y iii).cuanto ms joven es el nio, mayores son las dificultades diagnsticas a la hora de diferenciar: bronquitis agudas, traquetis, bronquiolitis o neumopatas. se dispone de pocos datos globales [27, 55, 56] ; en cambio, estudios recientes de buena calidad aclaran la epidemiologa viral en el curso de neumopatas extrahospitalarias [7, 57] .virus segn el fenotipo de la afeccin respiratoria aguda.agente etiolgico viral las tcnicas convencionales virolgicas aplicadas en las infecciones de vas respiratorias bajas han puesto de manifiesto el papel primordial del vrs, que representa el 25% de las muestras, y despus a distancia, con prevalencias sensiblemente menores, equivalentes al 3%, los virus influenza, vpi, adv y hrv [55] . no obstante, un 60% de las muestras pareca estar libres de patgenos. veinte aos ms tarde, el desarrollo de tcnicas de biologa molecular ha permitido reducir de manera significativa el nmero de muestras negativas a un 8,5% [56] . este ltimo estudio se ha realizado con una cohorte de nios que acudi a las urgencias hospitalarias: unos fueron ingresados (263, media de edad 4 meses) y otros no (186, media de edad 7 meses); sus afecciones respiratorias diferan, con un 93,2 y un 61,8% de afecciones de vas respiratorias bajas, respectivamente (cuadro iv). su epidemiologa viral slo difiere de manera significativa para el vrs (60 y 36,6% respectivamente) y los virus influenza (7,6 y 15,1% respectivamente). se muestra una codeteccin viral en el 24,7 y el 14,5% de las muestras, respectivamente. en conjunto, los neumovirus (vrs, hmpv) representan cerca del 50% de las muestras, los picornavirus (hrv, ev) ms del 33%, y los virus influenza cerca del 10%. con tcnicas de amplificacin gnica, otros equipos confirman este amplio predominio viral, pero con una distribucin diferente, lo cual se debe en parte a que se trata de poblaciones y fenotipos clnicos diferentes, y a posibles brotes epidmicos, en especial de gripe, que hacen que la prevalencia de los virus influenza alcancen el 20 e, incluso, el 30% [27] . estas investigaciones aplicadas a una cohorte de lactantes nacidos de padres atpicos y seguidos slo de forma ambulatoria [58] , revelan que la bsqueda de virus es positiva en el 84% de los casos, de los que casi la mitad son picornavirus. en un 20%, se manifiesta una codeteccin viral sin incidencia clnica particular [59] .los estudios epidemiolgicos que se ocupan de las bronquiolitis del lactante son ms numerosos; las cifras se han modificado con los avances de las investigaciones virolgicas. la tasa de investigacin viral positiva ha pasado del 30 al 90% en 20 aos, cuando se han podido detectar virus emergentes como hmpv, covh o bovh [60] . el clsico predominio del vrs se mantiene, con una tasa que oscila entre el 50 y el 60% de las identificaciones. para la interpretacin de los datos epidemiolgicos, es necesario conocer con exactitud el fenotipo clnico estudiado. un lactante puede presentar un sndrome obstructivo con sibilancias en el curso de una bronquiolitis, pero tambin durante una exacerbacin asmtica inducida por virus. la epidemiologa viral es bsicamente diferente para los vrs y los picornavirus.la epidemiologa microbiana en las neumopatas vara en funcin de las estaciones y de las epidemias extrahospitalarias virales (vrs, hrv, influenza) o bacterianas (neumococo, mycoplasma pneumoniae). el 50% de los patgenos se detectan en 24-48 horas gracias al uso masivo de las exploraciones diagnsticas modernas; esta positividad alcanza el 80%, e incluso el 90% cuando se obtienen los resultados definitivos (cuadro v). el problema que se plantea es hasta dnde poner el lmite de esta bsqueda en la prctica ambulatoria, que se reserva para los estudios epidemiolgicos y laboratorios de investigacin. para el tratamiento de las neumopatas extrahospitalarias en la ciudad, no se requieren pruebas diagnsticas especiales; stas slo se realizan cuando fracasa la antibioticoterapia inicial. de manera global, el nico patgeno hallado en el 15-35% de las neumopatas extrahospitalarias es un virus; esta tasa es significativamente ms elevada en el lactante, con un 80% de identificacin cuadro iii. microbiologa de las infecciones respiratorias agudas.agente etiolgico microbiano epidemiologa viral comparativa entre lactantes que acuden a urgencias por afeccin del tracto respiratorio segn la necesidad de una hospitalizacin [56] . e -4-064-a-10  bronconeumopatas agudas del nio viral. el vrs representa el 50% de las etiologas en el nio menor de 2 aos, pero tan slo el 10% en los mayores de 5 aos [56] ; despus estn los hrv, vpi, adv y virus influenza (24, 10, 7 y 4%, respectivamente). en el nio mayor, se aslan con frecuencia los virus influenza y vrs en el curso de neumopatas, con una prevalencia aproximada del 6 y el 10%, respectivamente [11, 36] . gracias a los mtodos diagnsticos actuales, cada vez es ms frecuente la deteccin de al menos dos patgenos (30-40%). casi en la mitad de las muestras en las que se identifica un virus, se detecta tambin una bacteria; as mismo, en casi la mitad de los casos de neumonas por neumococo se identifica un virus concomitante [4, 57] . en resumen, entre la edad de 6 meses y 6 aos, la etiologa viral pasa del 40 al 15%, las coinfecciones virales y bacterianas del 25 al 20% y las bacterianas, del 25 al 40% [7] . la determinacin inicial de la naturaleza viral o bacteriana en una neumopata es difcil (cuadro v) [3, 7, 22-24, 57, 61-65] ; esta epidemiologa depende de las tcnicas aplicadas y la poblacin estudiada. el neumococo se observa a cualquier edad; en un 13-28% de las neumonas, haemophilus influenzae no tipificables estn implicados raramente (3-1% de los casos). en el nio mayor de 5 aos, mycoplasma pneumoniae representa entre el 20-40% de las neumonas extrahospitalarias; despus de la edad de 10 aos, se detecta cph. pneumoniae en un 5 o, incluso, un 20% de los casos [50] . las complicaciones pulmonares de la varicela se describen aparte; son infrecuentes pero estn relacionadas con el estreptococo a betahemoltico o con el estafilococo dorado. en definitiva, el neumococo representa el riesgo infeccioso ms importante y, por desgracia, su resistencia a los antibiticos se ha vuelto preocupante. este riesgo es mucho ms elevado antes de la edad de 2 aos, por las diferencias de serotipos, y tambin es mayor cuando el nio ha recibido antibiticos durante el mes precedente o si est inmunodeprimido. la mortalidad correlaciona con el estado clnico subyacente y con la gravedad inicial de la enfermedad (sepsis o insuficiencia respiratoria).queda por aclarar el papel especfico de cada uno de los patgenos. es conocido el sesgo que existe en la poblacin hospitalaria y, en particular, el de los nios que acuden a consulta por el fracaso de una antibioticoterapia inicial ambulatoria. es probable que papel de los virus influenza est infravalorado en la patogenia de las neumopatas; stos favorecen la posterior aparicin de una infeccin bacteriana, con un desfase de 2-4 semanas, por neumococo ms que por micoplasma [66] .el diagnstico de bronconeumopata requiere la combinacin de exploracin fsica, pruebas de imagen radiolgicas, de laboratorio habituales y pruebas microbiolgicas adecuadas [67] .particularidades bacteriolgicas segn el cuadro clnico, se pueden destacar algunas particularidades bacteriolgicas:  en el curso de la bronquiolitis aguda del lactante, el riesgo de infeccin bacteriana invasiva es muy bajo (1-2%); el riesgo frecuente de sobreinfeccin o coinfeccin no justifica una antibioticoterapia inicial;  las bronquitis agudas son casi siempre de origen viral; sin embargo, algunas bacterias estn implicadas; esta epidemiologa se tiene en cuenta cuando est indicada una antibioticoterapia. despus de la edad de 3 aos, mycoplasma pneumoniae provoca un cuadro de traqueobronquitis febril; en los nios de 10 aos, se pueden sospechar otras bacterias: cph. pneumoniae o bordetella pertussis, si la proteccin vacunal es insuficiente. antes de la edad de 3 aos, a veces resulta difcil diferenciar una bronquitis aguda de una neumopata; en caso de duda, se realiza una radiografa. la distincin entre colonizacin y sobreinfeccin tampoco es sencilla; a esta edad, el neumococo y haemophilus influenzae intervienen a veces en las bronquitis agudas; este dato orienta la antibioticoterapia ante un cuadro sptico o que persiste ms de 1 semana.estudios epidemiolgicos relativos a las neumopatas del nio. bronconeumopatas agudas del nio  e -4-064-a-10las clasificaciones convencionales basadas en el tipo de afeccin anatmica, radiolgica y etiopatognica se han establecido para el diagnstico positivo del tipo de afeccin de las vas respiratorias inferiores. sin embargo, una valoracin fundada en la gravedad del proceso resulta ms eficaz y sirve para orientar con rapidez la opcin teraputica. la estrategia fundamental para disminuir la morbilidad e, incluso, la mortalidad, sigue siendo el tratamiento adecuado de las neumopatas bacterianas. las bronconeumopatas del nio asocian de manera variable un sndrome infeccioso y una tos ms o menos productiva acompaada o no de dificultades respiratorias [68] .para la exploracin fsica, se debe contar con la cooperacin de los padres; se realiza con el nio desnudo, si es posible en brazos de la madre, para observarle en un primer momento (tipo de disnea, frecuencia y ritmo respiratorios, signos de dificultad respiratoria, cianosis). los organismos sanitarios internacionales han elaborado unas recomendaciones basadas en la gravedad y han establecido unos parmetros fcilmente reconocibles para detectar esos casos que necesitan exmenes complementarios, en particular la realizacin de una radiografa torcica [69] . la frecuencia respiratoria es el signo principal: en un nio menor de 1 ao, la polipnea se define por una frecuencia respiratoria de ms de 50/min; en nios de 1-5 aos, por una cifra superior a 40/min, medida durante un minuto, con el nio en calma y despus de una desinfeccin rinofarngea. la progresin de la afeccin parenquimatosa provoca una modificacin de la dinmica respiratoria con acentuacin de los esfuerzos inspiratorios; en ese momento, aparecen el tiraje y la distensin. la existencia de tiraje subcostal es un parmetro fiable de una afeccin parenquimatosa grave. las anomalas auscultatorias reflejan la afeccin baja y distinguen los estados clnicos en bronquiolitis, bronquitis o neumopata. es necesario buscar la presencia difusa o localizada de signos alveolares (estertores crepitantes), bronquiolares (estertores sibilantes) o pleurales (disminucin del murmullo vesicular y matidez).la organizacin mundial de la salud considera que la asociacin de una taquipnea con signos de tiraje tiene una sensibilidad y una especificidad del orden del 75 y el 70%, respectivamente. este criterio se ha establecido para aquellos pases que no disponen de tcnicas radiolgicas. la asociacin ms especfica de una infeccin baja es la siguiente: temperatura superior a 38,5c, frecuencia respiratoria superior a 60/min, quejido espiratorio y dificultades o rechazo para beber, sobre todo en un nio menor de 1 ao [70] . sin embargo, el mdico debe permanecer alerta porque en el nio se observan manifestaciones clnicas engaosas: dolores torcicos aislados o abdominales seudoapendiculares, fiebre aislada e incluso sepsis.al finalizar el estudio clnico inicial, pueden ser necesarias pruebas complementarias para poder establecer el diagnstico etiolgico de certeza. al mismo tiempo, debe valorarse la gravedad inicial y descartar las otras causas de dificultad respiratoria.en pediatra, no existe ningn baremo validado para evaluar la gravedad de las bronconeumopatas. sin embargo, los siguientes signos deben considerarse elementos de gravedad:  edad inferior a 6 meses;  intensidad del sndrome infeccioso;  polipnea y dificultad respiratoria intensa;  rechazo de la bebida, vmitos y diarrea;  signos de agotamiento: irregularidades respiratorias, sudoracin, taquicardia, agitacin, disminucin del grito o la tos, debilitamiento del murmullo vesicular, trastornos de la conciencia;  hipoxia que requiera una fraccin inspirada de oxgeno superior al 50%;  hipercapnia superior a 55 mmhg; una enfermedad subyacente (enfermedad respiratoria crnica, enfermedad neuromuscular, cardiopata congnita, inmunodepresin, drepanocitosis). de esta evaluacin derivan las indicaciones de hospitalizacin, que tienen en cuenta el estado general del nio, la tolerancia respiratoria, la medida de la saturacin transcutnea de oxgeno (oximetra de pulso < 94%), la medicin no invasiva de la oxigenacin arterial, la presencia de cianosis perifrica, la dificultad para alimentarse (menos de un tercio de los biberones tres veces seguidas o menos de la mitad ms de medio da), un rpido agravamiento o una resistencia teraputica inicial, dificultades de acceso a la asistencia o incompetencia psicosocial. la decisin de hospitalizacin puede basarse tambin en datos radiolgicos (neumopatas multilobares, pleuresa, etc.).no todos los cuadros de dificultad respiratoria se deben a bronconeumopatas. hay que descartar sobre todo:  la inhalacin de un cuerpo extrao;  una crisis de asma;  una obstruccin de las vas respiratorias superiores;  una insuficiencia cardaca aguda o un shock sptico;  una disnea sine materia (neurolgica);  una polipnea secundaria a una acidosis metablica (cetoacidosis diabtica, descompensacin de enfermedades hereditarias del metabolismo o farmacolgica [cido saliclico]). a la inversa, dos cuadros clnicos extrapulmonares bastante especficos de la edad peditrica deben hacer sospechar la existencia de una neumopata y realizar exmenes complementarios, en particular radiolgicos: sndrome seudomenngeo (aunque la asociacin de neumococia pulmonar y meningitis por neumomoco es posible) o seudoapendicular, porque pueden existir signos abdominales en la fosa ilaca derecha.la sensibilidad de la auscultacin para diagnosticar una neumopata es baja, ya que tan slo detecta un 33% de las neumopatas demostradas por radiologa. una radiografa torcica posee un valor predictivo positivo de alrededor del 90% y un valor predictivo negativo cercano al 100%. la radiografa torcica es un examen poco costoso y realmente importante para el diagnstico de neumopata. en un primer momento, se solicita una placa posteroanterior en inspiracin. si no revela ninguna anomala clnica, el valor predictivo negativo de ausencia de cualquier anomala radiolgica importante es muy alto [71] . su indicacin no puede ser sistemtica ante cualquier tos febril. la probabilidad de observar anomalas radiolgicas en pacientes con una auscultacin normal, sibilancias o roncus, es inferior al 10%. aparte de la polipnea, ya definida, o de una semiologa a la auscultacin con crepitaciones focales, la radiografa se realiza:  en un nio que presente factores de riesgo, si los datos clnicos son insuficientes para descartar una neumopata;  cuando existe una tos febril que persiste ms de 5 das o una fiebre superior a 38,5c durante ms de 3 das;  en un lactante de 6 meses, incluso menor de 2 aos, que presente una afeccin respiratoria baja que no corresponda a un primer episodio tpico de bronquiolitis sin signo de gravedad. a esta edad, una fiebre aislada y prolongada justifica la realizacin de una radiografa torcica;  en caso de afecciones respiratorias bajas recidivantes;  cuando se sospecha la inhalacin de un cuerpo extrao; en este caso, se realizan las placas en inspiracin y en espiracin; la endoscopia establece el diagnstico de certeza. la radiografa establece el diagnstico, aunque no especifica la etiologa; permite controlar la evolucin a corto plazo y descartar complicaciones: sobreinfecciones, trastornos de ventilacin, neumotrax o neumomediastino, pleuresa purulenta, empiema pleural, absceso pulmonar. la presencia de un broncograma areo es habitual en una neumona franca lobar, y su ausencia debe plantear dudas sobre el diagnstico. se recomienda el control de la regresin total de las anomalas radiolgicas al final del tratamiento, para comprobar la ausencia de una afeccin preexistente o la existencia de secuelas. se debe esperar un plazo mnimo de 3-4 semanas despus de finalizar el tratamiento, por la disociacin radioclnica. .la ecografa permite confirmar un derrame, diagnosticar un tabicamiento o guiar una puncin mediante localizacin de la bolsa lquida ms accesible.la tomografa computarizada (tc) torcica est indicada para el diagnstico y evaluacin de posibles secuelas: bronquiectasia, bronquiolitis constrictiva localizada o difusa, sndrome de mcleod [72] . a veces se detecta una malformacin congnita asociada. esta asociacin puede ser fortuita o causal de la sobreinfeccin broncopulmonar (malformacin qustica, adenomatoide pulmonar, quiste broncognico, tumor bronquial, etc.).al finalizar el estudio inicial, pueden ser necesarios varios exmenes para poder establecer el diagnstico etiolgico.una leucocitosis (>15.000/mm 3 ) con predominio de polimorfonucleares (>10.000/mm 3 ) y una protena c reactiva (crp) francamente elevada (>60 mg/l) es compatible con una etiologa bacteriana, pero tambin se puede observar en el curso de neumopatas virales. la crp, por s sola, no permite diferenciar el origen bacteriano o viral de una neumopata extrahospitalaria; en cambio, su valor predictivo negativo es bueno [73] . la velocidad de sedimentacin es engaosa en el nio.la procalcitonina suele estar elevada en caso de infeccin neumoccica [74] . una elevacin de esta concentracin superior a 2 g/l es un buen indicador de neumococo, incluso en caso de coinfeccin viral; una concentracin inferior a 1 g/l es ms favorable a una etiologa exclusivamente viral. entre estos dos valores, existe un margen cuya interpretacin es delicada [75] .la distincin entre las infecciones bacterianas y virales sigue siendo el objetivo de la investigacin, para discriminar mejor la pertinencia del uso de los antibiticos. nuevos marcadores se evalan con regularidad. la medida de la expresin de los receptores de complemento de los neutrfilos, en particular cr1 (cd35) parece prometedora y, asociando un baremo clnico (clinical infection score), se logra un resultado analtico de una sensibilidad del 98% y una especificidad del 97% [76] .en el nio, los mtodos serolgicos slo son tiles para identificar la inmunoglobulina m (igm) anti-mycoplasma pneumoniae y anti-cph. pneumoniae que, cuando se obtienen con rapidez, facilitan la decisin teraputica inicial.la deteccin de los antgenos en la orina es un examen clave en las legionelosis. en cambio, su sensibilidad y especificidad para el neumococo [77] son mediocres.las muestras bacteriolgicas nasofarngeas slo pueden demostrar la presencia de flora comensal. la realizacin, de forma ambulatoria, del examen citobacteriolgico de los esputos es difcil, incluso despus de una sesin de kinesiterapia. se considera que una bacteria es responsable de la infeccin cuando se encuentran en al menos 10 6 unidades formadoras de colonias (cfu)/ml en una muestra rica en leucocitos (>25/campo) sin contaminacin orofarngea (<10 clulas epiteliales/campo). su valor predictivo negativo es bueno. una concentracin ms baja es significativa para algunas bacterias que no forman parte de la flora comensal como pseudomonas aeruginosa o mycobacterium tuberculosis. otra forma de recoger secreciones bronquiales es mediante expectoracin inducida por nebulizacin de una solucin salina hipertnica, que a veces se tolera mal; la fibroendoscopia bronquial asociada a lavado broncoalveolar se reserva para las neumopatas graves o del inmunodeprimido. en la prctica clnica [78] , no es recomendable una toma directa de muestra intrapulmonar, por la agresividad que implica. cuando un derrame es superior a 1 cm, se realiza de manera sistemtica una puncin pleural para su estudio microbiolgico. las pcr bacterianas especficas, en particular las del neumococo, son aplicables en estas muestras diana.el carcter intracelular obligatorio de los virus hace que las muestras tengan que contener clulas. la fragilidad de la mayora de los virus impone el uso de medios de transporte especficos cuando se va a realizar una tcnica de cultivo. la calidad de la muestra es fundamental para poder establecer el diagnstico. as mismo, el transporte y el tratamiento tcnico deben ser rpidos, sobre todo cuando se trata de tcnicas cuantitativas o semicuantitativas, debido a la rapidez de la degradacin de los cidos nucleicos. las aspiraciones nasofarngeas siguen siendo la tcnica ms eficaz para poder diagnosticar los principales patgenos virales. los mtodos tradicionales para el diagnstico virolgico incluyen la bsqueda antignica directa por inmunofluorescencia (if) o prueba inmunoenzimtica (eia) y el aislamiento en cultivo, el cual es la tcnica de referencia, pero es larga y se reserva para los laboratorios de investigacin. cualquier laboratorio de anlisis puede, en cambio, realizar las tcnicas de if o eia, incluso a domicilio; poseen una sensibilidad que suele ser inferior a la del cultivo para los virus neumtropos ms frecuentes (80%), pero tambin permiten detectar una fraccin de muestras falsamente negativas en el cultivo. la especificidad es del 100% para los virus que se investigan; la etiologa se establece porque el virus identificado es replicativo (vrs, vpi 1-2-3, virus influenza a y b, adv, hmpv, algunos covh). los hrv, principales virus responsables de las infecciones de las vas respiratorias, slo se pueden identificar por cultivo viral o mediante tcnicas de biologa molecular. los resultados de diversos equipos que utilizan tcnicas de pcr-transcripcin inversa (rt-pcr), muestran que los mtodos moleculares detectan ms muestras positivas que los mtodos tradicionales. se est trabajando para ampliar el nmero de virus identificables por rt-pcr multiplex, as como para descubrir nuevos virus como algunos covh y bovh, responsables de afecciones respiratorias en el nio. como conclusin, la mejor forma de progresar hoy da en el diagnstico de las enfermedades respiratorias infantiles, es el uso combinado de la if y de la rt-pcr multiplex, que garantiza rapidez, control de los costes y una elevada tasa de deteccin de virus respiratorios. el diagnstico viral precoz permite reducir el tiempo de hospitalizacin y la administracin de una antibioticoterapia; en el caso del vrs, este tratamiento se reduce en un 52%, y los costes de hospitalizacin en un 26% [79] . es importante sealar que la prevalencia extrahospitalaria de la enfermedad respiratoria tiene un impacto mayor sobre el valor predictivo de las pruebas de diagnstico rpido. cuando la tasa de prevalencia es baja, del 1 o 2%, como la observada al comienzo o al final de la epidemia invernal por vrs o influenza, el valor predictivo positivo es tan slo del 15%, lo que significa que una prueba positiva es con ms frecuencia un falso positivo que un verdadero positivo. estas pruebas, por tanto, slo se deben utilizar en plena epidemia.en el curso de las neumopatas, el hemocultivo es el examen de referencia, pero el rendimiento es especialmente bajo en el nio, de un 10% como mximo, en las neumonas por neumococo. esto se debe a que su realizacin no es sistemtica, se limita al sndrome febril franco y mal tolerado, su repeticin en un mismo enfermo es limitada y, por ltimo, el volumen de la muestra es escaso y no permite que el cultivo sea satisfactorio desde un punto de vista tcnico, por la pequea carga microbiana.en el mbito de la urgencia, no se dispone de ningn indicador, ni clnico ni biolgico, que permita orientar la etiologa. los exmenes microbiolgicos dan resultados tardos bronconeumopatas agudas del nio  e -4-064-a-10 y su interpretacin es delicada. de este modo, sin un diagnstico etiolgico preciso, el tratamiento es casi siempre emprico (fig. 1) .la conducta teraputica puede resumirse en: mantener un buen estado nutricional y una hidratacin adecuada, unas vas respiratorias superiores e inferiores libres, con oxigenoterapia sustitutiva en algunos casos, control del equilibrio trmico e inicio de antibioticoterapia cuando el cuadro sugiere una neumopata bacteriana. despus se plantean tres cuestiones: cul es la gravedad de la enfermedad, cul es el estado subyacente y si hay que tratar al paciente en su domicilio o habr que hospitalizarlo.adems de los principios no especficos descritos, entre los que la desobstruccin de las vas respiratorias superiores debe ser cuidadosa, el uso de la kinesiterapia respiratoria es muy amplio en francia. a juzgar por las referencias anglosajonas, se trata de una excepcin cultural francesa. debe estar basada en la observacin documentada de una franca mejora clnica durante la fase obstructiva e hipersecretora de la enfermedad. la tcnica ms til es la de las maniobras de espiracin pasivas y lentas asociadas a una tos provocada [80] . dicha prescripcin no debe ser sistemtica y depender del estado clnico del nio. otros elementos intervienen en el tratamiento sintomtico; una posicin proclive dorsal a 30, con cuidado de que la cabeza no est hiperflexionada, y un control de la calidad medioambiental, evitando cualquier exposicin al humo de tabaco.cuanto ms joven es el nio, menos tiles son los tratamientos farmacolgicos y menos han sido evaluados; esto se aplica a los broncodilatadores y corticoides sistmicos o inhalados. su prescripcin a veces est relacionada con criterios de experiencias locales, pero su evaluacin sistemtica es imperativa; su eficacia podra ser mayor en un lactante que en el futuro ser asmtico y que tiene una primera crisis inducida por un virus.la antibioticoterapia en ningn caso es sistemtica. se puede discutir su indicacin en los casos de infeccin focal (otitis media aguda purulenta, foco pulmonar radiolgico) o en aquellos en los que se sospecha una sobreinfeccin bacteriana por la persistencia de una fiebre alta y por la elevacin de los marcadores de la infeccin. los grmenes ms frecuentes en estos casos, en los que se recomienda la asociacin de amoxicilina-cido clavulnico son haemophilus influenzae, streptococcus pneumoniae, moraxella catarrhalis. a veces, hay que sospechar la presencia de estafilococo.el paso a reanimacin y la decisin de aplicar respiracin asistida siguen estando mal codificados. la existencia de normocapnia o, incluso, hipercapnia es predictiva de apneas. los antivirales, como la ribavarina, ofrecen resultados decepcionantes y su uso se reserva para una inmunodepresin [81] .aparte de las medidas ambientales (transmisin a travs de las manos y por el aire), el tratamiento preventivo es reducido. la vacunacin antigripal no puede realizarse antes de los 6 meses, pero la vacunacin del personal tratante e incluso de los padres permite evitar casos nosocomiales. los anticuerpos monoclonales anti-vrs tienen indicaciones limitadas a los grandes prematuros, a los nios menores de 2 aos portadores de una displasia broncopulmonar que necesitan un tratamiento y a las cardiopatas graves que estn a la espera de una correccin quirrgica.como la etiologa viral es la predominante, ningn estudio aleatorizado ha podido mostrar el beneficio de una antibioticoterapia ni en el nio ni en el adulto, aunque se identifiquen mycoplasma pneumoniae o cph. pneumoniae. el tratamiento de la tos es difcil porque hay que respetarla lo ms posible. no existen argumentos a favor de los broncodilatadores inhalados, prescritos con tanta frecuencia; sin embargo, la obstruccin respiratoria debida a la inflamacin, el edema y la broncocontriccin pueden hacer recomendable su uso en pacientes que presentan una hiperreactividad bronquial [82] . los tratamientos antitusgenos y el uso de mucolticos no gozan de ninguna recomendacin por la falta de estudios consistentes. la kinesiterapia respiratoria se utiliza a veces durante la fase hipersecretora, aunque tampoco existe un argumento fctico.no debe olvidarse la posibilidad de que se trate de bordetella pertussis cuando se trata de nios de alrededor de diez aos que no han sido vacunados o lo han sido de forma incorrecta.en la prctica ambulatoria corriente, la falta de indicadores sensibles y especficos clnicos, radiolgicos, biolgicos y microbiolgicos que permitan definir el agente infeccioso responsable, justifica la decisin rpida y fcil de administrar una antibioticoterapia probabilstica (fig. 2) . la eleccin de la antibioticoterapia inicial depende de la edad y de la epidemiologa nacional, que seala las dos bacterias causales ms frecuentes: el neumococo y el micoplasma; se opta, por tanto, por la amoxicilina durante 10 das o los macrlidos durante 14 das. entre los macrlidos, unos nuevos productos de la clase de los azalidos presentan semividas prolongadas y concentraciones elevadas en las secreciones respiratorias, por lo que cabe esperar unos tiempos de prescripcin ms breves [83] . la azitromicina pertenece a esta clase teraputica. la agence franaise de scurit sanitaire des aliments et produits de sant (afssaps) slo la ha validado en el nio en caso de anginas estreptoccicas, cuando los betalactmicos estn contraindicados. otros autores han establecido una correlacin entre el uso de esta clase de antibiticos y la emergencia de neumococos resistentes [84] . hay que recordar que, con independencia de la edad, el riesgo infeccioso vital sigue ligado al neumococo; as, la amoxicilina (100 mg/kg/da, repartida en tres tomas cada 8 horas, sin sobrepasar 3 g/da) sigue siendo el tratamiento de primera lnea. este tratamiento suele ser ambulatorio y se administra por va oral [85] . si existe una alergia comprobada a los betalactmicos, se debe consultar con un especialista. las neumonas por haemophilus influenzae b son excepcionales, salvo en situaciones particulares (mucoviscidosis, broncopata crnica) o en un nio que no tiene cobertura vacunal; esta ltima circunstancia requiere la asociacin de amoxicilinacido clavulnico (80 mg/kg/da de amoxicilina). en el paciente sano, es excepcional que haemophilus influenzae no tipificables sean la causa de neumopatas graves, mientras que son los primeros responsables de otitis medias agudas.en el nio mayor de 3 aos, la amoxicilina es el tratamiento de referencia. sin embargo, una orientacin anamnsica clnica o radiolgica hacia mycoplasma pneumoniae, o en los nios de alrededor de diez aos hacia cph. pneumoniae, podra conducir a un tratamiento inicial con un macrlido.en todos los casos, es indispensable realizar una nueva valoracin clnica despus de 48-72 horas, con independencia de la decisin teraputica tomada. el criterio principal es la fiebre y no la tos; puede ser til realizar adems una crp o, incluso, una prueba de procalcitonina (pct), e interpretar los resultados en funcin de los datos iniciales. en una neumona por neumococo, la fiebre suele desaparecer en menos de 24 horas. la tos se mantiene durante una semana aproximadamente, pero puede durar ms cuando la infeccin est producida por grmenes atpicos. si no hay mejora y, por tanto, persiste la fiebre, habr que reconsiderar el diagnstico y buscar una posible complicacin mediante una radiografa torcica (lesiones parenquimatosas extensas, derrame pleural, cuerpo extrao, etc.). el fracaso del tratamiento con amoxicilina, cuando no existen complicaciones, evoca la posibilidad de una bacteria atpica, que requiere la prescripcin de macrlidos en monoterapia. es necesario hacer una revaloracin 3 das ms tarde. la existencia de complicaciones o un nuevo fracaso despus de haber cambiado de antibitico hacen necesaria la consulta con un especialista y, casi siempre, la hospitalizacin. aunque no existen recomendaciones oficiales formales, se aconseja realizar una radiografa torcica de control para comprobar la curacin, transcurrido un tiempo despus del tratamiento.nuevas molculas parecidas a los macrlidos, activas frente al neumococo y micoplasma, podran modificar la antibioticoterapia de primera lnea. la vacunacin antineumoccica de los lactantes ha mostrado una gran eficacia sobre las bacteriemias y meningitis por neumococo. en la actualidad, esta vacuna se limita a siete serotipos y, por desgracia, serotipos no incluidos en la vacuna pueden provocar infecciones respiratorias. una solucin sera ampliar su espectro aadiendo valencias, pero con un control microbiolgico para evaluar su repercusin sobre la epidemiologa extrahospitalaria.las pleuroneumopatas se definen por la asociacin de una infeccin pulmonar y un derrame pleural. los grmenes causales ms frecuentes son streptococcus pneumoniae, haemophilus influenzae y staphylococcus aureus; excepcionalmente tambin mycoplasma pneumoniae. el tratamiento se basa en la antibioticoterapia intravenosa (asociacin vancomicina-cefotaxima o cefotaxima-rifampicina), la evacuacin del derrame, primero con fines diagnsticos y despus en funcin de la intolerancia respiratoria (punciones repetidas, drenaje torcico, decorticacin quirrgica). algunos equipos recomiendan una corticoterapia despus del control de la infeccin, pero ningn estudio ha validado esta ltima medida. a veces los cuadros son impresionantes, pero se debe ser lo menos invasivo posible, porque la recuperacin suele ser completa. desde hace una dcada, se observa un recrudecimiento de las pleuroneumopatas en el nio, con aumento de un factor 4-5; las explicaciones son variadas: cofactor viral, en particular el virus influenza, sobreprescripcin de antiinflamatorios no esteroideos, emergencia de algunas cepas virulentas de neumococo.estudios epidemiolgicos britnicos refieren una disminucin de la funcin respiratoria en el adulto que ha padecido una neumona o una bronquitis antes de los 2 aos de edad. otros destacan que el perodo crtico se puede prolongar hasta los 7 aos y que las secuelas funcionales tardas son independientes de factores como: tabaquismo pasivo, estatura familiar, peso al nacer, contaminacin del aire en interiores. esta reduccin de la funcin respiratoria es probablemente el reflejo de la afeccin inicial y de una aceleracin de la decadencia fisiolgica en la edad adulta [86, 87] . la responsabilidad de estas infecciones respiratorias precoces en la aparicin de bronquitis crnica en el adulto parece tener una relacin de causalidad ms fuerte que el tabaquismo [88] .en el lactante, las atelectasias del lbulo superior derecho y las del lbulo medio son una complicacin clsica de la afeccin respiratoria viral baja. en el nio de ms edad, el lbulo inferior izquierdo es el ms afectado. la atelectasia en s misma da pocos sntomas, an cuando es extensa. algunas particularidades anatmicas favorecen la afectacin del lbulo medio (disminucin de la ventilacin colateral, implantacin del bronquio); sta se traduce por una atelectasia crnica que define el sndrome del lbulo medio. si la atelectasia es lobar, el territorio afectado aparece bien delimitado por hendiduras arciformes y cncavas; el territorio pulmonar se muestra retrado. la atelectasia del lbulo medio y de la lngula se ven mejor en la placa lateral, como una opacidad triangular de vrtice hiliar. una atelectasia extrema de un lbulo superior o inferior puede pasar totalmente desapercibida si estas zonas estn pegadas al mediastino. en otros casos, las atelectasias tan slo afectan a pequeos territorios pulmonares, y se traducen por opacidades bien delimitadas, lineales y, a menudo, prximas a una hendidura.las bronquiectasias en el nio siguen siendo una enfermedad actual y se sospechan ante una tos crnica, con o sin expectoracin, o bronquitis recidivantes asociadas a anomalas radiolgicas ms o menos marcadas. los estudios epidemiolgicos que se refieren a las dilataciones bronquiales encuentran antecedentes de neumopatas infecciosas en ms del 50% de los casos; las infecciones adenovirales son las ms frecuentes [89] . se sospecha la existencia de bronquiectasias cuando se observan imgenes claras en el seno del territorio retrado. la exploracin mediante tc torcica con cortes milimtricos permite demostrarla. los exmenes isotpicos de perfusin y ventilacin aportan datos sobre el valor funcional. debe discutirse la indicacin de su reseccin quirrgica, sobre todo en las formas localizadas, para evitar que las lesiones se extiendan al resto del parnquima pulmonar.a diferencia de lo que ocurre en el adulto, la bronquiolitis constrictiva postinfecciosa aparece incluso en el nio inmunocompetente. el cuadro clnico suele ser seudogripal y con frecuencia grave, puesto que entre un t33-50% de los casos necesita ventilacin mecnica [90, 91] . a veces, despus de una mejora inicial, se manifiesta la semiologa de la bronquiolitis obliterante, la cual se caracteriza por una disociacin entre signos funcionales importantes y una exploracin fsica pobre. la disnea de esfuerzo y la tos son los signos de alarma ms importantes. la polipnea es caracterstica y dificulta la alimentacin; su agravacin puede conducir a oxigenodependencia. la auscultacin puede ser normal o revelar una disminucin del murmullo vesicular; lo ms frecuente es que, despus de una bronquiolitis aguda y a pesar del tratamiento, la persistencia de crepitaciones localizadas o difusas alerte al mdico. tambin pueden existir otros signos clnicos: distensin torcica, hipocratismo o acropaquia digital, fractura de la curva ponderoestatural. la evolucin a largo plazo es poco previsible; puede ser prolongada, lentamente favorable, pero tambin puede conducir a una insuficiencia respiratoria crnica letal.la radiografa torcica durante el episodio inicial suele ser diferente de la de una bronquiolitis viral banal. nunca es normal; todas las observaciones sealan engrosamientos peribronquiales y una hiperinsuflacin. en alrededor del 50% de los casos existe una atelectasia y, en el 66%, opacidades que a veces son verdaderos sndromes de condensacin. en el estadio de la bronquiolitis constrictiva, persisten los engrosamientos peribronquiales, atelectasias frecuentes, un aumento de la transparencia pulmonar e hiperinsuflacin. slo los que tienen signos clnicos persistentes a largo plazo presentan opacidades pulmonares confluentes (el 66%), una dilatacin de los bronquios (un 33%) y zonas hiperclaras (el 50%) [91] . el sndrome del pulmn pequeo hiperclaro o de swyer-james-mcleod es una forma particular de la bronquiolitis constrictiva. su caracterstica patognica es que el parnquima pulmonar dependiente de la va respiratoria lesionada recibe algn flujo de gas por las colaterales. la involucin progresiva del territorio pulmonar afectado es secundaria a la disminucin del flujo sanguneo inducido. el resultado es una hipoplasia del parnquima y las arterias pulmonares, tanto en tamao como en nmero. el signo clave es el atrapamiento de aire que se ve con claridad en las placas radiolgicas en espiracin. sin embargo, estas anomalas no son especficas y las imgenes de la tc de alta resolucin han mejorado la sensibilidad y la precocidad del diagnstico. la obstruccin de los bronquiolos se puede detectar de forma indirecta por tc, ya que la hipoventilacin regional conduce a una reduccin de la perfusin que a su vez se detecta por imgenes de atenuacin en mosaico del parnquima pulmonar.los nios portadores de dficit inmunitarios primitivos o secundarios suelen tener al principio, en el curso de afecciones infecciosas, signos respiratorios moderados, como por ejemplo tos seca y persistente. la flora microbiana responsable incluye la ya descrita en el nio inmunocompetente y organismos que suelen ser poco virulentos en el husped normal. se debe buscar pneumocystis jirovecii, micobacterias, nocardia, legionella, hongos y virus, en especial cmv, adv, vzv y virus del sarampin [92] .los nios drepanocticos presentan a menudo infecciones que a veces son de evolucin fatal, por la frecuencia del neumococo. se calcula que este factor de riesgo, en relacin con un nio sano, es de 30 para las septicemias y de 300 para las meningitis bacterianas. respecto a las neumonas bacterianas, se calcula que este riesgo adicional es de 4 despus de la edad de 4 aos [93] .casi todas las infecciones respiratorias se deben a un reducido nmero de patgenos. sin embargo, el aumento de desplazamientos a lugares lejanos incrementa el riesgo de entrar en contacto con grmenes inusuales. por sus implicaciones teraputicas, el hecho de que sean poco habituales no debe ocultar la importancia de su diagnstico. por otro lado, los pacientes sometidos a terapias inmunosupresoras agresivas tambin pueden desarrollar infecciones por microorganismos a priori no patgenos.el nmero de microbios exticos que causan afecciones respiratorias es enorme, por lo que resulta imposible describir sus ataques especficos (cuadro vi) en este artculo. una investigacin cuidadosa sobre las zonas geogrficas frecuentadas antes de la aparicin de los sntomas respiratorios facilita un primer enfoque etiolgico [94] .alrededor de un 33% de las muertes que se producen en el mundo sucede durante el perodo neonatal. los pases en vas de desarrollo representan el 96% de esta cifra, y el 10% de los fallecimientos se debera a neumonas neonatales [95] . en general, la infeccin pulmonar forma parte de una infeccin sistmica. puede declararse rpidamente, durante la primera semana despus del nacimiento, o ms tarde, en el curso de las 3 semanas siguientes. la epidemiologa depende del entorno del periparto (fiebre materna, inhalacin meconial, rotura prolongada de las membranas, etc.), del trmino y de las comorbilidades.las formas precoces son sobre todo de origen bacteriano: estreptococo del grupo b, listeriosis, escherichia coli. a veces se identifican otras bacterias: proteus, enterobacter, klebsiella, estreptococos no b. los micoplasmas genitales, ureaplasma urealyticum y ureaplasma parvum, a pesar de su extrema frecuencia, son excepcionales en la etiologa de las neumopatas agudas. la principal infeccin viral se debe al virus del herpes simple.las neumopatas neonatales tardas son causadas por grmenes de las neumopatas extrahospitalarias, por los de las infecciones neonatales precoces (algunos estreptococos b) y, de manera ms especfica, por chlamydia trachomatis, que conduce al desarrollo de una neumopata disneizante no febril, precedida por una conjuntivitis caracterstica, con infiltrados alveolointersticiales difusos en la radiografa torcica. el tratamiento antibitico se basa en los macrlidos. los virus estn representados por el cmv, que puede proceder de una contaminacin maternofetal o, a veces, a partir de la leche materna. las infecciones pulmonares extrahospitalarias estn causadas en su mayora por viriasis respiratorias, sobre todo por el vrs y el vpi 3.a pesar de los datos epidemiolgicos expuestos, es necesario subrayar la escasez de estudios sobre este tema, a menudo realizados por laboratorios de investigacin durante la puesta a punto mtodos experimentales. a esta escasez de estudios se suma el tamao reducido de las poblaciones incluidas, a pesar de la importante carga sanitaria que representan las infecciones de las vas respiratorias bajas infantiles. segn un estudio de la direction de la recherche, des tudes, de l'valuation et des statistiques (drees), consagrada a la tipologa de las consultas de los mdicos generales, los diagnsticos relacionados con las afecciones de las vas respiratorias altas y bajas representan ms " puntos importantes  las bronconeumopatas del nio son fundamentalmente virales; su prevalencia es mxima antes de la edad de 5 aos. no toda infeccin de las vas respiratorias es una neumopata y puede tratarse de forma ambulatoria. sin embargo, en algunos casos, por una dificultad respiratoria o por complicaciones relacionadas con el agente infeccioso o las caractersticas del paciente, pueden volverse peligrosas y requerir un tratamiento urgente. al mismo tiempo que se establece el diagnstico positivo de infeccin aguda de las vas respiratorias, se debe evaluar su gravedad.  ni los elementos clnicos, ni los radiolgicos o biolgicos permiten predecir con suficiente exactitud cul es el agente etiolgico responsable. sin embargo, la radiografa de trax es fundamental para el diagnstico de las neumopatas, cuya semiologa clnica suele ser incompleta; las consecuencias teraputicas dependen de todas estas consideraciones.  la aplicacin de tcnicas diagnsticas experimentales asociadas a mtodos microbiolgicos convencionales en las infecciones de vas respiratorias, permite identificar un patgeno en el 80% e, incluso, el 90% de las muestras respiratorias. en la ltima dcada se han desarrollado mtodos de diagnstico virolgico rpido para la prctica diaria. queda por precisar qu impacto debe tener sobre la decisin mdica en la prctica ambulatoria.  los virus emergentes, coronavirus, metaneumovirus o bocavirus, ocupan un lugar cada vez ms importante debido a los mtodos moleculares disponibles; sus consecuencias a largo plazo no han sido todava precisadas. ante el riesgo de que se trate de un neumococo, est justificada una antibioticoterapia probabilstica precoz. del 60% de las sesiones dedicadas a los nios [96] . es importante iniciar estudios epidemiolgicos especficos de zonas geogrficas representativas de la poblacin tratada. as, es arbitrario generalizar los datos procedentes de pases diferentes, aunque se hayan tenido en cuenta las diferencias socioeconmicas, sanitarias e, incluso, conductuales.el autor de este artculo declara no tener ningn conflicto de intereses en relacin con los datos publicados en este artculo. bibliografaen las ltimas dos dcadas, el trasplante de rgano slido (tos) se ha convertido en el tratamiento de eleccin de muchas enfermedades que previamente llevaban a la muerte de los pacientes a travs del fallo de uno o ms rganos vitales. adems del refinamiento de las diferentes tcnicas quirrgicas y anestsicas, no cabe duda de que han sido los progresos en el tratamiento inmunosupresor lo que ha permitido este gran avance mdico. las infecciones son las complicaciones ms frecuentes del paciente trasplantado 1 y la principal causa de muerte durante el primer ao postrasplante. los pacientes receptores de tos se encuentran especialmente predispuestos a sufrir infecciones clnicas por virus, tanto comunes como oportunistas 2 , que pueden adquirir del rgano donante (infecciones derivadas del donante) o de la comunidad o mediante la reactivacin de los virus latentes endgenos propios. aparte de los efectos nocivos directos 3 de muchos de estos virus, debe destacarse el comportamiento inmunomodulador e inflamatorio de algunos, capaces de producir efectos indirectos de gran importancia 4 , como rechazo agudo o crnico del injerto, o favorecer otras infecciones oportunistas.la extensa familia de los virus herpes y muy notablemente el citomegalovirus (cmv) y el virus de epstein-barr (veb) se encuentran entre los patgenos virales oportunistas ms frecuentes causantes de infeccin en los pacientes con tos [5] [6] [7] . les siguen de cerca en frecuencia e importancia el virus del herpes simple (vhs), el virus de la varicela-zoster (vvz) y el virus del herpes humano tipo 6 (vhh-6) con los sndromes infecciosos habitualmente causados por ellos. en las ltimas dos dcadas se han aadido dos nuevos tipos de virus herpes 8 por otro lado, no puede olvidarse la relevancia en determinados tipos de tos, como el trasplante heptico, de los virus hepatotropos, como el virus de la hepatitis b (vhb) y el virus de la hepatitis c (vhc), capaces de condicionar el resultado del propio trasplante.entre los virus comunitarios, prcticamente cualquiera de ellos puede causar infecciones en pacientes con tos, si bien cabe destacar por su relevancia en los ltimos tiempos 9 virus respiratorios como el virus respiratorio sincitial (vrs), virus influenza y parainfluenza, metapneumovirus (mpv) y bocavirus; virus neurotropos como el virus de la coriomeningitis linfocitaria (vcml), el virus del nilo oeste (vno) y el virus de la rabia, as como los virus del sarampin, las paperas, coronavirus y rotavirus.las infecciones virales en pacientes sometidos a tos se encuentran condicionadas por, al menos, tres grupos de factores modificadores de su frecuencia, momento y forma de presentacin clnica, como son: el rgano trasplantado, la modalidad y tcnica quirrgica del trasplante y el protocolo de inmunosupresin utilizado 10 .  la relacin entre el estado serolgico 11 del donante y del receptor del trasplante (estado d/r) 12 .  las medidas de prevencin elegidas para evitar el desarrollo de enfermedad viral, profilaxis universal, profilaxis selectiva adaptada al riesgo, profilaxis prolongada, profilaxis diferida en su inicio o terapia anticipada [13] [14] [15] .las infecciones virales, al igual que las causadas por otros microorganismos, siguen en el tos un patrn cronolgico de presentacin muy definido que se distribuye en periodos bien determinados ( fig. 1 ), los cuales conforman una patocrona concreta 16 : el primer periodo se extiende durante las primeras 4 semanas tras el acto quirrgico. aqu el riesgo de infeccin es muy alto, principalmente por bacterias nosocomiales y en menor medida por hongos (candida y aspergillus), con clnica similar a las de otros pacientes posquirrgicos. las infecciones virales son infrecuentes en esta fase.  el segundo periodo ocupa desde el final del postoperatorio hasta el sexto mes. el riesgo de infeccin es menor y los microorganismos infecciosos suelen ser oportunistas, incluidos ya muchos de los virus antes comentados.  en el tercer periodo, iniciado a partir del sexto mes tras el trasplante, el riesgo de infeccin disminuye de manera notable y las infecciones estn producidas habitualmente por microorganismos extrahospitalarios. una minora de pacientes en los que el rgano trasplantado no evoluciona correctamente pueden padecer durante este periodo infecciones ms caractersticas de alguno de los dos periodos precedentes.tanto los virus comunes como los oportunistas son capaces de causar en el tos una variedad extensa de sndromes infecciosos con comportamiento clnico muy diferente. desde cuadros clnicos poco expresivos u oligosintomticos, con presencia de tan slo fiebre y viremia detectable, hasta procesos de enorme gravedad, bien por grave dao estructural y funcional del rgano trasplantado (ms predispuesto a la infeccin y a una mayor lesin) o de otros rganos diana (por especial tropismo de algunos virus), bien por el carcter de enfermedad diseminada y multisistmica que en algunos puede llegar a desarrollarse. puede destacarse la simple infeccin por cmv con fiebre y citomegaloviremia, pero tambin enfermedad grave de rgano especfico 17 como enterocolitis (hemorrgica en ocasiones), neumona (llegando a un patrn alveolointersticial bilateral con insuficiencia respiratoria grave o sndrome de distrs respiratorio del adulto [sdra]), hepatitis, retinitis y encefalitis. muy similar comportamiento pueden adoptar otros virus de la familia herpes, como el vhs, el vvz y el vhh-6 18 , causando enfermedad exantemtica mucocutnea ms o menos extensa y caracterstica (vesicular o no vesicular), con la particularidad de poder extenderse o afectar a otros rganos. son especialmente graves las hepatitis, neumonitis, afecciones del tracto digestivo (esofagitis y colitis) y, sobre todo, las formas neurooftalmolgicas de meningoencefalitis, encefalomielitis y retinitis. afortunadamente, esta familia de virus es susceptible de tratamiento con agentes antivirales especficos de eficacia demostrada 19 . en este contexto, el veb puede causar varios tipos de sndromes infecciosos muy distintos (tabla 1), aunque por su repercusin clnica y su exclusivo manejo, cobra especial importancia la enfermedad linfoproliferativa postrasplante (elpt) 20, 21 .los poliomavirus producen una plyade de entidades clnicas relevantes dependientes de su tropismo e invasividad, dando lugar a fenmenos de desmielinizacin severos como la leucoencefalopata multifocal progresiva (lmp) en el caso del jcv y una serie de procesos variados en el caso del bkv 22,23 , como son la nefropata intersticial del injerto (en el trasplante renal) con riesgo de prdida del rgano trasplantado, la estenosis ureteral, la cistitis hemorrgica, la meningoencefalitis o el carcinoma urotelial (tabla 2). una especial atraccin manifiesta el eritrovirus b19 por los precursores hematopoyticos, sobre todo de serie roja, pudiendo causar anemias aplsicas y pancitopenias graves y refractarias 24 , adems de inducir artritis, exantemas y riesgo de producir enfermedad grave de rgano.tanto las hepatitis de novo como las reactivaciones, reinfecciones o recurrencias por los vhb y vhc pueden causar serios inconvenientes en los pacientes con tos e influir en el pronstico y el resultado del trasplante, especialmente en los trasplantados hepticos. a diferencia de la recurrencia del vhb, la cual se contiene eficazmente con inmunoglobulinas especficas y antivirales, no se dispone de una profilaxis efectiva frente a la hepatitis c, que se hace recurrente de manera casi segura. la evolucin postrasplante depende de la prevencin de la reinfeccin del rgano trasplantado 25 , limitada por diversos factores del husped 26 y por la toxicidad de estos antivirales contra el vhc, incluidos los interferones pegilados 27 . una proporcin sustancial de pacientes infectados por el vhc sufren enfermedad heptica terminal recurrente del aloinjerto heptico que conduce a disminucin en la supervivencia del injerto, aumento en la necesidad de retrasplante heptico y, finalmente, reduccin en la supervivencia del paciente 28 . estos tabla 1 tratamiento de las infecciones por virus de la familia herpes y sus diferentes entidades en pacientes trasplantados. cuando se produce fallo teraputico con ganciclovir y el foscarnet causa efectos adversos graves, no es bien tolerado o no alcanza suficiente respuesta. antes de cada administracin, se debe determinar la creatinina en suero y las protenas en orina y administrar el cidofovir con probenecid por va oral y solucin salina intravenosa como prehidratacin. c la utilizacin conjunta de ganciclovir e inmunoglobulina se ha demostrado eficaz en el trasplante de progenitores hematopoyticos; la mayor parte de los grupos de tos extrapolan los resultados a sus pacientes, aunque no existe evidencia definitiva al respecto.hechos an han cobrado ms importancia actualmente, desde que a principios de la dcada comenzaron a realizarse trasplantes hepticos en pacientes coinfectados por el vih y el vhc 29-31 , dado que estos enfermos tienen una tasa de progresin a fibrosis ms rpida que condiciona mayor frecuencia de aparicin de cirrosis, enfermedad heptica terminal y carcinoma hepatocelular.el tratamiento de las infecciones por virus en el tos con frmacos antivirales efectivos debe ser complementado con la reduccin en el grado y la intensidad de la inmunosupresin (clave cuando constituye la nica estrategia efectiva para el manejo de las infecciones por virus). la prevencin de las infecciones virales en el tos es de capital importancia y puede ser lograda mediante la implementacin de diversas medidas como planes de vacunacin y determinadas estrategias antivirales como se acepta de forma consensuada para el cmv 32,33 .los pacientes hematolgicos presentan distintos tipos de alteracin inmunitaria dependiendo de la enfermedad que padecen, su momento evolutivo y el tratamiento que hayan recibido. este dficit inmunitario predispone al desarrollo de enfermedades infecciosas graves que aumentarn la morbimortalidad de estos pacientes.en los ltimos aos las infecciones virales estn cobrando una mayor importancia en este grupo de pacientes, que en la prctica clnica podramos dividir en pacientes oncohematolgicos, pacientes receptores de trasplante de progenitores hematopoyticos (tph) y receptores de hemoderivados. la epidemiologa est cambiando y el espectro de las infecciones virales severas est aumentando en pacientes en los que hace unos aos no eran habituales debido en gran medida al uso de nuevos frmacos con marcado efecto inmunosupresor. existen tres tipos de dficit inmunitario: neutropenia, dficit de inmunidad celular y dficit de inmunidad humoral. cada tipo de inmunodepresin se asocia con un determinado tipo de infecciones; no obstante, en las enfermedades hematolgicas suelen coexistir diferentes tipos de inmunodeficiencia 34 .la neutropenia predomina en pacientes con leucemias agudas, aplasia medular o sndromes mielodisplsicos evolucionados y en pacientes tratados con quimioterapia intensiva. aqu predominan las infecciones por bacterias gram-positivas, bacilos gram-negativos, hongos y virus (herpes, vrs, influenza, parainfluenza).el dficit de inmunidad celular aparece en pacientes con enfermedad de hodgkin y otros sndromes linfoproliferativos avanzados, en tratamientos con glucocorticoides, anlogos de las purinas y tratamientos con anticuerpos monoclonales. aqu son frecuentes las infecciones por bacterias intracelulares; infecciones virales (cmv, vhs, vvz, jcv, hhv-6, vrs), hongos y parsitos.el dficit de inmunidad humoral predomina en pacientes con mieloma mltiple, macroglobulinemia de waldestrm, leucemia linftica crnica (llc) y esplenectomizados. las infecciones son menos frecuentes que en grupos anteriores y son fundamentalmente por bacterias capsuladas.el tph es una opcin teraputica en las enfermedades hematolgicas, principalmente en las hemopatas malignas. la infeccin es una complicacin importante debido a la inmunodepresin sumatoria que produce la propia enfermedad neoplsica de base, el rgimen de acondicionamiento al que se somete al paciente para recibir el trasplante, el tratamiento del rechazo y de la enfermedad del injerto contra el husped (eich). tambin son factores de riesgo de infeccin si el trasplante es emparentado o no, el estado de la serologa viral previa al trasplante del paciente y el momento despus del trasplante en el que aparece la infeccin 35 .existen tres periodos de riesgo, de deficiencia inmunitaria, predecibles en el tph: periodo postrasplante inmediato: se inicia con el tratamiento de acondicionamiento y se mantiene hasta 30 das despus del trasplante. es un periodo de profunda neutropenia y linfocitopenia. en cuanto a las infecciones virales en esta fase, la ms frecuente es la reactivacin del vhs en pacientes previamente seropositivos 36 .  periodo postinjerto precoz: se inicia con la recuperacin de los neutrfilos y persiste hasta el da 100, en que se produce la recuperacin funcional de los linfocitos t y b; no obstante, la presencia de una eich y su tratamiento pueden retrasar esta recuperacin inmunitaria. el cmv es el agente infeccioso ms importante de esta fase. otras infecciones virales que destacan en esta fase son las producidas por el vrs, los virus influenza y parainfluenza, los rinovirus, gastroenteritis por rotavirus y virus coxsackie, o reactivaciones por adenovirus y vhh-6.  periodo postinjerto tardo: a partir de da 100 hasta que se recupera una inmunidad normal, a los 18-36 meses del tph, siempre que el paciente no reciba inmunosupresin y siga libre de eich. puede aparecer reactivacin del vvz;infeccin por cmv (sobre todo en pacientes seropositivos con eich crnica) 37 .virus del herpes simple: la manifestacin clnica ms frecuente es la gingivoestomatitis, aunque en ocasiones se puede extender a esfago, laringe o la piel de las regiones perioral y perianal. a veces es difcil de distinguir entre mucositis por vhs o la producida por la propia quimioterapia, motivo por el que se suele indicar tratamiento emprico antiviral. la reactivacin del vhs se puede reducir del 80% a menos del 5% en receptores seropositivos durante el primer mes despus del trasplante mediante el uso de aciclovir o valaciclovir desde el momento del acondicionamiento y hasta que se recuperan de la mucositis 35 . (vase tratamiento y profilaxis en la tabla 3 38, 39 .) virus varicela zster: aparece como infeccin primaria (5%) o como reactivacin (95%) en un 40% de los pacientes en algn momento del primer ao despus del trasplante; en pacientes con marcada inmunodeficiencia celular (enfermedad de hodgkin) y en enfermos en que antes no era habitual (llc) y que han recibido tratamiento con nuevos frmacos inmunosupresores (fludarabina, rituximab, alemtuzumab). adems de las formas tpicas cutneas de presentacin, puede producir neumona hemorrgica, hepatitis, afectacin del snc, trombocitopenia y necrosis de la retina. ocasionalmente en pacientes con tph, puede producir afectacin visceral sin lesin cutnea precedente. el eich es un potente predictor de diseminacin. la mortalidad es mayor si existe afectacin pulmonar. el tratamiento se resume en la tabla 3 38, 39 .citomegalovirus: la infeccin por cmv es una complicacin importante en el paciente con tph, ya que, aunque la incidencia de enfermedad por cmv ha disminuido en los ltimos aos debido a las estrategias de prevencin adoptadas, la seropositividad para el cmv se considera un factor de riesgo independiente de eich y se asocia con peor supervivencia, mayor mortalidad por bacteriemias e infecciones fngicas y con mortalidad relacionada con el trasplante 40 . las manifestaciones de la infeccin por cmv en los rganos diana son: neumona, enterocolitis y ms raramente retinitis. la neumona por cmv es la manifestacin ms frecuente y ms grave, ya que aun con tratamiento la mortalidad oscila entre el 30 y el 50%. es poco frecuente antes del prendimiento del trasplante. por otra parte, se est viendo que la neumona por cmv es una infeccin emergente en pacientes adultos con leucemia tratados con frmacos inmunosupresores 41 . los receptores de tph se pueden clasificar en distintos grupos de riesgo de sufrir enfermedad por cmv. se considera que son de alto riesgo los trasplantes alognicos si hay deplecin de clulas t de la fuente de progenitores, donante no emparentado, antgeno de histocompatibilidad (hla) no idntico, uso de corticoides a altas dosis, tratamiento con alemtuzumab y anlogos de las purinas; y los trasplantes autlogos con seleccin cd34+, tratados con anlogos de purinas y altas dosis de corticoides (tabla 3). las tcnicas diagnsticas de eleccin para la deteccin precoz de la infeccin son la antigenemia y la pcr. en lo referente al diagnstico, es importante aplicar definiciones de consenso en cuanto a criterios de infeccin 42 . las pautas de profilaxis, tratamiento anticipado y tratamiento dirigido se explican en la tabla 3.virus respiratorios comunitarios: los ms frecuentes en pacientes con tph y en pacientes con leucemia tratados con quimioterapia son paramixovirus (vrs, virus parainfluenza 1-3 , metapneumovirus), ortomixovirus (influenza a y b), rinovirus, coronavirus nl63 y hku1, adenovirus y bocavirus, entre otros. las viriasis respiratorias suelen acontecer en relacin con brotes estacionales y se adquieren por contacto con otros individuos infectados. si se desarrolla neumona, se asocia con alta mortalidad, sobre todo en el caso del vrs y virus parainfluenza. no existe un tratamiento de eficacia reconocida para estas infecciones, aunque se recomienda ribavirina inhalada en el caso de neumona por vrs e inhibidores de la neuraminidasa (oseltamivir, zanamivir) para el virus influenza 43 . no existe ninguna forma de quimioprofilaxis de eficacia probada para estas infecciones en los pacientes oncohematolgicos, por lo que es fundamental evitar la exposicin de los pacientes a estos virus, incluida la trasmisin nosocomial.adenovirus: se puede producir infeccin por reactivacin aproximadamente en el 10% de los receptores de tph alognico y en menor porcentaje en los tph autlogos. la manifestacin ms frecuente es la cistitis hemorrgica, aunque tambin puede producir infeccin sistmica pulmonar, heptica, digestiva y renal 44 . la eich es un factor de riesgo de infeccin por adenovirus despus del tph. no existe tratamiento eficaz para esta infeccin.otros virus: el eritrovirus b19 en pacientes con anemias hemolticas crnicas produce crisis de aplasia roja. en el tph es causa poco frecuente de anemia. los poliomavirus (virus jc y bk) pueden causar lmp y cistitis hemorrgicas, respectivamente. la mayor parte de los casos de reactivacin del veb son subclnicos y no requieren tratamiento, pero en otros casos puede producir una lpt de elevada mortalidad. el vhh-6 en el tph puede producir cuadros de mielosupresin, exantemas cutneos, meningoencefalitis y exacerbacin de la eich. el vhh-8 se ha relacionado con cuadros de hipoplasia medular, sarcoma de kaposi, enfermedad de castleman multicntrica y linfoma de clulas b de cavidades.el tratamiento con fludarabina (anlogo de las purinas) y con alemtuzumab (anticuerpo monoclonal humanizado igg1 kappa anti-cd52) se asocia con una mayor frecuencia de infecciones por vhs y vvz, as como de infeccin y enfermedad por cmv 45 .el rituximab (anticuerpo monoclonal quimrico dirigido contra el receptor cd20) se ha asociado con el desarrollo de aplasia roja pura por enterovirus b19, hepatitis fulminante por vhb, reactivacin del vhb latente, casos de varicelosis diseminada fatal, neumona por cmv e infecciones por vhs y vvz. su uso peritrasplante se ha asociado en el tph autlogo a infecciones inusuales como lmp, retinitis y neumonitis por cmv 46 .the world meteorological organization's (wmo) cross-cutting urban focus initiative supports the implementation of the united nations (un) new urban agenda (un, 2016a) and the sustainable development goals (in particular, sdg11: sustainable cities and communities; un, 2016b) through the novel concept and approach of integrated urban hydrometeorological, climate and environmental services (integrated urban services or ius) for both (i) sustainable development and (ii) multi-hazard early-warning systems for cities. the sendai framework for disaster reduction level. wmo through its relevant programmes and technical commissions guides the members and facilitates the generation of high quality, reliable information and services and its dissemination, communication to various stakeholders, governmental authorities, sectors in support of decision making. wmo commissions include relevant experts not only from government agencies (i.e. not only national hydrometeorological services, nmhs) but also universities, research institutes and private companies. federal agencies, such as nmhss, may support but not necessarily have a mandate to provide services at the municipal level (unless through agreement). urban services, if they exist, may also come from a variety of different providers.defining disaster risk and forecasting hydrometeorological impacts are beyond the remit of many meteorological services and are a new challenge for most nmhss. however, an understanding of these impacts can be developed through collaborative engagement with disaster management officials and other relevant experts. the risks and impacts associated with extreme weather and climate events are dynamic, so it may be argued that nmhss, who have real-time dissemination capability, are best equipped to issue impact based warnings (world bank, 2013) . integration or coordination amongst the services is also required to convey a consistent and accurate message as hazardous events could affect several services simultaneously or in sequence.a wmo cross-programme group within the commissions for atmospheric sciences, for climatology and for basic systems led by the gurme (gaw [global atmospheric watch] urban research meteorology and environment) scientific advisory group developed the guidance on integrated urban hydrometeorological, climate and environmental services in collaboration with globally relevant scientific services or disciplines. this guidance has three parts:(i) volume 1, the focus of this paper, addresses the concept and methods of an operational ius wmo, 2019a) (ii) volume 2 provides examples and case studies (wmo, 2019b) (iii) volume 3 will provide the ius implementation guidelines.as urban decision-making is embedded in different organizational or governance structures, partnership and cooperation relationships, this guidance will be relevant to all ius practitioners, called sectors, herein. in the future, the guidance will be updated as needed.the objective of the present paper is both to describe the ius concept and to provide an overview of the guidance (vol. 1) for the broader scientific community and stakeholders. following a background discussion (section 2), the ius concepts are outlined (section 3). results from surveys of urban experts and wmo members (section 4) are used to articulate the science and knowledge gaps (section 5) and to illustrate the lessons learnt and recommendations (section 6). this is followed by concluding remarks (section 7). accelerating growth of urban populations, especially in developing countries, has become a driving force of human development. crowded cities are centres of innovation and economic progress, but polluted air, extreme weather conditions, flooding and other hazards create substantial challenges. theoctober 2016 un habitat-iii conference adopted the new un urban agenda (un, 2016a) which makes urban resilience, climate and environment sustainability as well as disaster risk management foci.increasingly dense, complex and interdependent urban activities are rendering cities vulnerable: a single hazard event can lead to a widespread breakdown of a city's infrastructure through cascading downstream or "domino" effects ( figure 1 ). as the components of urban systems are tightly intertwined, having good predictions that are tailored for the different systems, spatially explicit at the appropriate scale and refreshed at appropriate frequencies allows for the systems to be operated efficiently and effectively. this is especially important when extreme events occur. for example, tropical cyclones (typhoons or hurricanes) impact cities around the world annually, causing a cascade of effects ( figure 1 ) including hazardous meteorological conditions (blue); first order impacts (green); and follow-on impacts (purple). the latter impacts may be immediate, as with traffic accidents associated with severe convection (e.g. road flooding) or take longer (days -weeks) to manifest themselves (e.g. plant disease). these impacts (figure 1 ) are not exhaustive, as there are also socioeconomic impacts to individuals, neighbourhoods, the city, region and often beyond.being able to forecast/identify the area within a city most likely to be exposed to the hazards allows agencies to respond rapidly and optimally. consequently, combining the forecast with detailed city information (e.g. demographics, infrastructure) is best. using current communication technologies enables response systems to rapidly receive, assimilate, predict and enhance urban products and their delivery to end users. neighbourhood scale weather, climate, air quality and water information is also needed to support long-term planning to ensure that cities evolve appropriately in the future. as cities impact their surroundings in numerous ways (e.g. as the largest sources of greenhouse gases; un-habitat, 2011), creating sustainable cities is key to achieving global sustainability.j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f journal pre-proof figure 1 : illustration of the domino effect for a typhoon event, which produces multiple hydro-meteorological hazards (blue) that have immediate effects (green) and follow-on impacts (purple) that can be both short-and long-term.in the context of city management (by mayors and city agencies), urban services relate to transportation, infrastructure, housing, water and waste management, snow clearance and other city operations. in our context, ius refers to the provision of weather, climate, hydrology and air quality infrastructure (data, observations, predictions) to support and integrate both traditional and other (new) urban services. they include hydro-meteorological forecasts for a range of phenomena (e.g. thunderstorms, tropical cyclones, coastal inundation, flooding) and conditions (e.g. air quality, healthrelated heat/cold stress) as well as climate services (e.g. carbon neutral cities, building codes, zoning, planning and design) at a variety of spatial (inter-and intra-urban) and temporal scales.ius have generally been developed from existing prediction systems, including: weather prediction designed for warnings (e.g. tropical cyclones, synoptic storms, thunderstorms) at global to local spatial scales and hourly/daily/weekly temporal scales  climate services information systems (wmo, 2016) designed for products (e.g. climate extremes, sector specific climate indices, climate projections, climate risk management and adaptation) at global, national and regional scales, and from sub-seasonal to decadal and longer temporal scales  hydrology and water hazard warnings (e.g. flash river floods, heavy precipitation, river water stage, storm tides, sea level rise, coastal inundation) at all scales including urban j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f journal pre-proof  air quality hazards (e.g. smog, sand and dust storms, wildfires, regional haze, acid rain, volcanic ash plumes, accidental releases, etc.) at national, regional and local scalesius inherently need to provide high resolution (~1 km or smaller) information compared to the regional scale (~10 km and larger). the goal is to provide urban to intra-urban spatial information.urban domains encompass a wide range of physical and human geographical characteristics, including governance structures, with metropolitan areas often comprising multiple contiguous or neighbouring cities. extensive commuter regions may create substantial infrastructure in rural areas (e.g. roads/trains between centres and industrial settings). hence, the "urban" extent must consider the needs of planners to address housing, transportation and recreation in the metropolitan region.to implement ius may presents significant challenges, meanwhile it will make good use of already available, but perhaps not yet integrated, components ( figure 2 ). the components are: dense observation networks and databases, high-resolution forecasts across different time scales, multihazard early warning systems, (improved) understanding of how to deliver and communicate the information, (improved) understanding of public perception, warning response, climate watch systems, and climate services for risk management and adaptation strategies (baklanov et al., 2010; wmo-igac, 2012; beig et al., 2015) . figure 2 generically describes the framework of a service providing information to an application sector. in the context of ius, the weather, climate, air quality and hydrology are the focus for services for various sectorial stakeholders, partners or decision-makers (city authorities, planners, urban designers, behavioral experts). the components (boxes) in figure 2 indicate where integration may occur to create an ius. integration has three aspects:(i) internal to a service (intra-service) (ii) between one service and another (cross-service) (iii) between sectors (cross-sector).integration may occur at the monitoring, data assimilation and/or urban system modeling level (e.g.including anthropogenic factors), or at the decision-making level where products and experts from the different services provide independent and perhaps sometimes even contradictory advice directly to decision-makers. the maturity of an ius is defined by where the integration occurs and the depth of engagement with different sectors. integration has proven an effective practice in multi-hazard early warning systems and provides a holistic approach to enhance resilience. evolution of comprehensive earth system models, extension of forecasting both to longer (sub-seasonal, seasonal, s2s) and shorter (nowcasting) time-scales, and enhanced spatial (intra-urban) scales provide other levels of integration that are intrinsic to ius information wmo, 2015; baklanov et al., 2016) . as these issues are interdependent, multi-disciplinary approaches are required to resolve the gaps, identify inconsistencies and work towards solutions. the guidance document (wmo, 2019a) promotes early cross-service and deep cross-sector integration.integration has significant challenges due to technical and decision-making complexity. language to ensure mutual understanding of the intra-service, cross-service, cross-sector partners ( figure 2 , top yellow box) is essential and requires early engagement to establish roles/responsibilities, gain knowledge of capabilities, capacities, current and potential requirements. frequently, the process may be instigated following a significant event with economic and/or societal impact (e.g. a heat-or cold wave, storm or flood event) or an opportunity for partners to come together with a shared vision of needs (e.g., major sports event or expo or through socio-political will).at the heart of the system are observations, data, monitoring and modelling to generate useful and usable information (post-processing) for the relevant partners ( figure 2 , blue ellipse). effective cityspecific impact-based warnings, their timely delivery and effective use in decision-support systems, can only be realised through co-design by decision-makers, service providers and various sectorial users ( figure 2 , grey boxes). these warnings must include effective communication and outreach to the urban population for effective action.tools to support longer term decisions (e.g. for urban design and planning towards resilience in a context of climate change; societal expectations for livability, health, workability and sustainability; urban actions to reduce greenhouse gas and other pollutants emissions) are being developed. the articulation of weather, climate, hydrological and environmental services within an urban context are required to address these new challenges. ius should result in consistent cross-sector messages. it is critical that the end-users (e.g. public and specialists) understand the message especially when some form of warning is critical to successful mitigation. however, experience has shown that understanding of warning messages, risk profiles, human response and effective risk communication is a challenge and requires attention (wmo, 2018b).the final step in a development cycle is the complete evaluation (i.e., scientific, functional, societal impact, etc.) and assessment of the ius to build capacity, identify needs and areas requiring research and development (figure 2 , bottom yellow box). the evaluations may require the collection of specialized data. the resources and skills in academia, research institutes (inside and outside government), private sectors and other agencies will be needed to meet the challenges. at each stage of the collaborative process, there is an on-going cross-service and cross-sector training, education, as well as a research and development process (figure 2 , side white boxes). the process is not complete until the partnership itself is examined to ensure that the ius is sufficiently resourced for the tasks at hand.for the various partners to function most effectively and to find optimal solutions, information needs to be combined and shared, ideally using common infrastructure. the performance of all stakeholders, including providers, can be substantially enhanced if systems, infrastructure and operational activities are established and maintained within a multi-purpose framework. it is expected that the synergies developed as a result of ius will yield gains due to efficiencies of the integration of a broad spectrum of urban environmental management systems and better functionality and reliability through more frequent activation of systems.the innovation of the ius concept, promulgated here, is that it allows the end-user to receive an appropriate product that considers two or more of weather, climate, hydrology and air quality scientific services. these individual services are often delivered through different programs or j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f journal pre-proof agencies and may also benefit from integration (e.g. flood with water quality warnings, meteorological warnings and disaster reduction activities) but the focus of ius is the cross-service, cross-sector aspect. some of the critical urban applications/services are inherently integrated (to various degrees) due to co-dependencies.from the perspective of delivery, requirements, maturity and capacity, there will be a spectrum of approaches, from highly coupled (weather, climate, air quality, hydrology) probabilistic or deterministic modelling systems (numerical or statistical), with tailored products combined in multihazard, multi-scale decision-support platforms, to independent hazard predictions with interpretations by hazard specialists to support decision-makers. there are significant differences in requirements for ius by cities from those generally currently available from national or regional service providers. so, depending on the specific requirements of a city, the capabilities and the resources available, the implementation of ius can be significantly different in each instance.the many challenges to creating an effective ius are described more fully elsewhere (wmo, 2019a).they include understanding the following: how to access and use observations in urban areas;representation of urban characteristics in models; urban scale and regional scale model integration requirements; impact of cities on weather, environment, water and climate; impact of changing climate on cities including mitigation and adaptation; feedback from the city activities to weather, water, air quality and climate (e.g. modification of energy use and greenhouse gas emissions feedbacks); role of other natural hazards (e.g. earthquakes, volcanic eruptions, space weather) on urban weather, air quality, hydrology and climate; development and use of integrated decision support systems; communication and multi-disciplinary risk management; evaluation of integrated systems and services; understanding of the critical limit thresholds, and; targeted and tailored delivery platforms and predictions of economic and social impact.the first order needs of cities are known. they are influenced by: location (e.g., coastal, river, mountainous, polar, deserts), hazards (e.g., geological fault lines, volcanoes, dust storms, fire danger, space weather), climate conditions and the city itself (e.g. major industries, transport networks, technology, energy supply, construction styles).the known need for services (wmo, 2019a) include monitoring and prediction of: severe weather, climate, hydrological and air quality events, such as, heat and cold waves, , slippery roads, tropical cyclones and extra-tropical storms; droughts; flash floods; changes in soil stability and landslides; j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f river and lake flooding; coastal inundation from storm surges or ocean waves; sea level rise due to climate change; sand and dust storms; wild fires; air and water pollution, including accidental releases and aero-allergens; harmful uv radiation; and disease vectors.ius should include societal impact predictions from natural and anthropogenic hazards (e.g. tropical cyclones, major storms, sand and dust storms, volcano eruptions) or extreme weather conditions (winds, rain, freezing rain, snow, ice, fog, hail, flooding and lightning) which may cause disruptions to key functions (e.g. transport, communications, energy distribution, renewable energy (e.g., solar power, wind energy)). as the societal impacts, may have long-term implications on people or ecosystems, they need to be included in urban planning.several cities have, are preparing, or are developing ius for various reasons, with different levels of integration and providing different services. wmo has played a role in the development and/or demonstrations of some of these (e.g. figure 3 , tang, 2006; grimmond et al., 2014; baklanov et al., 2018 baklanov et al., , 2019 amorim et al., 2018) . to understand the state and development plans of ius for good practice (wmo, 2019a), exploratory surveys were conducted with 31 urban experts representing 22 specific cities (table 1) . some ius were in demonstration or pre-operational mode but contributed key messages. other key messages include the needs for: long term planning/design; bridging scientific disciplines (weather, climate, air quality, hydrology; cross-service integration); cross-jurisdictional (national, regional, urban) organizations and urban authorities (cross-sector) and; open data infrastructure and communication. in the following highlights from the survey are discussed briefly.the shanghai meteorological service (sms) of the china meteorological administration (cma) has been evolving from a traditional weather forecast/warning service to include a multi-hazard disaster risk reduction service (tang, 2006; dabberdt et al., 2013; tan et al., 2015) . initially, the focus was on air pollution episodes and high-impact weather during the shanghai world expo 2010. subsequently, this has expanded to consider multiple weather hazards and to incorporate the vulnerability and exposure of various sites to enhance the resilience of the city infrastructure and capacity for risk management. (tang, 2006) . a 50-member shanghai emergency management response committee (emc, figure 3 ) was established and in february 2013, the shanghai emergency warning center was formed to enhance and improve the existing emergency procedures (figure 3 ). thirty-six joint response mechanisms including co-operation agreements, warnings and action plans among 25 government agencies for disaster prevention and mitigation were created. action plans for weather disasters are issued by the general office of sms and each agency has defined responsibilities. sustainability and efficiency can be enhanced if systems and operational activities are established and maintained within a multi-purpose framework that considers all hazards and end users' needs.mhews are expected to be activated more often than a single-hazard warning system and, thus, should provide better functionality and reliability also for dangerous but rare high-intensity events (e.g. tsunami). multi-hazard systems can help the public to better understand the range of risks of different hazards, reinforce desired preparedness actions and warning response behaviours. theshanghai mhews is designed to cope with the threats from tropical cyclones, storm surges, rainstorms, heat and cold waves, thunderstorms, and air pollution as well as their cascading effects, such as floods, health impacts, accidents, and infrastructure damage.a mhews should ideally incorporate all risks and vulnerabilities that are both natural and anthropogenic as many disasters are multi-dimensional. the warning system should be able to encompass all the potential consequences that may flow from a single extreme event. for example, an industrial fire may lead to widespread atmospheric contamination and to power outages causing the failure of heating or cooling for the entire city or parts of it. given a mhews usually focuses on j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f managing the potential cascade of disasters stemming from an initial hydro-meteorological hazard, the primary, secondary, and sometimes tertiary impacts (figure 1 ) require well-ordered coordination and cooperation to support highly sensitive users as well as the general public. hence, the need for multiagency coordination and multi-phase response requires standard operating procedures and action plans as well as early warnings (world bank, 2013) .multi-disciplinary initiatives: as earth system modeling is complex and highly technical, one barrier to effective integration is a lack of mutual understanding of capabilities, capacity, responsibilities/ roles within both services and sectors. lack of a common language and terminology is identified as a key obstacle, but new generations of scientists with the necessary skills can be developed through multi-disciplinary conferences, training workshops and education programs.expo 2010 (figure 4 ), combines meteorological, air quality and risk assessment monitoring for a variety of health products through modeling.another cross-sector collaboration on the reduction of impacts of weather, climate on public health has brought together the hong kong observatory (hko), local universities, sector-related social enterprises/ organizations (e.g. senior citizen home safety association), and other government departments (shun and chan, 2017, wmo, 2018a) to develop the hong kong heat index (hkhi) for the hot and humid sub-tropical climate and to carry out health impacts studies of extreme hot weather events wang et al., 2018) , seasonal variations of influenza (chan et al., 2009) , and weather -climate impacts on services for the elderly (mok and leung, 2009; wong et al., 2015; lee and leung, 2016) . following the 2003 sars (severe acute respiratory syndrome) event, local planning and development measures were implemented (ng, 2009; ren et al., 2011 ) that included weather considerations, and are now used elsewhere . long-term urban planning: climate change should be considered in all urban planning because of the long times scales involved. urban planners would like urban system models outputs at high spatial resolution. this can be achieved using high resolution weather models (~1 km) forced by multiple simulations of climate scenarios (e.g. carbon dioxide doubling) to provide climate and air quality at urban spatial and temporal scales (amorim et al., 2018; takane et al., 2019) . these models can account for the urban fabric (ching et al., 2018) , physical (e.g., anthropogenic car emissions) and human behaviour processes (e.g. excess heat from use of air conditioners in heat waves; lemonsu et al., 2012; masson et al., 2013 schoetter et al., 2017 takane et al., 2019) . as urban designers need both access to and understanding of the data/products, cross-sector (e.g., earth system scientists to/from urban planners), training is necessary. for example, urban weather, climate, analysis and application can be linked from hazard to urban design considerations ( figure 5 ).j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f open and accessible data: observations in cities are collected by many agencies/stakeholders. for consistent, efficient and effective use, these data must be open, accessible and preferably in a consistent format. as data come from different sensors, with different sampling strategies/resolutions, collected for different purposes, of different quality and from different models, this means the data will be heterogeneous and that metadata are critical for appropriate use.communications/product dissemination: there are several aspects of risk communication and dissemination. the multi-hazard concept must address the issue of conveying the risk and impact of a variety of hazards (e.g. air pollution episode, tsunamis, river flooding, tornados) to a range of decision-makers, stakeholders and the public each with different knowledge base, expertise and requirements for levels for information (golding et al., 2019) .many ius hazards will be highly tailored, have high spatial and temporal resolution (e.g. hourly for air quality and weather) and need to be targeted to at-risk individuals and not necessarily to the general population. this can vary from targeted emails, mobile applications, or text alerts, to publicdisplay boards for extreme weather or air pollution conditions cerc, 2019) .each city's priorities will vary with the hazards and risks that it faces, and it will need to consider these when designing an ius. extensive sharing of capabilities and knowledge amongst services and sectors is needed to undertake comprehensive development. although progress has been made, many scientific and technological questions remain; these include:j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f ensuring observations cover the range of spatial scale in cities. for example, recognizing the difference between within street canyon, within a park, above roof level (within the roughness sub-layer), within the constant flux layer (or inertial sub-layer) and the varying depths of the boundary layer, is important. it is crucial to consider what different instruments measure, given their different assumptions or variables actually observed (e.g. mixed layer height, mixing height, temperature inversion, kotthaus et al., 2018) . the state and variations of the physical and chemical characteristics of the three-dimensional urban atmosphere needs to be observed . representation of urban form and function in models. the urban material (e.g. surface type),form (e.g. building density, height and surface roughness), function (e.g. anthropogenic effects and building use), urban hydrology (e.g. irrigation and sewer system), and urban vegetation (e.g. leaf area index, phenology, extent and height) all need to be captured to model the hydro-meteorological and environmental processes and their influences at different temporal and spatial scales. data assimilation: there is a need for development of schemes that can use 3d urban observations to improve model predictions in urban areas. these will require assessment and uncertainty analyses. ensembles and coupled models: evidence from a wide range of approaches to modeling the urban environment needs to be drawn on to select those that provide the most useful information on the probability of occurrence of hazards. such modeling systems will certainly need to couple aspects of the urban surfaces (including walls) and its hydrology with the atmosphere and its pollutants; and in many cities ius models will also need to incorporate the coastal ocean, lakes or (tidal) rivers. they will also need to include a means of assessing the sensitivity of the predictions to uncertain initial states and parameters, through use of model ensembles, for example. urban atmosphere scales requirements (to drive other models). what scales are really required for useful forecasts or assessments? understanding downscaling from globalregional models requires knowledge of the interactions of a range of scales and different approaches may be used depending on the characteristic time scales (schlnzen et al., 2011) or on the application purpose (hoffmann et al., 2016) . this will drive the development of tailored products and services. understanding urban physical processes. what is the impact of cities on weather/climate/ water/environment (e.g., air quality, water quantity and quality, ecosystem, thermal variability, disease transmission)? this will drive the complexity (feedback loop) of models.j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f impact of changing climate on cities. how will the urban environment (e.g., public health, economy and ecosystems) react to climate change (e.g., air quality, water quantity and quality, heatwaves, dust storms, wildfires and other high impact events). impact of changes to cities. cities constantly evolve, through demographic and population change, economic development, urban fabric changes (e.g., urbanization, land use, energy use, transport, pollutant and greenhouse gas emissions, densification and suburbanization) anddriven by adaptation to climate and hydrological changes. other environmental hazards, e.g. earthquakes/volcanic eruptions/space weather, and their interactions with the atmosphere. social and environmental consequences of these high impact events may change the physical nature of the city (e.g. infrastructure including telecommunications, transport systems, housing, energy production, food/water supply, disease). development of integrated decision support systems is needed to efficiently present relevant, often uncertain and conflicting information to technical experts, to support warning decisionmaking and should incorporate information about societal impacts, consequences and action statements. understanding the impact on human response and behaviour is part of the decision-making process. communication and management of risk. a common understanding and language is needed to bridge the services and sectors and to articulate a better understanding of the range of risk and impacts in order to take appropriate mitigation actions to protect the public (e.g. early warning systems or urban design/planning). evaluation of integrated services: cost-benefit studies are needed for both initiation and sustainability of ius, e.g. socio-economic evaluation of benefits, co-benefits (e.g. for climate), system operating costs and avoided losses. identifying and understanding critical limit values: for meteorological and atmospheric composition variables with respect to human health and for environmental protection. new, targeted and customized user interface and delivery platforms: effective use of the many new communication techniques needs to be developed in close consultation with users to ensure that services, advisories and warnings result in appropriate action and, in turn, inform how best to improve the services.ius will assist decision makers and end-users. it is important not to wait for a disaster before initiating the planning of an ius as it takes time to develop. various cities have, are preparing, or are j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f developing ius (table 1 ) that can provide an initial template for development. from these a wide range of lessons have been learnt including: initiation of integrated services is often opportunistic (e.g. following an extreme event or in preparation for a major event). it is essential to engage all relevant sectors (agencies, the public, city government, civil society, private businesses) from the beginning, so as to develop a mutual appreciation of the challenges, understanding of capabilities and requirements, a common language, and lines of communication. it is necessary to understand and/or establish regulatory and institutional frameworks that clearly define agency mandates, interactions, roles and responsibilities to enable creation and maintenance of ius. operational implementation should include cross-sector technology transfer mechanisms (codesign, research, development, test beds, capacity building) and cross-service provision (warnings, advisories, risk and impact communications, capacity building, evaluation).the recommendations are: encourage the scientific community and all levels of government to lead and contribute to the promotion, development and coordination of ius, including knowledge transfer. ensure that legal and institutional frameworks are in place for partnerships within cities that clearly define agency mandates, interactions, roles and responsibilities to enable creation and maintenance of ius. engage with relevant stakeholders and users (academia, agencies, non-government organizations, the public, city government, private sector, civil sector, businesses) from the beginning, to raise awareness, identify needs, co-design solutions and obtain feedback. carry out further research, including multi-disciplinary cross cutting studies, to develop ius. encourage wide accessibility to data by influencing ownership issues and technical support. encourage demonstration ius projects to showcase the benefits and learning experiences to all.migration to cities creates densely populated environments and associated infrastructure which result in ever increasing vulnerabilities and exposure to natural and anthropogenic hazards. the un has identified "sustainable cities and communities" as one of its sustainable development goals (un, 2016b j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f effect) may occur in a city because of an initial hazardous event impacting a densely populated area as infrastructure fails. integrated urban services include: multi-hazard early warnings (e.g. severe weather, climate, flooding, air quality, health), products supporting building design, urban design, planning and zoning that require micro-(building, street)) to local (neighbourhood) to regional (city) climate information.provision of urban services is within the mandate of city governments. current provision and application of hydro-meteorological, climate and environment urban services are within the capability and capacity of many relevant institutions. given co-dependencies, the delivery of effective and efficient urban services requires integration, co-operation and collaboration amongst different services and sectors (professions, levels of government).results from two targeted surveys indicate that integrated urban services already exist or are in preparation/development with various stages of maturity in many cities. urban service requirements will be city-specific, driven by many local factors including natural and human-made environment, science, applications, capacity, capability, infrastructure, organizational structures, mandates and socio-economic situations. indeed, the surveys identified that capabilities already exist to deliver urban services but there is often a lack of mutual-awareness. there is a need for more interaction in order to understand the requirements and capabilities of both the service providers and the service users (sectors). the challenge of local versus national mandates of roles and responsibilities can only be solved through collaboration, and cross-service and cross-sector approaches are needed. one size does not fit all. there are still considerable knowledge gaps, scientific and implementation challenges. the implementation of ius will be an evolving process.the paper is prepared based on the wmo guidance on integrated urban hydrometeorological, climate and environmental services (volume i: concept and methodology). the authors appreciate the participation of the wmo gurme sag and urban expert team members, who participated in writing the ius guidance, to members of the wmo secretariat urban focal points team; and to nmhs colleagues and city experts who responded to the surveys and developed and realized ius in different cities. the authors thank two anonymous reviewers who provided knowledgeable and comprehensive comments that improved the paper.amorim, j.h., asker, c., belusic, d., carvalho, a.c., engardt, m., gidhagen, l., hundecha, y., krnich, h. lind, p., olsson, e., olsson, j., segersson, d., strmbck, l., joe, p., . integrated urban services for european cities: the stockholm case. wmo bulletin, 67(2), 33-40.j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o fit is widely agreed that the exposure to ambient air pollution may cause serious respiratory illnesses (katsouyanni et al., 1996; navrud, 2001; aunan and pan, 2004; neuberger et al., 2004; scoggins et al., 2004; jalaludin et al., 2004; maynard, 2004; lee et al., 2009 ) and that weather conditions may also contribute to the seriousness (smoyer et al., 2000) . several statistical models have been used to assess the impacts of air quality and weather factors on respiratory illnesses, including simple statistical correlation analysis, regression method, meta-analysis, spatial analysis and nonparametric statistical models such as the generalized additive model (gam). however, quantifying the effects of various pollutants as well as weather conditions is always a difficult task due to the high unknown nonlinearities on the impact of these environmental and weather factors on the onset of the respiratory illnesses and possible interactions amongst these factors. nonparametric regression is a powerful tool to model unknown functional relationships. with the consideration of a possible incubative period and/or cumulative effects, we need to consider the lags of potential factors that result in a large number of covariates in the regression. in order to avoid the so-called 'curse of dimensions' referring to the inaccuracy when the multivariate function is estimated nonparametrically, some statistical tools have been developed so as to let the model determine the best combinations in the sense of their contribution to the regression. representative models include a varying/functional coefficient model (chen and tsay, 1993; hastie and tibshirani, 1993) , regression graphics (cook, 1998) , sliced inverse regression (li, 1991) , single index model (hrdle and stoker, 1989 ) and multiple index model (xia et al., 2002) . in this paper, we will adopt the multiple index model for our data, following xia et al. (2002) and shao et al. (2010) .further complexity in modeling the number of respiratory illnesses is made by the effect due to hygienic related factors such as the public health measures by government and possible personal awareness in the community because they can also affect the spread of infectious respiratory diseases. unfortunately, the effect by hygiene related factors has not been considered in literature, partly because of the lack of quality information which in turn makes it difficult to quantitatively measure and support the effect of hygiene related factors on respiratory illnesses.from the data collected in hong kong, we observed an unusual change in the number of respiratory illnesses in early 2003, while all other air quality and weather data were relatively stable. the change coincides with the outbreak of severe acute respiratory syndrome (or sars). the background and severity of this disease is briefed below. sars is a respiratory disease in humans and is caused by the sars-associated coronavirus (sars-cov). it was first reported in asia in february 2003. over the following few months, the disease spread to more than two dozen countries in north america, south america, europe and asia before the sars global outbreak of 2003 was contained. according to the world health organization's (who) concluding report on 21 april 2004 (see http://www.who.int/csr/sars/country/table2004_04_21/en/index.html), this major outbreak consisted of 8096 known cases with 774 deaths (a mortality rate of 9.6%). hong kong was the most seriously affected area in terms of population size (6.8 million) and land area (1100 km 2 ). there were 1755 cases in total (1 case per 4000 population with 977 females and 778 males) with 299 deaths (a mortality rate of 17%). the source of infection was traced back to an infected guangzhou professor who arrived in hong kong in late february 2003. during his stay in a hotel, the infection was spread to other guests and visitors, subsequently triggering off a chain of outbreaks in hong kong, singapore, canada and vietnam. a detailed history and public health experiences can be found in hong kong's sars expert committee report (2003) and cheng (2003) . the official announcement of the sars epidemic was on 8 march 2003. the last case was reported on 2 june 2003. after an observation period of 20 days, hong kong was removed from the who's list of areas with recent local transmission of sars on 23 june 2003. the who's research concluded that sars was spread by close person-to-person contact. sars-cov is thought to be transmitted most readily by respiratory droplets of infectious persons when droplets from the cough or sneeze of the infectious persons are propelled a short distance (generally up to 3 ft) through the air and deposited on the mucous membranes of the mouth, nose, or eyes of persons who are nearby. the virus also can be transmitted when a person touches a surface or object contaminated with infectious droplets and then touches his/her mouth, nose, or eye(s). in addition, it is possible that the sars-cov might spread more broadly through the air (airborne spread) or by other ways that are not known.for infectious diseases, efficient prevention before major outbreak and treatment during outbreak are primary ways of disease control. however, community-or population-based health protection should be another important way to stop the spread of such infectious diseases but has not been addressed seriously before. during the sars epidemic, hong kong's department of health introduced a large-scale health awareness program to publicize the importance of personal and environmental hygiene. the actions included wearing face masks in public by everyone, washing hands regularly (especially before touching mouth and eyes and having food). official actions included cleaning surfaces in public areas such as handles and buttons with disinfectants regularly, and temperature checks at airports and other immigration ports. an educational campaign for personal and environmental hygiene was widely promoted by tv advertisements and posters in public areas (leisure cultural services department, 2003; housing authority, 2003; leung et al., 2003) . such public health measures showed great success in controlling the disease. some measures in public areas have been kept in force until now. therefore, the data provide us an opportunity to model the effect of strict hygiene related factors on respiratory illnesses. for the purpose of public health, it is very important and interesting to see how effective these public health measures are. by developing a method to handle data with sudden change(s) in modeling, we can also assess the change of the number of illness before and after the sars epidemic. the results can be used as an indirect support of the effectiveness of such efforts by governmental and community campaigns.the paper is organized as follows. section 2 is a brief description of the data set. model and estimation procedures are given in section 3, followed by a statistical test to quantify the efficacy of community-based hygiene campaign. the results are given in section 4, and section 5 concludes the paper.hong kong became a special administrative region of the people's republic of china on july 1, 1997, after a century and a half of british administration. it is located in the south of mainland china with a population of 6.8 million and an area of 1103 km 2 covering hong kong island and the more rural new territories. its climate is sub-tropical with temperatures between 10c in winter and 33c in summer. air pollution data were obtained from the environmental protection department of hksar (www.epd.gov.hk). these include the daily average level of sulfur dioxide (so 2 , gm 3 ), respirable suspended particulates (rsp gm 3 ), nitrogen oxides (no x , gm 3 ), nitrogen dioxide (no 2 , gm 3 ), ozone (oz, gm 3 ). weather data were obtained from hong kong observatory, including temperature (temp, degree celsius) and relative humidity (humi). the same variables were used by xia et al. (2002) and shao et al. (2010) . daily admission figures to public hospitals in hong kong due to respiratory illnesses were obtained from the hospital authority of hksar. the cases included all respiratory illnesses. these figures can be regarded as the daily number of illnesses due to respiratory diseases. although the air pollution index is usually reported to the public, we do not use it in this study as it is secondary data derived from the highest indices of several key pollutants.daily data over six years were collected for this study, from 01/01/2000 to 31/12/2005. the numbers of respiratory illnesses are plotted in figs. 1 and 2, from which a sudden drop in the number of respiratory illnesses can be seen in early 2003 during the outbreak of sars. the data was divided into two parts: pre-sars period refers to the data before 8 march 2003 and post-sars after 23 june 2003 (inclusive). we do not use the data during the sars epidemic as it is a transition period for the change. the summary statistics for individual variables are given in table 1 and box plots are given in fig. 3 . we can see that the temperature and humidity are very similar during the pre-and post-sars period. however, so 2 , rsp and ozone increase for all regions while nos and no 2 are relatively stable. in contrast, the number of illnesses decreases.both xia et al. (2002) and shao et al. (2010) considered the weekly pattern of the respiratory illnesses. it is possible that the weekly pattern in the number of the respiratory illnesses confounds with similar patterns in air pollution. to check if it is the case, the box-plots of all the variables for each day of the week is given in fig. 4 , from which it can be seen that only the number of admitted patients shows some weekly pattern, while all the air pollutants/weather variables show no weekly pattern (in fact, they remain quite constant over the day of the week). therefore, the weekly pattern in the number of the respiratory illnesses could be modeled together with the pollutants/weather variables. let y be our response variable, which is the number of daily admission to a regional hospital due to respiratory illnesses, and x = (x 1 , . . . , x p ) be the row-vector of covariates (with possible lags) affecting the response variable. the potential covariates in our study include (so 2 , no x , rsp, oz, temp, humi). let t start (=8 march 2003) denote the full outbreak of the sars epidemic and t end (23 june 2003) the end of the sars epidemic. in order to evaluate the effectiveness of public health measures and air quality on the reduction of respiratory illnesses, with consideration of weekly effect, we consider the following candidate models:the individual terms in the model are considered as follows. (i)  t is a zero-mean, constant variance error term. (ii)  t measures the impact of public health measures with  1 and  3 being real values representing the lower and upper asymptotes, respectively,  2 being a positive value representing the growth rate and  4 being a real value representing the time of maximum growth. that is, the effect of public health measures as measured by the shift in the total number of illnesses. by noting the magnitude of impact decreases eventually over time due to many factors including behavioral and memory dynamics, the growth curves are widely used in psychological research to model the changes over time (mcardle and nesselroade, 2002) . the logistic growth curve is a special case of the generalized richard growth curve (richard, 1959) . a negative value of  1 indicates a reduction of the number of illnesses, meaning an effective impact of public health measures. a positive value of  3 means that the impact of public health measures will fade and vanish over time. we do not use the full richard curve because it involves complicated computing due to a limit or embedded cases (shao, 2002) and the special case here is good enough to fit the data. bear in mind that we do not use the data during the sars epidemic as it is highly unstable. (iii) due to the hospital system in hong kong where only emergency departments are in normal service during weekends, the effect of the day-of-the-week is indicated in previous studies (xia et al., 2002; xia and tong, 2006) . here the dummy variables are defined aswith day 1 to 6 referring to saturday to thursday respectively and friday as the reference day. the second term measures the effect of the day-of-the-week which is also important (dominici et al., 2000; forster de and solomon, 2003; bruckmann and wichmann-fiebig, 1997; xia and tong, 2006) . (iv) the effect of environmental and weather factors on the illnesses is characterized by a multiple index model defined as g(x) = g( 11 x 1 +    +  p1 x p , . . . ,  1m x 1 +    +  pm x p ) = g(xb)with m < p and e(|x ) = 0 almost surely. here g( ) is an unknown smooth function and b = ( 1 , . . . ,  m ) is the coefficient matrix with  j = ( 1j , . . .  pj ) t being the jth direction or components, () t denotes the transpose of a vector or matrix. without loss of generality, the standardized version of x = (x 1 , . . . , x p ) is used in the model, i.e. e(x j ) = 0 and var(x j ) = 1 (j = 1, . . . , p). to ensure the uniqueness of the coefficient matrix, one should impose some identification condition on b. usually it is assumed that b t b = i mm , that is, b is an orthogonal matrix. xia et al. (2002) used the minimum average variance estimation technique (mave) to estimate b in the multiple index model and then cross validation (cv) to determine d. a brief outline of the method is given below.for a fixed d, the minimum average variance estimation is to find b bywith the constraint that b t b = i mm . the name mave is given in light of the following equationwhere the last term is the conditional variance with a given xb. there are two conditional expectations we need to deal with. assume that there are n observations y i with corresponding covariates x i = (x 1,i , . . . , x p,i ) (i = 1, 2, . . . , n). for any given x 0 = (x 1,0 , . . . , x p,0 ), the inner expectation at x 0 can be approximated by a local linear expansion of e(where a = g(x 0 b) and b = g(v)/v evaluated at v = x 0 b. note that the outer conditional expectation is in fact the conditional variance with a given xb. following the idea of local linear smooth estimation, we can estimate  2 xb by exploiting the approximationwhere w i0  0 are some weights with  n i=1 w i0 = 1. usually kernel smoothing is employed by defining the weights aswhere where b j = (b j1 , . . . , b jd ) is a row vector. note that the constraint b t b = i makes the above minimization more difficult.furthermore, the weights depend on the choice of coefficient matrix b. we can use an iteration procedure to find the solu-to determine the number m of efficient dimensions, cross validation is used by xia et al. (2002) asthe d with the smallest cv (m) value is the estimated dimension.note that the conditional expectation in (7) and (8) does not involve the time t of observation. we can apply the algorithm developed by xia et al. (2002) for the multiple index model but with more steps for the estimation of other parameters. the algorithm has the following steps.step 1. initialize the estimate of the coefficient b in the multiple index part g(xb) as b = i.step 2. initialize the parameter estimates of  = ( 1 ,  2 ,  3 ,  4 ) and  = ( 1 ,  2 , . . . ,  6 ) as  [0] and  [0] . good estimates can be the least squares estimates of the model y =  t +  6 k=1  k d k,t .step 3. in the mth iteration (m = 1, 2, . . .), computeand update the coefficient b of the multiple index part g(xb) by mave with model y * = g(xb [m] ). the updated estimate is denoted as b [m] .step 4. compute [m] ), and update the parameter estimates of  and  by the least squares method. the updated estimate is denoted as  [m] and  [m] .step 5. check the differences between the current estimates and previous estimates. if the maximum difference is less than a predetermined tolerance value (which is 0.001 in this study), then stop the iteration. otherwise, return to step 3.based on the above five steps, estimation for the parameters and the unknown function in model (1) (denoted as , and g() respectively) can be obtained. to construct the confidence bounds of each parameter in the growth curve and weekly pattern, we employ the bootstrap method (see, for example efron and tibshirani, 1993) as below.step i. randomly resample the model residualswith replacement to form a new residual series  * t . note that the superscript '*' denotes something calculated from bootstrap resampling.step ii. add  * t to the fitted model output t to form the new values y * t = t + * t . because the new residual series is generated with replacement, any model residual t can be sampled more than one time or not sampled at all.step iii. calibrate the bootstrap sample. . , t ) to obtain a bootstrap estimator ( * , * ) of parameter vector ( , ).step iv. repeat the bootstrap sampling for r times. in this study the resampling is repeated 500 times.since the bootstrapping produces a large number of estimates for each parameter (say  1 for example), the bootstrap confidence interval (or percentile interval) for  1 can be estimated by simply taking quantiles from empirical marginal distributionf  1 . to do this, we first obtain the ordered bootstrap estimates { * 11 , . . . ,  * 1r } derived from the bootstrap resampling method. the two-sided confidence interval at level  is then given by [ * 1r(/2) ,  * 1r(1/2) ]. note that unlike standard asymptotic confidence intervals, percentile intervals obtained from bootstrapping will not generally be symmetric around the parameter estimate.the cumulative effects of pollutants and weather factors on the respiratory illnesses have been recognized by many researchers (schwartz, 2000; zeger et al., 1999; dominici et al., 2003; xia et al., 2002; xia and tong, 2006; shao et al., 2010) . relevant investigations on the situation were conducted by (xia et al., 2002; xia and tong, 2006; shao et al., 2010) . in our data analysis, the 'weekend-effect' and the change of hygiene habits, together with the environmental effect, are modeled by (3). log-transformation is applied to the number of respiratory cases before model fitting.the cumulative effects are incorporated into the model by using lagged variables. for ease of implementation and interpretation, we use the same lags for all variables in our model (xia et al., 2002; shao et al., 2010) . that is, for each time point t, x = (x 1t , . . . , x p,t ) is the collection of all the environmental and weather factors with lag l, where x i,t = (x i,t , . . . , x i,tl ) with x i,t being observed value of the ith variable at time t and l is an integer to be estimated. the long-term effect of changing hygiene habits is measured by the expected amount of change (jump) on the number of admissions after sars epidemic. for a given lag l, the efficient dimension m and the optimal bandwidth h are determined by the cross validation criterion given in eq. (10). we did all computations in matlab (see http://www.mathworks.com/products/matlab/).the optimal results have lag l = 7 and m = 3, which are the same as those given before (xia et al., 2002; shao et al., 2010) .the parameter estimates for the sars effect (modeled by a growth curve) and the weekly effect are given in table 2 . the optimal bandwidth is h = 0.339. it can be seen from table 2 that all the parameters in the growth curve part are statistically significant at the level of 0.05. the expected difference of the number of respiratory cases (after log-transformation) due to the change of public health measures is estimated as 1 = 0.4977 (the second term in the growth curve is very small in the beginning of the public health measures), which means that the number of total respiratory cases after the sars epidemic reduces 39.21% in comparison with the expected number of respiratory cases (original data) before the sars epidemic. the shape and 95% confidence limits of the growth curve which model the effect of sars over time is given in fig. 5 which clearly shows the significance of the public health measure due to the sars outbreak on the number of administration. however, the impact eventually fades over time as modeled by the logistic growth curve. the impact is obvious as nearly all the parameter estimates are significantly different from zero at 95% of the confidence level (table 2) . it can also be seen from table 2 that the weekly effect is statistically significant, with an obvious lower number of administration during saturday and sunday but higher on monday.the cross-validation cv = 0.0502. the root mean squared error between observed and fitted values is rmse = 0.1414, which translates to the root mean squared error rmse = 31.25 for the original number of the cases. therefore, the model works reasonably well to capture the change of the number of hospital administrations. the residuals are plotted in fig. 6 . this reduction in the number of respiratory diseases is not an accidental event. it has come from a combination of better public awareness and the efforts of the hksar government.a by-product of our model is the assessment of the weekend-effect and the impact of different factors on the number of admitted patients. the change of ratios of the total respiratory cases for each day of the week to that for friday is given in table 2 . we can see that the number of reported cases on saturday is less than friday and decreases a little further on sunday, before a big increase on monday. tuesday and wednesday are only slightly more than friday before more cases on table 3 coefficients of the first efficient dimension reduction direction with lag l = 7, m = 3 and h = 0.332. the coefficients of greater than 0.1 are highlighted by bold font. thursday. friday has the smallest reported cases in comparison with other weekdays, perhaps again due to the weekend effect. we do not tend to study the detailed holiday effect any further here.the impact of different factors on the number of admitted patients can be assessed by the coefficients b = ( 1 , . . . ,  m ) of the index, which are given in table 3 . we pay special attention to the large coefficients associated with the factors. following (xia et al., 2002; shao et al., 2010) , we regard coefficients with absolute value greater than 0.1 as significant coefficients. with this rationale, a simple way to interpret the results is to look for coefficients larger than 0.1. let us call these coefficients as large coefficients. bear in mind that the first dimension accounts the most contribution to the model. we can see that so 2 , temperature and humidity are important factors for diseases, compared with no 2 and oz which have moderate contributions. the rsp and no x are less important to the respiratory diseases in hong kong. the second dimension is set to model the variance which is not included in the first dimension. we can see that for the second dimension, so 2 , no x and humidity are the major factors and rsp still does not show its importance. for the third dimension, all the factors show similar importance except humidity which has no coefficient larger than 0.1.as a comparison, we report here the best model for  = 0 (i.e., the change of hygiene habits does not affect the respiratory cases), with h = 0.2417 and cv = 0.05924. the root mean squared error between observed and fitted values is rmse = 0.1802, which translates to the root mean squared error rmse = 37.25 for the original number of the cases.to see the difference between the models with and without change, we provide the fitted errors (differences between the observed and fitted numbers of cases) in time series plots in fig. 6 and summary statistics in tables 3 and 4 . we can see visually from fig. 6 that the model without change tends to under-fit the observed numbers for the data before sars and over-fit the observed numbers for the data after sars. this can be confirmed by the summary statistics in table 3 . the model with change has smaller residuals with smaller standard deviation for the overall data, the data before sars and the data after sars. for the model with change, the summary statistics do not show any trend when the data are splitinto two part (before and after sars). however, for the model without change, both the mean and median prediction errors are positive for the data before sars but are negative for the data after sars, reassuring the importance of incorporating change in the model in order to capture the change after the sars outbreak.in this paper, we develop a model to assess the effect of ambient air quality and weather conditions on respiratory diseases with consideration of the impact of the change of hygiene related factors by using the multiple index model with change, and model the change after the introduction of hygiene related measures (after the sars outbreak in the case of hong kong data) by a growth curve. the model consists of three additive parts: the nonparametric multiple index model part takes account of the impact of pollutants and climatic factors, a growth curve after the sars outbreak models the impact due to public health measures and a categorical variable models the weekly effect. the data from hong kong are used for this study as the 2003 sars epidemic initiated a change of public health measures in the community due to government effort and public awareness. in addition, another possible driving force for maintaining individual hygiene habits during the epidemic was the power of the media. during the time of the sars epidemic, all media (including newspapers, radio and tv) reported daily death cases due to sars. this was probably a most effective way to alert people of the dreadful disease and the importance of having good hygienic habits. it was well observed that during the sars period the people of hong kong followed the advice of the government on hygienic measures closely, such as wearing face masks in the public, washing hands frequently, avoiding going to the public in case of having a flu, etc. the effects of pollutants and climatic factors on respiratory diseases are complicated due to the latent effect, nonlinearity and interactions between factors. the multiple index model is used to model such complicated relationship due to it flexibility and ability of handling a large number of dependent variables. the results provide indirect quantitative support to the governmental awareness program during the outbreak of the epidemic, and also the effectiveness of the media in disease control. another important observation, however, is that the growth curve starts to increase sharply near the end of 2003 (see fig. 5 ), and has flattened before mid-2004. this means that the number of illnesses had reverted to pre-sars levels in about 6 months' time. this in turn reflects the forgetfulness of hong kong people, or people in many large cities. large city people are occupied with many attractions, when the immediate threat of an epidemic fades, their alertness will wane fast. the media's interest in the epidemic is also short-lived if it does not continue to cause casualties. this suggests strongly that public health organizations and officers have to frequently remind people to keep up with their hygienic habits, so as to minimize the damage of infectious diseases.in terms of modeling practice, it is noted that the growth curve function becomes positive after the summer 2004 due to a short upward trend in the first half of year 2005. although it is possible to restrict the growth curve function to the maximum of zero by letting  3   1 , it is not a good exercise to implement such a restriction before clearer understanding of the short upward trend. furthermore, our model setting has no problem to include more parametric terms such as a linear function of time for long-term trends.la infeccin del tracto respiratorio inferior es una de las causas ms frecuentes e importantes de enfermedad humana, desde los puntos de vista de la morbilidad, la mortalidad y el costo econmico para la sociedad. se ha estimado que en ee.uu. se producen anualmente alrededor de 4 millones de casos de neumona adquirida en la comunidad 1, 2 , con 600.000 hospitalizaciones; parecen estar aumentando tanto la mortalidad como la proporcin de hospitalizaciones atribuibles a este tipo de infeccin 3 . la incidencia general ha oscilado entre 2,6 y 16,8 casos por 1.000 adultos por ao, en varios estudios comunitarios 4 ; sin embargo, la incidencia vara considerablemente con la edad, el sexo, la raza y el nivel socioeconmico [5] [6] [7] . por ejemplo, la enfermedad es ms frecuente en los negros que en los blancos 8 , en las mujeres que en los hombres 8 y en las personas mayores que en las ms jvenes 8 . como era de esperar, es especialmente frecuente entre las personas que viven en residencias de ancianos 9 .en ee.uu. la neumona es la sexta causa principal de muerte y la primera causa de muerte por infeccin 5 . los autores de un extenso metaanlisis sobre el pronstico y la evolucin de 33.148 personas con neumona adquirida en la comunidad encontraron una tasa de mortalidad global del 13,7% 10 . en los pases desarrollados, la tasa de mortalidad anual es de aproximadamente 50 a 60 por 100.000 11 . al igual que las cifras de incidencia, sin embargo, las relacionadas con la mortalidad tambin varan de modo considerable en grupos especficos de pacientes. como era de esperar, la tasa de mortalidad en los pacientes que no necesitan hospitalizacin es generalmente baja, aproximadamente el 0,1% 8 . sin embargo, las tasas de mortalidad comunicadas en pacientes con neumona de gravedad suficiente para requerir ingreso en el hospital oscilan entre el 4% y casi el 40% 7, 10, 12 . la edad tambin es una variable muy importante; se ha estimado que la neumona es responsable de casi la mitad de todas las muertes por enfermedad infecciosa en la poblacin geritrica 13 .en conjunto, la neumona adquirida en el hospital aparece en aproximadamente el 0,5% al 1% de los pacientes ingresados 14 . sin embargo, la incidencia es considerablemente mayor en situaciones especficas. por ejemplo, se ha demostrado que esta forma de neumona complica la evolucin de hasta el 18% de los pacientes sometidos a ciruga 15 , y del 6% al 52% de los que reciben ventilacin mecnica 16 . en este ltimo grupo la neumona representa casi la mitad de todas las infecciones 17, 18 . entre las infecciones nosocomiales, la neumona tiene la mortalidad y la morbilidad ms altas 19 ; su presencia prolonga la estancia hospitalaria de los supervivientes, en una media de 7 a 9 das por paciente 20 , con el consiguiente aumento del costo 21, 22 . la mortalidad de estos pacientes es alta, y diferentes investigadores la estiman en el 30% al 70% 23 , pero la mortalidad atribuible a la neumona en este contexto de comorbilidad sustancial es considerablemente menor 17, 24 .los microorganismos pueden entrar en el pulmn y causar infeccin por tres rutas: rbol traqueobronquial, vasculatura pulmo-nar y directamente desde el mediastino o el cuello o a travs del diafragma o la pared torcica. aunque existe superposicin, la infeccin adquirida por cada una de esas vas produce anomalas pulmonares bastante caractersticas, que se pueden reconocer en el estudio tanto anatomopatolgico como radiolgico.la infeccin adquirida a travs del rbol traqueobronquial se produce con ms frecuencia por aspiracin o inhalacin de microorganismos; a veces se produce despus de la implantacin fsica directa desde una fuente infectada, como un broncoscopio 25 , o de la extensin de la enfermedad a la va area desde un ganglio linftico peribronquial (p. ej., en la tuberculosis). en lo que respecta a la infeccin pulmonar, usamos los trminos inhalacin para referirnos a la respiracin de aire que contiene material potencialmente infeccioso, como esporas micticas o ncleos goticulares que albergan bacterias o partculas vricas, y aspiracin para referirnos a la introduccin de material slido o lquido en los pulmones. cuando este material es un cuerpo extrao o es abundante (como sucede con frecuencia en el caso del contenido gstrico aspirado), suele causar dao pulmonar directamente por mecanismos qumicos o fsicos (vase pgina 744); usamos el trmino neumona por aspiracin para referirnos a esta lesin. la aspiracin de cantidades menores de secreciones nasales u orales que contienen microorganismos tambin es una causa frecuente de neumona, en este caso originada por los propios microorganismos. aunque este proceso tambin se ha denominado neumona por aspiracin, preferimos referirnos a esta forma de enfermedad por el tipo especfico del germen causal (p. ej., neumona anaerobia, actinomicosis).la tos o el estornudo de un individuo cuyo tracto respiratorio est colonizado o infectado producen una mirada de gotitas diminutas, cargadas de microorganismos. al contacto con el aire, las gotitas pierden agua y se convierten en ncleos goticulares, que, debido a su tamao extremadamente pequeo, pueden permanecer suspendidos en el aire durante perodos prolongados; la exposicin de otra persona a este aire contaminado puede originar diseminacin de los microorganismos 26 . es probable que los ncleos goticulares inhalados con un tamao de 1 a 2 m afecten al epitelio de las vas areas perifricas, donde pueden proliferar y causar enfermedad. dependiendo de su virulencia, puede ser necesario un nmero sustancial de microorganismos para provocar enfermedad, debido a que las cantidades menores son eliminadas con efectividad por las defensas del husped 27 ; sin embargo, algunos microorganismos (p. ej., mycobacterium tuberculosis) son capaces de producir enfermedad incluso con un inculo pequeo. adems de la transmisin por inhalacin de microorganismos desde una persona a otra, los productos de algunos microorganismos, como las microconidias de histoplasma capsulatum, son inhalados en forma de partculas trasportadas por el aire, procedentes del suelo contaminado.como ya se ha dicho, la aspiracin de secreciones orofarngeas es tambin un mecanismo frecuente por el que los grmenes llegan a los pulmones. la flora orofarngea del adulto normal contiene mltiples microorganismos aerobios y anaerobios 28 . la mayor parte de ellos son comensales con virulencia baja, que no causan nunca infeccin pulmonar; sin embargo, algunos (p. ej., actinomyces israelii y diversas bacterias anaerobias) pueden causar enfermedad respiratoria si son aspirados en cantidad suficiente por un husped susceptible. adems, no es infrecuente que las vas areas superiores estn colonizadas por grmenes patgenos, como streptococcus pneumoniae o staphylococcus aureus (en personas por lo dems sanas), o por bacterias gramnegativas potencialmente virulentas (en pacientes hospitalizados o con enfermedades crnicas). en ambas situaciones, la aspiracin de saliva o secreciones nasales contaminadas puede suministrar un inculo bacteriano suficiente para causar infeccin. la importancia de este mecanismo se pone de relieve por el hecho de que a veces se produce aspiracin asintomtica en muchas personas sanas, y con una frecuencia an mayor en pacientes comatosos, que han ingerido cantidades excesivas de alcohol o cuyas secreciones nasofarngeas estn aumentadas a consecuencia de una infeccin vrica del tracto respiratorio superior 29 .el depsito de bacterias y hongos en las vas areas o en la superficie del epitelio alveolar por inhalacin o aspiracin se puede seguir de uno de tres acontecimientos: 1) destruccin y eliminacin de los microorganismos con restauracin de la esterilidad pulmonar original; 2) proliferacin limitada pero prolongada de los microorganismos sobre la superficie epitelial, no asociada a invasin transepitelial (colonizacin), y 3) proliferacin ms intensa de los microorganismos, asociada a una reaccin inflamatoria aguda y, muchas veces, necrosis tisular. el que se produzca uno u otro de estos acontecimientos depende de diversos factores, entre ellos tamao del inculo, virulencia del microorganismo, estado de las reacciones inflamatorias e inmunitarias del husped y presencia o ausencia de enfermedad pulmonar subyacente 30 .los microorganismos producen muchas sustancias que aumentan la probabilidad de colonizacin o de invasin, entre ellas proteasas y otras sustancias qumicas que daan directamente las clulas epiteliales o el tejido conjuntivo 31 ; sustancias causantes de una reduccin de la limpieza mucociliar, como la piocianina 32 ; molculas de adherencia que favorecen la unin a la superficie epitelial, y sustancias inhibidoras de la reaccin inflamatoria del hesped 33 .la patogenia de la infeccin del tracto respiratorio inferior por virus es algo distinta de la de las bacterias y los hongos. una vez que se ha depositado sobre la mucosa del tracto respiratorio, un virus debe llegar a las clulas epiteliales subyacentes para propagarse. el virus accede a esas clulas por medio de molculas que interactan con receptores especficos de la superficie de la clula husped. la presencia y la naturaleza de tales molculas y receptores son importantes para determinar la infectividad del virus y el lugar en el que produce enfermedad. despus de penetrar a travs de la membrana celular, el adn vrico (o el adn recin sintetizado en el caso de los virus arn) acta como una plantilla para la produccin de varias molculas necesarias para la formacin de nuevos virus. se pueden producir varios resultados: 1) la clula husped puede morir y liberar los virus recin formados para que infecten otras clulas; 2) la clula husped puede conservar la viabilidad y seguir produciendo y liberando nuevos viriones, un proceso que se puede asociar a una reaccin inmunitaria frente a los antgenos vricos que se expresan sobre la superficie celular, y 3) el virus puede permanecer dentro de la clula en estado latente durante perodos prolongados (p. ej., despus de la incorporacin del adn vrico en el adn del husped) y ms adelante reaparecer para causar enfermedad, cuando se altera la inmunidad general del husped.la evolucin de la infeccin vrica del tracto respiratorio inferior, en particular la causada por el virus influenza, se puede complicar con una neumona bacteriana superpuesta. es probable que la tendencia a la aparicin de esta infeccin guarde relacin con varios factores 34, 35 , entre ellos 1) deficiencia de la limpieza mucociliar, a causa de prdida de clulas del tapizado de las vas areas y los alvolos, o anomalas ciliares; 2) presencia de lquido de edema alveolar, que contiene nutrientes utilizables para la proliferacin bacteriana; 3) alteracin de la fagocitosis y de la eficiencia bactericida de los macrfagos alveolares; 4) interferencia con la quimiotaxis de los leucocitos polimorfonucleares, y 5) potenciacin de la adherencia bacteriana al epitelio daado.la enfermedad pulmonar subyacente es un factor de riesgo importante para la infeccin pulmonar. por ejemplo, los pacientes con epoc tienen una mayor susceptibilidad a la enfermedad vrica y clamidisica. la patogenia de ese aumento de la susceptibilidad no est clara, pero es posible que guarde relacin con cambios estructurales en el epitelio de la va area (p. ej., metaplasia epidermoide e hiperplasia de las clulas caliciformes), limpieza mucociliar anormal o trastorno de la respuesta inflamatoria local. otro ejemplo es el micetoma (aspergiloma), que casi siempre se desarrolla en una cavidad pulmonar o foco de bronquiectasia preexistente.los datos clnicos tiles en el diagnstico etiolgico de la neumona incluyen edad del paciente, presencia de enfermedad coexistente y su gravedad, rapidez de la progresin y el hecho de que la infeccin se haya adquirido en el hospital (nosocomial) o en la comunidad. por ejemplo, una neumona adquirida en la comunidad, con comienzo brusco y asociada a escalofros y recuento leucoctico por encima de 20.000/mm 3 , probablemente sea de origen neumoccico; sin embargo, estas caractersticas no son suficientemente especficas para diferenciar de modo fiable entre la infeccin por neumococos y la causada por el gnero legionella u otros microorganismos en un determinado paciente 36 . la gravedad y la causa de la neumona estn muy influenciadas por el estado inmunitario, y los pacientes inmunodeprimidos estn predispuestos a la neumona diseminada, muchas veces por grmenes oportunistas. la edad tambin es una variable importante para la prediccin; por ejemplo, la neumona est causada con ms probabilidad por virus, chlamydia pneumoniae o mycoplasma pneumoniae en los pacientes jvenes, comparados con los individuos mayores. la gravedad y el patrn de la infeccin causada por un microorganismo particular tambin guardan relacin con la edad en algunos casos; por ejemplo, mientras que los rinovirus suelen causar slo coriza en los adultos, pueden producir laringitis estridulosa, bronquitis, bronquiolitis y bronconeumona en los nios 37 .aunque a veces es posible detectar la neumona por los hallazgos de la exploracin fsica del trax cuando todava es normal la radiografa, con ms frecuencia los signos fsicos de enfermedad pulmonar faltan por completo en pacientes que ya presentan zonas significativas de consolidacin parenquimatosa 38 . adems, pueden existir signos radiogrficos de neumona, sin signos fsicos acompaantes en una zona, y suceder lo contrario en otras zonas. de modo similar, ningn dato nico de la anamnesis predice con seguridad la presencia o ausencia de neumona detectable en las radiografas 39 .la infeccin del tracto respiratorio inferior adquirida a travs de las vas areas puede estar limitada predominantemente a esas vas (traquetis, bronquitis o bronquiolitis) o afectar al parnquima pulmonar (neumona). la neumona, a su vez, se puede subdividir en tres tipos, cada uno de ellos con caractersticas anatomopatolgicas y radiolgicas bastante tpicas: neumona del espacio areo no segmentaria (lobar), bronconeumona (neumona lobulillar) y neumona intersticial. a pesar de alguna superposicin entre esos patrones en lo que respecta a las etiologas subyacentes 40, 41 , es posible reconocerlos con frecuencia suficiente, y se asocian a microorganismos especficos en muchos casos, por lo que el reconocimiento de esos tipos tiene utilidad diagnstica en el contexto clnico apropiado. por ejemplo, la neumona del espacio areo no segmentaria suele ser de origen bacteriano y se debe la mayora de las veces a s. pneumoniae, mientras que la neumona intersticial difusa se debe con frecuencia a la infeccin por virus o por pneumocystis jiroveci (p. carinii) 42, 43 . se debe recordar, sin embargo, que diversos factores pueden modificar las manifestaciones radiolgicas tpicas de la infeccin pulmonar 44 , entre ellos enfermedades subyacentes (como el enfisema) 45 , la edad y el estado inmunitario del paciente. como era de esperar, la correlacin entre los signos radiolgicos, anatomopatolgicos y microbiolgicos es mejor con la tcar que con la radiografa 46, 47 . traquetis, bronquitis y bronquiolitis. la infeccin que afecta predominantemente a las vas areas puede estar limitada a la trquea, los bronquios o los bronquiolos, o puede afectar a dos o tres de esas estructuras. los virus (en particular el virus sincitial respiratorio [vsr] y los virus parainfluenza) y los micoplasmas son los patgenos ms frecuentes. en trminos de morbilidad tiene gran importancia la bronquiolitis, que se observa sobre todo en nios y se caracteriza desde el punto de vista clnico por sibilancias, disnea y, en los casos con afectacin ms grave, cianosis, postracin y muerte 48, 49 . la bronquiolitis vrica de la infancia es bien conocida como precursora de las bronquiectasias en el adulto y del pulmn hipertransparente unilateral (sndrome de swyer-james), y ha sido implicada tanto en la patogenia como en la exacerbacin del asma 50 .aunque es relativamente infrecuente, la traquetis bacteriana localizada es una infeccin potencialmente seria en los nios, y a veces tambin en los adultos 51 . los grmenes causales ms frecuentes son s. aureus y haemophilus influenzae 52 . la enfermedad se ve con frecuencia despus de una infeccin vrica de las vas areas superiores, y puede producir obstruccin potencialmente mortal como consecuencia de la acumulacin de tejido de granulacin y exudado inflamatorio en la luz traqueal. al igual que en la infeccin vrica del tracto respiratorio, la bronquitis bacteriana puede constituir una alteracin aislada o asociarse a traquetis y/o bronquiolitis. en los nios la afectacin simultnea de las vas areas proximales y distales constituye una manifestacin relativamente frecuente de la tos ferina. entre los adultos, la infeccin bronquial se ve ms frecuentemente en pacientes con enfermedad subyacente de las vas areas, habitualmente epoc, bronquiectasias o fibrosis qustica. en los pacientes con fibrosis qustica la infeccin crnica por pseudo-monas aeruginosa o por burkholderia cepacia representa probablemente un factor importante para la patogenia de las bronquiectasias progresivas que se observa en muchos casos.la bronquitis aguda se suele asociar a radiografa normal, o slo a signos inespecficos; en ocasiones se encuentra engrosamiento de la pared bronquial y/o dilatacin de los bronquios 53 . la bronquiolitis puede cursar tambin con radiografa normal, o manifestarse en forma de acentuacin de las marcas pulmonares o un patrn reticulonodular. en la tcar la inflamacin de la pared bronquiolar y la ocupacin de la luz de los bronquiolos por exudado dan lugar a la presencia de ndulos centrolobulillares pequeos y lneas ramificadas (patrn de rbol en brote; figura 6-1) 54 . neumona del espacio areo. la neumona no segmentaria del espacio areo est causada la mayora de las veces por s. pneumoniae, aunque tambin se pueden encontrar otros grmenes, como klebsiella pneumoniae. la caracterstica patognica ms importante de esta forma de la enfermedad parece ser la produccin rpida de lquido de edema, con una reaccin celular relativamente menor. la consolidacin neumnica suele ocurrir inicialmente en la periferia del pulmn, debajo de la pleura visceral 55 . conforme aumenta su cantidad, el lquido de edema fluye directamente de un cino a otro; como habitualmente contiene abundantes microorganismos, al mismo tiempo se extiende la infeccin. as pues, la infeccin no se localiza en focos discretos, como en la bronconeumona, sino que ocupa una porcin confluente del parnquima pulmonar (vase figura en color 6-1), limitada slo por los lmites de la pleura y, en ltimo trmino, por la reaccin inflamatoria celular del husped.desde el punto de vista radiogrfico, la neumona no segmentaria del espacio areo aparece como una consolidacin homognea, relativamente bien delimitada respecto al parnquima vecino no afecto (figura 6-2). como implica el nombre de la enfermedad, la consolidacin sobrepasa tpicamente los lmites segmentarios, un dato muy importante para distinguir entre esta forma y la bronconeumona. por lo general el proceso llega hasta una cisura interlobar, pero rara vez puede afectar a todo el lbulo (lo que justifica la preferencia del trmino neumona aguda del espacio areo en vez de neumona lobar). los bronquios mayores suelen permanecer permeables y con aire en su interior, lo que da lugar a la formacin de un broncograma areo. la cantidad de exudado inflamatorio puede ser tan grande como para originar expansin de un lbulo y dar lugar al signo de la cisura abombada (figura 6-3) 56 . el diagnstico clnico de neumona aguda del espacio areo causada por s. pneumoniae es indicado muchas veces por la presencia de tos, expectoracin, escalofros, fiebre y, en particular, dolor pleural. en muchos casos los signos fsicos indican la localizacin de la enfermedad, a pesar de que los signos clsicos de la consolidacin parenquimatosa (retraso inspiratorio, percusin alterada, respiracin bronquial, estertores finos y pectoriloquia fona) se oyen ahora con mucha menos frecuencia que antes, probablemente debido a la mejor atencin mdica de la poblacin y el inicio temprano de tratamiento antibitico. de hecho, la exploracin fsica del trax slo suele revelar estertores finos y disminucin del murmullo vesicular. bronconeumona. son ejemplos de bronconeumona la infeccin por s. aureus, la mayora de las bacterias gramnegativas y algunos hongos. desde el punto de vista patognico, difiere de la neumona no segmentaria del espacio areo por la produccin de una cantidad relativamente pequea de lquido y exudacin rpida de numerosos leucocitos polimorfonucleares, tpicamente alrededor de los bronquiolos membranosos y respiratorios pequeos (figura . los neutrfilos parecen limitar la diseminacin de los microorganismos, al menos inicialmente, y por tanto la enfermedad tiene un aspecto focal (vase figura en color 6-2); la extensin de la infeccin dentro de los lobulillos secundarios produce neumona confluente, un proceso que se asocia muchas veces a necrosis y hemorragia.el patrn de curacin de la bronconeumona tambin es distinto al de la neumona aguda del espacio areo causada por s. pneumoniae. puesto que en esta ltima no suele existir destruccin tisular, la restauracin de la arquitectura pulmonar normal constituye la regla una vez que las defensas del husped controlan el proceso. en contraste, la bronconeumona se debe tpicamente a grmenes virulentos y hay cierto grado de destruccin tisular. as pues, si el paciente sobrevive a la infeccin, es inevitable la organizacin del foco inflamatorio, que se manifiesta durante la fase precoz por la presencia de focos de tejido fibroblstico en las vas areas y los espacios areos alveolares (neumona en fase de organizacin) y ms adelante por formacin de tejido fibroso maduro y un grado variable de prdida de la arquitectura pulmonar normal.las manifestaciones radiolgicas de la bronconeumona pueden oscilar desde zonas focales peribronquiales y peribronquiolares de consolidacin, con afectacin de uno o varios segmentos de un solo lbulo, hasta la consolidacin multilobar bilateral (figura 57 . la inflamacin de los bronquiolos pequeos y los alvolos adyacentes produce opacidades nodulares centrolobulillares mal definidas, de 4 a 10 mm de dimetro (ndulos del espacio areo), o se puede extender para afectar a todo el lobulillo secundario (consolidacin lobulillar) 43, 58 . la confluencia de la neumona hacia los lobulillos adyacentes puede producir un patrn que simula la neumona no segmentaria del espacio areo; la distincin con esta ltima se puede establecer en la mayora de los casos por la presencia de una distribucin segmentaria o lobulillar de las alteraciones en otras zonas. debido a que el proceso afecta a las vas areas, la bronconeumona produce con frecuencia prdida de volumen de los segmentos o lbulos enfermos.como ya se ha dicho, la bronconeumona est causada tpicamente por grmenes muy patgenos y se asocia a exudacin de abundantes neutrfilos; la accin combinada de las toxinas microbianas y las enzimas leucocticas produce destruccin tisular 59 , que puede provocar varias complicaciones, como formacin de abscesos, neumatoceles y gangrena pulmonar. absceso pulmonar. el tamao de los abscesos pulmonares vara desde los que slo se pueden ver con el microscopio hasta los que ocupan gran parte de un lbulo. los mayores erosionan con frecuencia una va area, con salida de material necrtico y formacin de una cavidad. estos abscesos pueden ser solitarios o mltiples y, en el caso de una enfermedad de evolucin relativamente larga, pueden causar destruccin y fibrosis pulmonares considerables (vase figura en color .las manifestaciones radiolgicas incluyen masas nicas o mltiples, frecuentemente cavitadas (figura . pueden aparecer aisladas o dentro de zonas de consolidacin. en una revisin de los signos radiogrficos de 50 pacientes, los bordes internos de los abscesos eran lisos en casi el 90% de los casos y deshilachados en el resto 60 . haba niveles aire-lquido en casi el 70% y consolidacin del parnquima adyacente en el 50%. el grosor parietal mximo era de 4 mm o menos en aproximadamente el 5% de los casos, entre 5 y 15 mm en aproximadamente el 80% y mayor de 15 mm en aproximadamente el 15%.desde el punto de vista clnico, un absceso pulmonar puede aparecer en la evolucin de una neumona conocida o puede constituir la manifestacin inicial de la enfermedad. muchos abscesos estn causados por bacterias anerobias 61 , y en esos casos el paciente suele ser un anciano, con higiene oral deficiente y alguna enfermedad subyacente que predispone a la aspiracin; los signos y sntomas de la enfermedad pueden ser notablemente leves, aunque es frecuente la fiebre. s. aureus y p. aeruginosa son otros patgenos relativamente frecuentes. se observa hemoptisis en algunos casos, y puede constituir la manifestacin inicial, a veces fatal 62 . gangrena pulmonar. una complicacin relativamente infrecuente de la neumona es la formacin de fragmentos de pulmn necrtico en la cavidad de un absceso (secuestro o gangrena pulmonar) (figura 6-7). la patogenia de la necrosis pulmonar en estos casos puede guardar relacin con la accin directa de las toxinas bacterianas, la isquemia secundaria a trombosis de los vasos pulmonares adyacentes al foco de neumona o la combinacin de ambos factores 63 . cualquiera que sea el mecanismo, se considera probable que la separacin entre tejido necrtico y pulmn viable adyacente est mediada, al menos en parte, por enzimas leucocticas. las manifestaciones radiolgicas son inicialmente transparencias pequeas dentro de una zona de consolidacin c a p  t u l o 6  enfermedades infecciosas de los pulmones 227neumona aguda por klebsiella: abombamiento de la cisura. imagen del pulmn derecho en una radiografa posteroanterior de trax, que revela una consolidacin masiva del espacio areo con afectacin de la mayor parte del lbulo superior. el desplazamiento hacia abajo de la cisura menor (flechas) indica expansin lobar; las zonas centrales de radiotransparencia (entre las puntas de flecha) indican necrosis parenquimatosas. bronconeumona aguda. el corte histolgico (a) muestra enfermedad precoz formada por un exudado inflamatorio agudo dentro de la luz de un bronquiolo terminal y en el parnquima pulmonar inmediatamente prximo; los espacios areos vecinos no estn afectados. b. se muestra la enfermedad ms avanzada; aunque existe confluencia de la inflamacin que se origina en varios bronquiolos, todava se identifica la naturaleza focal del proceso. el cultivo pulmonar post mortem fue positivo para pseudomonas aeruginosa. ( wb saunders, 1999.) pulmonar, de modo habitual en un lbulo agrandado que muestra abombamiento de la cisura hacia fuera 64 . las transparencias confluyen con rapidez para formar una cavidad grande que contiene lquido y pulmn necrtico. la proyeccin en decbito lateral demuestra que los fragmentos de pulmn necrtico se mueven libremente dentro de la cavidad.neumatocele. el neumatocele es un espacio lleno de gas con paredes finas que habitualmente guarda relacin con una infeccin; de forma caracterstica el neumatocele aumenta de tamao a lo largo de das o semanas y casi siempre acaba por desaparecer (figura [6] [7] [8] . entre los varios mecanismos que se han propuesto para explicar su formacin el ms probable es el drenaje de un foco de parnquima pulmonar necrtico, seguido por obstruccin con mecanismo valvular de la va area que ventila la zona. la vlvula, que puede ser un exudado inflamatorio y/o pared necrtica de la va area, permite la entrada de aire al espacio parenquimatoso durante la inspiracin, pero impide que el aire salga durante la espiracin 65 . la complicacin est causada la mayora de las veces por s. aureus en lactantes y nios y por p. jiroveci en los pacientes con sida 66 . neumona intersticial. la neumona intersticial se asocia tpicamente a infeccin por virus, m. pneumoniae o p. jiroveci. se encuentran dos patrones anatomopatolgicos, dependiendo en parte de la virulencia del germen y de la rapidez con que se produzca la infeccin: 1) infeccin relativamente prolongada o insidiosa que se manifiesta de forma predominante por infiltracin linfoctica de los tabiques alveolares sin alteraciones significativas del espacio areo (figura 6-9a) y 2) enfermedad con progresin ms rpida o ms virulenta, caracterizada por lesin alveolar difusa (figura 6-9b). el mecanismo patognico subyacente en la segunda forma de la enfermedad guarda relacin con la lesin de la membrana alveolocapilar. las manifestaciones histolgicas incluyen engrosamiento intersticial por el lquido de edema, congestin capilar y un infiltrado celular inflamatorio; hiperplasia de las clulas tipo ii, y exudado proteinceo dentro de los espacios areos. en los conductos alveolares y los bronquiolos respiratorios el exudado tpicamente est concentrado y aplanado (membranas hialinas).las manifestaciones radiolgicas de la neumona intersticial causada por infeccin vrica o por micoplasmas son un patrn reticular o reticulonodular (figura 6-10) 67 . la bronquiolitis asociada puede producir opacidades centrolobulillares, lineales y nodulares 54 ; la bronquitis se puede manifestar por engrosamiento peribronquial y acentuacin de las marcas pulmonares. tpicamente la neumona por p. jiroveci se manifiesta en las radiografas por un patrn granular fino o reticulonodular mal definido bilateral y simtrico (figura 6-11a) 68 . en caso de infeccin ms grave los sig-secuestro pulmonar. un corte del pulmn izquierdo muestra un fragmento grande de pulmn necrtico dentro de una cavidad en el lbulo superior derecho. se aisl klebsiella pneumoniae en el esputo pre mortem del paciente. neumona intersticial. la biopsia pulmonar abierta de un varn de 68 aos con aplasia eritroctica (a) muestra engrosamiento intersticial ms o menos difuso por un infiltrado celular (que a mayor aumento en b se ve que es predominantemente linfoctico); los espacios areos no estn afectados. se identificaron citomegalovirus en la histologa (flecha en b) y mediante inmunohistoqumica. otro corte perteneciente a un nio de 8 aos con leucemia (c) muestra engrosamiento intersticial leve, hiperplasia de las clulas tipo ii, material proteico dentro de los espacios areos alveolares y varias membranas hialinas (flechas). el patrn es de lesin alveolar difusa. se identificaron virus del herpes zster en las clulas epiteliales alveolares. nos progresan hacia una opacificacin parenquimatosa ms homognea que vara desde el aspecto de vidrio esmerilado hasta la consolidacin; muchas veces se aprecia un patrn reticulonodular heterogneo en la periferia de la opacidad homognea 69 . la alteracin predominante en la tcar son en zonas bilaterales extensas de atenuacin en vidrio esmerilado (figura 6-11b); entre el 20% y el 40% de los pacientes tiene ndulos pequeos, opacidades reticulares y engrosamiento de los tabiques interlobulillares 70 . muchas infecciones vricas de los pulmones comienzan de forma insidiosa con fiebre, cefalea y malestar general, aunque no es infrecuente ver otras manifestaciones (p. ej., exantema, faringitis, artralgias) en casos debidos a grmenes especficos. el sntoma principal de la afectacin del tracto respiratorio inferior es la tos; aunque al principio sea seca, se puede acompaar de expectoracin mucosa o francamente purulenta si se prolonga la infeccin. este ltimo dato debe plantear la posibilidad de sobreinfeccin bacteriana. la enfermedad ms grave se puede manifestar con disnea y, rara vez, insuficiencia respiratoria. la distincin entre infeccin vrica e infeccin causada por bacterias u otros grmenes no suele ser posible en general slo con los datos clnicos.la infeccin a travs de los vasos pulmonares suele aparecer en pacientes que tienen un foco de infeccin extrapulmonar. muchas veces el origen de esta infeccin es evidente por los signos clnicos. sin embargo, en ocasiones, como en la endocarditis o en el caso de focos diminutos localizados en la piel o en un rgano interno, el foco primario no es evidente. los microorganismos responsables de la infeccin pueden circular libremente en la sangre (sepsis) o pueden estar unidos a material trombtico (mbolos spticos). es tpico el aspecto nodular de los focos individuales. cuando la enfermedad pulmonar se debe a sepsis tpicamente adopta la forma de innumerables ndulos de 1 a 5 mm de dimetro (infeccin miliar) (figura 6-12); puesto que los microorganismos se diseminan probablemente desde los capilares alveolares, las arteriolas y las vnulas, la enfermedad tiende a distribuirse de modo ms o menos aleatorio dentro del lobulillo. este patrn se encuentra con ms frecuencia en la tuberculosis, pero tambin se ve a veces en la infeccin mictica (sobre todo en pacientes inmunodeprimidos). la enfermedad pulmonar causada por mbolos spticos se manifiesta tambin por ndulos mltiples, aunque habitualmente menos numerosos; adems, la oclusin de arterias pulmonares por trombos puede originar hemorragia o infarto (o ambos) y focos peor definidos o con forma de cua. el aspecto radiolgico de la infeccin miliar se caracteriza por opacidades puntiformes bien definidas, de modo habitual con una distribucin uniforme por ambos pulmones 71 ; a veces existe un ligero predominio basal que refleja el aumento del flujo sanguneo inducido por la gravedad (figura [6] [7] [8] [9] [10] [11] [12] [13] . cuando comienzan a verse, los ndulos miden de 1 a 2 mm de dimetro (el trmino miliar se refiere a un tamao similar al de los granos de mijo); en ausencia de tratamiento adecuado el dimetro puede aumentar hasta 3 mm-5 mm 71 . los mbolos spticos se caracterizan por la presencia de ndulos que de modo habitual miden de 1 a 3 cm de dimetro y que muchas veces estn cavitados (figura [6] [7] [8] [9] [10] [11] [12] [13] [14] . como ya se ha dicho, la tc tambin muestra con frecuencia zonas de consolidacin subpleural con forma de cua, muchas veces con zonas centrales de necrosis o cavitacin franca (vase figura 6-14) 72 .se puede producir diseminacin directa a travs de la pared torcica o del diafragma, o desde el mediastino, en pacientes que tienen heridas torcicas contaminadas o por extensin de la infeccin desde un foco extrapulmonar, por ejemplo un absceso abdominal o una mediastinitis secundaria a rotura esofgica. en esos casos la enfermedad pulmonar se localiza generalmente en una zona contigua a la infeccin extrapulmonar y muchas veces adopta la forma de absceso. a veces no se identifica con facilidad el origen de esta infeccin 73 .el diagnstico de neumona se suele establecer en base a la anamnesis y los signos radiogrficos. en una persona previamente sana que presenta fiebre de comienzo reciente, sntomas sistmicos, tos, 232 c a p  t u l o 6  enfermedades infecciosas de los pulmones f i g u r a 6 -1 3 tuberculosis miliar. la imagen del pulmn izquierdo en una radiografa anteroposterior de trax muestra numerosos ndulos bien definidos de 1 a 3 mm de dimetro, ms abundantes en la base. b expectoracin purulenta, neutrofilia y consolidacin del espacio areo en la radiografa de trax, el diagnstico se puede establecer con un alto grado de confianza 74 . sin embargo, no todos esos signos se encuentran en todos los casos, y se debe tener cuidado de no infradiagnosticar ni sobrediagnosticar la enfermedad, sobre todo en determinadas circunstancias. por ejemplo, no es infrecuente que algunos de los sntomas y signos tpicos de neumona falten o estn alterados en ancianos 75, 76 . adems, la presencia de una enfermedad cardiopulmonar subyacente puede causar problemas diagnsticos en relacin con la diferenciacin con el infarto, la hemorragia y el edema de pulmn 6, 77 .la ventilacin mecnica tambin representa un contexto en el que puede ser difcil el diagnstico. por ejemplo, en un paciente sometido a ventilacin mecnica que presenta sndrome de dificultad respiratoria aguda (sdra) la evaluacin clnica quizs no reconozca la fase proliferativa (de organizacin) del sdra, el empiema, la sinusitis nosocomial 78 o la infeccin relacionada con catter como causa de la fiebre, y sta se puede atribuir errneamente a la presencia de una neumona 79, 80 . de modo similar, las secreciones traqueales purulentas procedentes del tracto respiratorio superior o inferior rara vez estn causadas por una neumona en los pacientes que reciben ventilacin prolongada 81, 82 . adems de la variabilidad interobservador 86 , el diagnstico radiogrfico de neumona relacionada con el ventilador carece tambin de sensibilidad y especificidad 77 : aunque la presencia de broncograma areo guarda relacin con neumona en la mayora de los casos, la utilidad de ese signo se limita a los pacientes sin sdra subyacente.la identificacin de un germen especfico responsable de la neumona se ve dificultada por la falta de sensibilidad y de especificidad de las pruebas de laboratorio que se utilizan habitualmente. sin embargo, existen pocas pruebas de que los resultados de la investigacin microbiolgica modifiquen la eleccin del tratamiento en la mayora de los pacientes con neumona adquirida en la comunidad que no precisan ingreso en el hospital; adems, en este contexto la mortalidad no parece guardar relacin con la determinacin de una causa especfica de la neumona 83 . con toda probabilidad, los pacientes en los que no se puede identificar un germen sufren neumona por s. pneumoniae o m. pneumoniae, virus o microorganismos atpicos como chlamydia. es probable que la mayora de estos pacientes reciba antibiticos adecuados para su tratamiento o que no necesite antibiticos dado el origen vrico de la infeccin 84, 85 .en contraste con el paciente levemente enfermo que tiene una neumona adquirida en la comunidad, la identificacin temprana del germen responsable probablemente mejore el pronstico en los pacientes graves, sobre todo en aquellos que tienen una neumona nosocomial relacionada con el ventilador 86, 87 . el tratamiento emprico innecesario de los pacientes que no tienen neumona tambin conlleva un riesgo significativo: los pacientes que reciben este tratamiento pueden infectarse ms adelante por grmenes resistentes, y esas infecciones se asocian a una mortalidad ms alta que la de los pacientes no tratados previamente con antibiticos 88, 89 . a pesar de estas observaciones, muchos investigadores han encontrado que despus de corregir las variables de confusin que contribuyen independientemente a la mortalidad, la importancia de la neumona como causa de muerte parece ser relativamente escasa o nula en los pacientes con neumona nosocomial relacionada con el ventilador 17, 24, 89, 90 . es posible que la mortalidad atribuible a la neumona nosocomial en estos pacientes se limite a las infecciones causadas por ciertos patgenos de alto riesgo, como p. aeruginosa, el gnero acinetobacter y xanthomonas maltophilia 91 .estas inconsistencias explican, al menos en parte, la diversidad de estrategias que se han propuesto para el tratamiento de los pacientes que tienen una neumona relacionada con el ventilador 92, 93 y para el estudio de los pacientes que tienen una neumona adquirida en la comunidad 94 . preferimos intentar establecer un diagnstico lo ms firme posible y definir la causa de la infeccin en los pacientes que tienen enfermedad grave, en los que tienen un cuadro progresivo a pesar del tratamiento inicial y en los que tienen riesgo de infecciones oportunistas o poco frecuentes por inmunodepresin o por una exposicin ambiental particular 94, 95 . se han descrito diversas tcnicas para conseguir ese diagnstico; su empleo depende de la pericia y las preferencias de los consultores de una determinada institucin. cultivo y tincin de gram del esputo. en ausencia de medidas apropiadas para asegurar una muestra de buena calidad, la tincin de gram y el cultivo del esputo no son sensibles ni especficos para la identificacin del germen causal de la neumona 85, 94 . de hecho, muchas muestras de esputo son poco satisfactorias para el estudio diagnstico debido a contaminacin por la flora de la va area superior, ausencia de secreciones de las vas areas inferiores o erradicacin de los patgenos del esputo por el uso previo de antibiticos 94 . sin embargo, cuando es posible obtener esputo purulento no contaminado por secreciones de las vas areas superiores antes de instituir tratamiento antibitico su examen puede resultar muy til para el diagnstico. por ejemplo, la sensibilidad de la tincin de gram para el diagnstico de la neumona neumoccica bacterimica llega al 85% 96 . el valor de esta informacin aumentar sin duda al aumentar la prevalencia de grmenes resistentes a la penicilina en la comunidad (vase pgina 237) 95 . la tincin de gram del esputo tambin tiene un valor predictivo negativo alto respecto al cultivo 97 .no es probable que la informacin obtenida con los estudios del esputo, influencie el tratamiento en la mayora de los pacientes con neumona adquirida en la comunidad 85 . sin embargo, aconsejamos la tincin de gram y el cultivo antes de iniciar el tratamiento antibitico en cualquier paciente cuya enfermedad sea suficientemente grave para justificar el ingreso en el hospital 98 , siempre que la obtencin de muestras no retrase el inicio del tratamiento 95 . los resultados de estos estudios quizs permitan modificar el tratamiento antibitico para incluir cobertura contra grmenes no previstos 99, 100 , tengan importancia pronstica, modifiquen la duracin del tratamiento y proporcionen informacin sobre la epidemiologa local de la infeccin 101 . hemocultivo. aunque el cultivo de la sangre tomada antes de administrar antibiticos tiene una sensibilidad escasa para identificar el germen responsable de la neumona, se deben hacer cultivos en todos los pacientes que necesiten ingreso en el hospital por una neumona adquirida en la comunidad. la especificidad del cultivo positivo es alta (aunque algunos pacientes sufren infecciones mixtas) y el resultado tiene importancia pronstica 94 . si se sospecha una neumona relacionada con el ventilador, el hemocultivo tambin puede ser til para identificar otras fuentes de infeccin 102 . aspiracin endotraqueal. se pueden obtener con facilidad secreciones del tracto respiratorio inferior mediante aspiracin endotraqueal en los pacientes intubados. el anlisis no cuantitativo de estas muestras es un medio sensible aunque inespecfico para determinar la causa de la neumona 80, 103 . el cultivo cuantitativo mejora la especificidad, hasta tal punto que su rendimiento puede ser comparable al de mtodos ms agresivos de diagnstico bacteriolgico 104, 105 . muestras con cepillo protegido. en un intento de mejorar la sensibilidad y la especificidad del cultivo y de la tincin de gram para el diagnstico de neumona se ha recurrido a la obtencin broncoscpica de material utilizando un cepillo protegido 20 . la cuantificacin del crecimiento de las bacterias recuperadas se ha usado para definir la presencia o ausencia de neumona y para identificar el patgeno causal 106 . sin embargo, la generalizacin de la aplicacin y la utilidad de esta prueba se han visto limitadas por la falta de estandarizacin metodolgica, por la escasez de estudios que demuestren mejora de la mortalidad, de la morbilidad o de otras variables en comparacin con mtodos menos agresivos 104, 107 y por la idea de que ninguna prueba es suficientemente sensible para excluir la neumona en casos en los que la sospecha clnica es alta 108 .la sensibilidad comunicada del anlisis de la muestra obtenida con cepillo protegido ha variado entre aproximadamente el 50% y el 80% 109, 110 . en general la especificidad de la prueba ha sido superior al 80% 109, 111 . en un estudio de 147 pacientes sometidos a ventilacin mecnica en los que se sospechaba una neumona nosocomial en el que se emple un umbral de 10 3 unidades formadoras de colonias para establecer el diagnstico, slo se confirm la neumona en 45 casos 81 . el cultivo fue falsamente positivo en slo cuatro pacientes, y ningn paciente con menos del lmite diagnstico del recuento de colonias mostr signos de neumona durante el seguimiento. aunque la mayora de los dems investigadores no ha obtenido este grado de xito, algunos han encontrado datos favorables similares 112 .de hecho, puede ser incorrecto establecer umbrales definitivos del cultivo cuantitativo para el diagnstico de neumona con muestras obtenidas con cepillo protegido. el significado de un resultado positivo se debe interpretar a la luz de la probabilidad previa de enfermedad y se deben tener en cuenta tanto el perjuicio potencial de no tratar la neumona como el riesgo de un tratamiento innecesario 113 . aunque en gran parte se carece de datos cuantitativos sobre los riesgos y beneficios de administrar o no tratamiento, en el contexto de los pacientes con enfermedad crtica, dada la relacin riesgo-beneficio fija del tratamiento antibitico es evidente que conforme aumenta la probabilidad previa de neumona debe disminuir el umbral usado para definir el resultado de una prueba como anormal (es decir, sern necesarios menos microorganismos para iniciar un ciclo de tratamiento) 113 . lavado broncoalveolar. el lba, incluyendo el lavado protegido con cultivo cuantitativo de las secreciones pulmonares distales, ha proporcionado resultados para el diagnstico de neumona similares a los que se obtienen con muestras de cepillo protegido 114 . el rendimiento ptimo de la prueba depende del uso de un volumen de lavado adecuado y de la realizacin de la prueba antes de instituir el tratamiento antibitico o de cambiarlo 115 . la identificacin de grmenes intracelulares en las clulas fagocticas tiene una especificidad para neumona superior al 95% en la mayora de los estudios; aunque algunos investigadores han comunicado un rendimiento mucho menor 111 , las cifras de sensibilidad publicadas han variado en general entre el 60% y ms del 90% 109, 116, 117 . se ha encontrado que la presencia de grmenes en la tincin de gram guarda una relacin ntima con los resultados de los cultivos y, por tanto, permite una seleccin precoz y apropiada de los antibiticos 117 . la evaluacin de la neutrofilia en el lba tambin puede ser til para el diagnstico; por ejemplo, la ausencia de neutrfilos predijo ausencia de neumona en los dos das siguientes a la recogida de la muestra en el 97% de los pacientes de un estudio 118 , y el hallazgo de menos del 50% de neutrfilos en el lquido de lavado tuvo un valor predictivo negativo del 100% en otro estudio 80 . aspiracin transtorcica con aguja. la aspiracin percutnea del pulmn con una aguja ultrafina se ha empleado para la identificacin de patgenos en pacientes con neumona sometidos y no sometidos a ventilacin mecnica 119, 120 . como era de esperar, la especificidad y el valor predictivo de un cultivo positivo han alcanzado cifras de hasta el 100% 121 , mientras que la sensibilidad y el valor predictivo negativo son bajos (aproximadamente el 61% y el 34%, respectivamente). los resultados son mejores cuando la opacidad radiogrfica es ms extensa y el paciente no ha recibido todava antibiticos 122 . no se ha determinado si la prctica de esta prueba tiene un efecto favorable sobre la evolucin.se sigue discutiendo si los mtodos mencionados ms arriba deben formar parte del tratamiento estndar de los pacientes que tienen una neumona grave, sobre todo los que tienen una neumona relacionada con el ventilador; adems, tampoco se sabe con certeza cul de esas pruebas es la mejor 92, 93, 123 . y lo que es ms importante, no se sabe si la aplicacin de cualquiera de esas tcnicas permite reducir la morbilidad o la mortalidad con relacin costo-eficacia favorable en comparacin con mtodos ms sencillos y menos agresivos (p. ej., evaluacin clnica, cultivo cuantitativo y tincin de gram de los aspirados endotraqueales) 124 .neumona adquirida en la comunidad la frecuencia publicada de los diferentes microorganismos responsables de neumona adquirida en la comunidad vara mucho en las distintas series 6 . esa variacin se debe a numerosos factores, entre ellos las tcnicas usadas para el diagnstico, la edad de los pacientes, la presencia o ausencia de otras enfermedades significativas y la gravedad de la neumona 125 . adems, incluso con el mximo esfuerzo, no se puede identificar el germen causal en ms del 50% de los pacientes con neumona adquirida en la comunidad 126 . a pesar de estas limitaciones es posible hacer algunas observaciones generales.s. pneumoniae es el patgeno que se identifica con ms frecuencia en la mayora de los estudios 126, 127 , y representa aproximadamente el 35% de todos los grmenes hallados. en los pacientes que ingresan en el hospital por neumona las bacterias anaerobias se aslan en aproximadamente el 20% al 35% 128 . entre el 2% y el 8% de los pacientes sufre infeccin por h. influenzae 6 ; la mayora de ellos presenta obstruccin crnica al flujo areo subyacente o son ancianos. moraxella catarrhalis no es una causa infrecuente de neumona en los mismos grupos de pacientes 129 . la neumona adquirida en la comunidad por s. aureus es infrecuente, y habitualmente se produce despus de una infeccin por el virus influenza; muchas veces se asocia a bacteriemia y a una mortalidad alta, y se debe considerar su presencia en todos los pacientes graves ingresados en la unidad de cuidados intensivos (uci) para el tratamiento de la neumona 130 . s. aureus resistente a meticilina puede ser una causa particularmente grave de neumona en la poblacin de las residencias de ancianos 131 .la frecuencia con que se identifica el gnero legionella como causa de neumona adquirida en la comunidad muestra una variacin regional marcada. aunque estos grmenes slo representan el 2% o menos de los casos totales, en algunas series son mucho ms frecuentes, sobre todo entre los pacientes que estn suficientemente graves para necesitar la hospitalizacin y la asistencia en una uci 132 . los grmenes entricos gramnegativos representan una causa infrecuente de neumona en la poblacin general, pero se debe considerar su presencia en los pacientes graves, sobre todo en los ancianos, en los que han sufrido aspiracin y en los que sufren enfermedades subyacentes significativas 133, 134 . aunque muchas veces no se incluye entre las causas de neumona adquirida en la comunidad, en las revisiones epidemiolgicas est claro que tambin se debe tener en cuenta la posibilidad de tuberculosis en los pacientes ambulatorios con neumona; su prevalencia es mayor en ciertas poblaciones, como personas que viven en residencias de ancianos, alcohlicos, vagabundos, adictos a las drogas y pacientes infectados por el vih, as como en las poblaciones con prevalencia alta de tuberculosis 135 .cuando el anlisis se limita a los pacientes ambulatorios que no precisan hospitalizacin, disminuye mucho la proporcin de especies bacterianas que se identifican como causas de neumona adquirida en la comunidad; por ejemplo, en un estudio de 149 pacientes de este tipo, slo 3 (2%) presentaban una neumona bacteriana 136 . muchos pacientes de ese tipo tienen neumona atpica, causada por m. pneumoniae (germen identificado en casi el 30% de los pacientes en algunas series) 2, 137 o c. pneumoniae (aproximadamente el 20%) 2, 138 . tambin se han identificado otros grmenes similares a las clamidias como causas de neumona adquirida en la comunidad 139, 140 . la incidencia de la neumona de la fiebre q (causada por coxiella burnetii) muestra una variacin geogrfica significativa, y su identificacin se limita en general a zonas rurales 2 . en los adultos el virus influenza es la causa ms importante de neumona vrica adquirida en la comunidad 139, 140 .la gravedad de la neumona influye sobre la necesidad de ingreso (en una sala general o en la uci), la utilizacin de tcnicas diagnsticas y la eleccin de antibiticos. la neumona grave se ha definido como aquella que precisa ingreso en una uci 141 . por otra parte, la presencia de ciertas manifestaciones clnicas de la neumona exige considerar el ingreso hospitalario, al menos hasta que se demuestre una respuesta favorable al tratamiento 142, 143 . esas manifestaciones incluyen cualquier antecedente de enfermedad subyacente significativa, edad superior a 65 aos, alteracin del estado mental, esplenectoma previa, sospecha de aspiracin, aumento de la temperatura por encima de 38,3 c y signos de infeccin en otra localizacin. diversos datos de laboratorio se han relacionado tambin con un aumento de la morbilidad y de la mortalidad, entre ellos una cifra de leucocitos inferior a 4  10 9 o superior a 30  10 9 , una cifra absoluta de neutrfilos por debajo de 1  10 9 y una pao 2 inferior a 60 mm hg o paco 2 superior a 50 mm hg (mientras el paciente respira aire ambiente), aumento del nitrgeno ureico y de la creatinina en sangre, hemoglobina inferior a 90 g/l, acidosis metablica y signos de coagulacin intravascular diseminada (cid). entre los signos radiogrficos que justifican vigilancia adicional se incluyen afectacin multilobar, cavitacin y derrame pleural.en ausencia de esos factores de riesgo es improbable una evolucin clnica complicada 1 . de acuerdo con un anlisis de los datos clnicos y analticos de 14.199 adultos ingresados por neumona adquirida en la comunidad se dise una regla de prediccin que estratificaba los pacientes en cinco clases respecto al riesgo de muerte dentro de los 30 das siguientes, y se aplic a otros 40.236 pacientes 1 . la tasa de mortalidad en los pacientes incluidos en las tres primeras clases fue suficientemente baja para considerar razonable el tratamiento ambulatorio. esa consideracin se aplic en especial a los pacientes de la clase i (<50 aos de edad, ausencia de comorbilidad, estado mental normal, frecuencia cardaca <125 latidos/min, frecuencia respiratoria <30 respiraciones/min, presin arterial sistlica >90 mm hg y temperatura entre 35 c y 40 c). estos datos implican que las observaciones clnicas y analticas simples son tiles para evaluar el riesgo de muerte en los pacientes con neumona adquirida en la comunidad. sin embargo, ningn criterio ni grupo de criterios nico puede sustituir al juicio global del mdico; los factores sociales y la circunstancias clnicas, como los vmitos persistentes, tambin deben influir en la decisin de proceder a la hospitalizacin en un caso concreto 144, 145 .la neumona adquirida en el hospital (nosocomial) se puede definir como una neumona que aparece 48 horas o ms despus del ingreso, y por tanto excluye la infeccin que se estuviese incubando cuando ingres el paciente. las bacterias representan la causa que se identifica con ms frecuencia. al principio de la evolucin hospitalaria (dentro de los 4 primeros das siguientes al ingreso) los grmenes ms frecuentes son s. pneumoniae, m. catarrhalis, s. aureus sensible a meticilina y h. influenzae 146 . ms adelante predominan los grmenes entricos gramnegativos, como el gnero enterobacter, escherichia coli, los gneros klebsiella y proteus y s. aureus, incluyendo especies resistentes a meticilina 20 . la presencia de factores de riesgo especficos aumenta la probabilidad de ciertos grmenes. por ejemplo, las bacterias anaerobias son ms probables en pacientes con neumona despus de una aspiracin presenciada y en aquellos que tienen una denticin deficiente o alteracin de la conciencia 147 . la infeccin por p. aeruginosa se debe considerar en los pacientes que han recibido corticoides o antibiticos de amplio espectro, en los que llevan mucho tiempo ingresados en la uci y en los que tienen una enfermedad pulmonar subyacente, como bronquiectasias 148 . s. aureus es ms frecuente en los pacientes que estn en coma 149 , as como en aquellos que tienen un traumatismo craneoenceflico, gripe reciente, insuficiencia renal o antecedentes de abuso de drogas intravenosas. el gnero legionella es endmico en algunos hospitales 150 , y la neumona causada por esos grmenes guarda relacin con la administracin de corticoides. la hospitalizacin prolongada y el uso previo de antibiticos tambin favorecen la aparicin de neumona nosocomial por grmenes resistentes a los antibiticos, como s. aureus, gnero acinetobacter, serratia marcescens y p. aeruginosa 151 . se deben sospechar grmenes similares cuando la neumona es especialmente grave (p. ej., en pacientes sometidos a ventilacin mecnica o ingresados en la uci) 152 .varios investigadores han evaluado los factores de riesgo para la aparicin de una neumona nosocomial 146, 153, 154 , y esos factores se han agrupado en cinco categoras generales: 1) factores del husped, como edad y grado de inmunodepresin; 2) frmacos que favorecen la colonizacin microbiana de las vas areas superiores o del estmago (la administracin previa de antibiticos tiene importancia especial a este respecto); 3) frmacos que favorecen la aspiracin de las secreciones de las vas areas superiores o del contenido gstrico; 4) duracin de la ventilacin mecnica (la ventilacin prolongada aumenta el riesgo de exposicin a equipo contaminado y a las manos colonizadas de los trabajadores sanitarios), y 5) factores que evitan la eliminacin adecuada de las secreciones de la va area, como ciruga reciente o inmovilizacin por traumatismo o enfermedad. como era de esperar, muchas veces existen mltiples factores de riesgo en los pacientes que presentan una neumona.la alteracin de la funcin inmunitaria o inflamatoria es una manifestacin importante de numerosas enfermedades, y representa una complicacin del tratamiento que se emplea para otras muchas. por razones obvias, tanto la incidencia como la gravedad de la infeccin, incluyendo la de los pulmones, aumentan en los pacientes que tienen estos trastornos. adems, los grmenes responsables de la infeccin difieren con frecuencia de los responsables de la infeccin en el husped normal. por ejemplo, la aspergilosis invasora, la neumona por pneumocystis jiroveci (cariniii) (npc) y la neumona por citomegalovirus (cmv) son relativamente frecuentes en los pacientes que tienen leucemia mielgena aguda, sida y trasplante de rganos, respectivamente; sin embargo, estas enfermedades se ven rara vez en personas que tienen normales los sistemas inmunitario e inflamatorio.los trastornos de la funcin inmunitaria o inflamatoria pueden ser hereditarios o adquiridos, y los segundos resultan mucho ms frecuentes. la descripcin de las diversas caractersticas clnicas, radiolgicas y anatomopatolgicas de la infeccin pulmonar relacionada con la mayora de las alteraciones adquiridas de las defensas del husped se puede encontrar en los captulos correspondientes del libro; se presta atencin particular a las infecciones de los pacientes sometidos a trasplante de rganos (vase pgina 531) y de los que tienen sida (vase pgina 423).los trastornos congnitos de la funcin inmunitaria celular o humoral se asocian muchas veces a una mayor incidencia de infeccin pulmonar. uno de los ms frecuentes es la inmunodeficiencia variable comn, que cursa con disfuncin de los linfocitos b 155 . las bronquiectasias representaban en otro tiempo una consecuencia inevitable de esta enfermedad 156 ; sin embargo, la identificacin precoz de las bronquiectasias y la institucin temprana de tratamiento con gammaglobulinas intravenosas han evitado tanto esa complicacin como la infeccin pulmonar recurrente que la produce 157 . por razones desconocidas, aproximadamente el 20% de los pacientes con sntomas atribuibles al trastorno presenta neumopata intersticial 158 .s. pneumoniae es una bacteria grampositiva con forma oval o lanceada que habitualmente se dispone en parejas. aparece rodeada por una cpsula polisacrida bien definida, cuya estructura permite el tipado con antisueros especficos 159 . se ha estimado que el microorganismo se encuentra presente como comensal normal en hasta el 20% de la poblacin 160 . en ciertos grupos, como los pacientes con asma o epoc, las tasas de colonizacin pueden ser mucho ms altas. como ya se ha dicho, s. pneumoniae es el germen patgeno ms frecuente que se identifica en los pacientes ingresados en el hospital por neumona. representa aproximadamente el 40% de todos los aislados 151 . los factores de riesgo importantes incluyen edad, tabaquismo, abuso de drogas y alcohol, enfermedad crnica e inmunodepresin subyacente 162, 163 . la aparicin de resistencia a los frmacos se ha convertido en una caracterstica importante del microorganismo, y hasta el 35% de las cepas es resistente a penicilina en varias partes de ee.uu., europa y el este de asia 164 . patogenia y caractersticas anatomopatolgicas. la infeccin del tracto respiratorio inferior suele seguir a la aspiracin de microorganismos procedentes de un foco de colonizacin en la nasofaringe 165 . la virulencia depende en parte de la cpsula de polisacrido que ayuda a proteger al microorganismo de la fagocitosis 165 y de la capacidad de la bacteria de adherirse a las clulas epiteliales broncopulmonares mediante macromolculas de superficie (adhesinas) 166 . esta ltima propiedad es potenciada por diversas citocinas inducidas por la pared celular del microorganismo, el humo de tabaco y, a veces, la infeccin vrica previa 167, 168 . la adherencia del germen a las clulas epiteliales tiene varias consecuencias, como la produccin de citocinas y toxinas capaces de iniciar una reaccin inflamatoria 168 . la bacteria afecta tambin a las clulas endoteliales al causar un aumento de la permeabilidad de la membrana alveolocapilar e iniciar la cascada procoagulante 168 . esos procesos se asocian al desarrollo de lquido de edema, que se extiende de unos alvolos a otros y produce una consolidacin ms o menos uniforme del parnquima pulmonar (vase figura en color 6-1).bajo la influencia de las citocinas 169 los leucocitos emigran despus desde los capilares hacia los espacios areos 165 . aunque estas clulas son capaces de matar a los microorganismos no pueden controlar por completo la infeccin, y la resolucin se asocia muchas veces a la aparicin de anticuerpos anticapsulares que facilitan la fagocitosis del germen por los macrfagos alveolares. es probable que la elevada incidencia de resolucin guarde relacin con la ausencia de produccin de toxinas por el germen, una caracterstica que se refleja tambin en la ausencia de necrosis tisular. aunque los estudios experimentales han demostrado un aumento considerable de la actividad proteoltica que acompaa a la acumulacin de neutrfilos en los espacios areos, un aumento simultneo y comparable de antiproteasas en el suero y en el lquido pulmonar parece proteger al parnquima de la produccin de lesin 170 . como consecuencia, la formacin de abscesos es infrecuente y probablemente slo ocurre en relacin con cepas particularmente virulentas o cuando existe una infeccin simultnea por grmenes anaerobios 171 . manifestaciones radiolgicas. el patrn radiogrfico caracterstico es una consolidacin no segmentaria homognea que afecta a un lbulo (figura 6-15). puesto que la consolidacin comienza en los espacios areos perifricos, casi siempre est en contacto con una superficie de la pleura visceral, interlobar o de la convexidad del pulmn. la infeccin se manifiesta como un foco redondo (esfrico) de consolidacin que simula una masa 172 , zonas focales de consolidacin u opacidades mixtas del espacio areo y del intersticio 43 . las complicaciones como cavitacin, gangrena pulmonar y formacin de neumatoceles son raras; se considera probable que muchas de esas complicaciones guarden relacin con infecciones mixtas 171 .la incidencia de derrame pleural vara con la tcnica radiogrfica que se utiliza para detectarlo, la gravedad de la infeccin y la presencia o ausencia de bacteriemia. el derrame pleural se manifiesta en las radiografas anteroposteriores y laterales de aproximadamente el 10% de todos los pacientes 173 , en aproximadamente el 30% de las de aquellos que tienen una neumona grave que precisa tratamiento en la uci 124 y en aproximadamente el 50% de las radiografas de los pacientes que tienen bacteriemia 175 . manifestaciones clnicas. el cuadro clnico habitual es de comienzo brusco con fiebre, escalofros intensos, tos, expectoracin escasa y dolor pleural intenso. la tos puede ser seca al principio, pero pronto produce material hemorrgico, herrumbroso o verdoso. los pacientes debilitados o alcohlicos pueden presentar cianosis profunda, y es posible la aparicin rpida de shock. estas manifestaciones clsicas de la enfermedad pueden faltar en los ancianos, y es posible que en ellos la neumona se confunda con otras enfermedades, como insuficiencia cardaca congestiva, tromboembolia o tumor maligno 176 . la exploracin fsica revela signos de consolidacin y quizs se oiga un roce pleural. no existen manifestaciones clnicas particulares que distingan esta infeccin de la neumona causada por el gnero legionella o por otros grmenes en un determinado paciente 177 . se pueden encontrar focos metastsicos de infeccin en cualquier tejido, pero generalmente slo producen manifestaciones clnicas en el corazn, las meninges y las articulaciones. la complicacin ms importante de la infeccin neumoccica quizs sea la sobreinfeccin, habitualmente por microorganismos gramnegativos en pacientes tratados con antibiticos de amplio espectro. hallazgos de laboratorio y diagnstico. el diagnstico definitivo precisa el aislamiento del microorganismo o la demostra-cin de un antgeno polisacrido especfico. la sensibilidad de una buena tincin de gram para el diagnstico de neumona neumoccica es de slo aproximadamente el 15%, debido en parte a que muchas veces no se obtienen muestras de esputo en el momento apropiado 178 . sin embargo, el hallazgo de un germen predominante en una muestra de buena calidad tiene una especificidad alta para el diagnstico 179 . la infeccin se puede demostrar mediante el cultivo del microorganismo en muestras que normal-mente son estriles, por ejemplo de pulmn (mediante aspiracin transtorcica con aguja), sangre o pleura 178 . el hallazgo del antgeno capsular en el esputo, el lquido del lba o el lquido pleural mediante tcnicas como la contrainmunoelectroforesis 180 , la coaglutinacin 181 y el enzimoinmunoanlisis de adsorcin (elisa) 182 tambin indica la presencia de infeccin 6 . adems, se ha usado la reaccin en cadena de la polimerasa (rcp) para detectar adn estreptoccico en sangre, lquido pleural y aspirado pulmonar [183] [184] [185] ; sin embargo, la tcnica no distingue entre colonizacin e infeccin en las muestras de exudado farngeo y de esputo 186 .el recuento leucoctico suele ser superior a 20.000/mm 3 , pero los pacientes muy graves presentan con frecuencia leucopenia. se pueden encontrar hiponatremia e hipobilirrubinemia 187 . el anlisis de los gases de la sangre arterial puede demostrar hipoxemia ligera o incluso intensa; en la mayora de los casos tambin est reducida la pco 2 . pronstico y evolucin natural. diversos factores de riesgo se han relacionado con el aumento del riesgo de muerte por neumona en general, y por neumona por s. pneumoniae en particular 12 . esos factores de riesgo pueden guardar relacin con caractersticas demogrficas (edad avanzada, etnia y residencia en un hogar de ancianos), caractersticas clnicas (vase pgina 235) y alteraciones de laboratorio (vase pgina 235) 188 . cuando no se dan estos factores de riesgo se puede prever una buena evolucin. de modo hasta cierto punto sorprendente, el aumento de la prevalencia de grmenes resistentes a los antibiticos no se ha asociado a un aumento apreciable de la mortalidad 189 . la explicacin se relaciona posiblemente con el hecho de que la mayor parte de las cepas tiene una resistencia de grado intermedio y no de alto grado, por lo que las dosis altas de antibiticos pueden proporcionar concentraciones tisulares efectivas para destruir los grmenes. adems, en ocasiones se eligen antibiticos a los que es sensible el microorganismo como parte de la pauta emprica inicial para el tratamiento de los pacientes con enfermedad grave 104 .s. pyogenes es un microorganismo grampositivo que aparece en las extensiones en cadenas cortas. sola ser una de las causas ms frecuentes de bronconeumona, sobre todo en los pacientes jvenes y en los ancianos. sin embargo, con la introduccin de antibiticos se ha hecho infrecuente. a pesar de todo, parece estar aumentando su importancia como causa de neumona grave, tanto espordica como epidmica 190, 191 .en la mayora de los aspectos los signos radiogrficos son indistinguibles de los hallados en la neumona estafiloccica aguda: consolidacin homognea o focal con distribucin segmentaria y cierto grado de prdida de volumen, que tpicamente afecta a los lbulos inferiores y que a veces tiene carcter bilateral 192 . falta la tendencia a la formacin de neumatocele y de pioneumotrax, en contraste con la neumona estafiloccica aguda, aunque se pueden formar abscesos y cavidades y el empiema es frecuente. la neumona suele tener un comienzo brusco con dolor pleural, escalofros intensos, fiebre y tos productiva de esputos purulentos, muchas veces manchados de sangre. en general se pueden detectar signos de derrame pleural. las complicaciones incluyen engrosamiento pleural residual 193 y bronquiectasias (sobre todo en los nios, en los que la enfermedad aparece junto con un exantema).s. aureus es un coco grampositivo, que aparece en las extensiones en parejas, cadenas cortas, ttradas o grupos 194 . se diferen- cia de otras especies de estafilococos por la produccin de coagulasa, una enzima que provoca coagulacin del plasma. las cepas de s. aureus resistentes a meticilina (sarm) han adquirido una importancia particular y representan casi el 40% de los aislados estafiloccicos en algunos hospitales estadounidenses 131 . aunque la colonizacin por grmenes de esas cepas tambin es frecuente en instituciones para pacientes crnicos, slo un pequeo porcentaje de las personas afectas desarrolla una infeccin franca.el germen representa una causa infrecuente de neumona adquirida en la comunidad; es responsable de slo aproximadamente el 3% de todos los casos, y de aproximadamente el 3% al 12% de los cuadros de gravedad suficiente para precisar ingreso en un hospital y tratamiento en una uci 12 . esta infeccin grave se encuentra rara vez en adultos sanos. los factores de riesgo incluyen edad muy joven o avanzada, alcoholismo, enfermedades crnicas como epoc, sida, desnutricin, bacteriemia por infeccin de tejidos blandos o endocarditis 149, 194 , residencia en una institucin, debilidad general, abuso de drogas intravenosas e infeccin gripal reciente 195, 196 . s. aureus es ms importante como causa de neumona nosocomial, sobre todo en la uci, donde representa uno de los patgenos ms frecuentes 194 . este microorganismo tambin es muy frecuente en el esputo de pacientes con fibrosis qustica.el patrn anatomopatolgico ms frecuente es el de bronconeumona aguda, muchas veces asociada a la formacin de abscesos. resulta frecuente cierto grado de fibrosis parenquimatosa residual. en ocasiones (normalmente asociado a gripe y evolucin rpidamente mortal) hay edema intraalveolar y hemorragia extensa, infiltracin por neutrfilos relativamente escasa y datos escasos o nulos de necrosis tisular. la neumona relacionada con la diseminacin hematgena de microorganismos se caracteriza por ndulos bien o mal definidos, la mayor parte de ellos de 0,5 a 3 cm de dimetro.la consolidacin parenquimatosa de la bronconeumona estafiloccica aguda tiene tpicamente una distribucin segmentaria. en funcin de la gravedad de la afectacin el proceso puede ser focal u homogneo, y la segunda forma representa una bronconeumona confluente. la consolidacin afecta a ms de un lbulo en aproximadamente el 60% de los pacientes y tiene carcter bilateral en aproximadamente el 40% 57, 197 . debido al exudado inflamatorio que llena las vas areas la consolidacin se puede acompaar de atelectasia secundaria; por la misma razn rara vez se observa broncograma areo, y su presencia debe plantear dudas sobre el diagnstico. en la tcar la afectacin bronquiolar se manifiesta por opacidades nodulares centrolobulillares y opacidades lineales ramificadas (patrn de rbol en brote).se producen abscesos en el 15% al 30% de los pacientes (figura 6-16) 57, 197 . la formacin de neumatoceles tambin es frecuente, y se observa en aproximadamente el 50% de los nios y el 15% de los adultos 57, 198 . los neumatoceles suelen aparecer durante la primera semana de la neumona y desaparecen espontneamente al cabo de semanas o meses. se producen derrames pleurales en el 30% al 50% de los pacientes; aproxi-238 c a p  t u l o 6  enfermedades infecciosas de los pulmones f i g u r a 6 -1 6 absceso agudo de pulmn: staphylococcus aureus. las radiografas posteroanterior (a) y lateral (b) revelan consolidacin masiva de todo el lbulo superior derecho con una gran cavidad irregular en el centro. hay aumento del volumen del lbulo, a juzgar por el abombamiento hacia atrs de la cisura mayor. ( 57, 197 . a veces se encuentra neumotrax espontneo.en la neumona relacionada con la diseminacin hematgena de los grmenes el aspecto radiolgico es de mltiples ndulos o masas diseminados por los pulmones. los ndulos tienen a veces bordes mal definidos o son confluentes. los abscesos pueden erosionar la pared bronquial y producir cavidades llenas de aire, muchas veces con niveles lquidos 199 . en la tc la mayor parte de las alteraciones tiene una localizacin subpleural. en alrededor de las dos terceras partes de los casos algunos ndulos muestran un vaso que atraviesa su interior (signo del vaso nutricio) 72, 200 . los infartos spticos originan zonas de consolidacin subpleural con forma de cua 200 .el cuadro clnico de la neumona por s. aureus es variable y depende de la edad y del grado de debilidad del paciente, y de que la neumona se superponga a una infeccin gripal. en los nios y los adultos que adquieren la infeccin despus de la gripe el comienzo suele ser brusco con dolor pleural, tos y expectoracin purulenta amarilla o parda, a veces con hilos de sangre 201 . cuando la infeccin aparece en el hospital los signos y sntomas clnicos son similares a los que producen otras bacterias virulentas adquiridas en el hospital.el diagnstico se debe considerar siempre que aparezca una neumona en pacientes con gripe u hospitalizados. la positividad del cultivo de esputo es un indicador sensible de infeccin; sin embargo, carece de especificidad 194 . el recuento leucoctico suele estar aumentado, pero se puede encontrar leucopenia en los pacientes graves. en muchos pacientes se obtienen hemocultivos positivos; sin embargo, es importante recordar que la positividad del hemocultivo se puede deber a bacteriemia por la neumona o a diseminacin hematgena de grmenes desde un foco extrapulmonar.las complicaciones de la neumona estafiloccica incluyen meningitis, abscesos metastsicos (sobre todo en el encfalo y en los riones) y endocarditis aguda, incluso en pacientes sin valvulopata previa. el derrame pleural es bastante frecuente y se puede complicar con empiema. dada la asociacin frecuente de la neumona por s. aureus a la presencia de enfermedad subyacente y de estancia en el hospital no es sorprendente que la tasa de mortalidad haya sido muy alta, entre el 20% y el 85% en varias series 131, 202 .m. catarrhalis (branhamella catarrhalis, neisseria catarrhalis) es un diplococo gramnegativo intracelular de forma arrionada 203 . conocido desde hace mucho tiempo como comensal de la cavidad oral, se ha descrito cada vez con ms frecuencia como patgeno importante en los tractos respiratorios superior e inferior 204 . la infeccin se suele encontrar en pacientes con neumopata subyacente, sobre todo en pacientes con epoc que estn recibiendo corticoides 205 . los pacientes con deficiencia de inmunoglobulinas tambin parecen ser susceptibles 206 . se han descrito brotes epidmicos nosocomiales de infeccin 207 .desde el punto de vista clnico, la enfermedad adopta la forma de una traqueobronquitis o bronconeumona febril aguda 208 . en la mayora de los pacientes la infeccin es leve; sin embargo, puede ser grave en los pacientes inmunodeprimidos 203 . las complicaciones de derrame pleural, empiema y septicemia son infrecuentes. aunque se ha descrito positividad de los hemocultivos 206 , el diagnstico se suele basar en la identificacin de microorganismos tpicos en una tincin de gram de buena calidad del esputo junto con crecimiento abundante en el cultivo 203 .n. meningitidis es un diplococo gramnegativo que en las muestras de pacientes con enfermedad se encuentra sobre todo dentro de las clulas. el microorganismo se ha aislado en la sangre 209 y en otras muestras que normalmente son estriles 210 , en pacientes con neumona sin meningitis y en forma de cultivo puro en muestras de pacientes con agudizaciones purulentas de la bronquitis crnica 211 . la infeccin vrica (p. ej., neumona adenovrica o gripe) parece ser un factor de riesgo importante 212, 213 . los jvenes que realizan el servicio militar tambin parecen constituir un grupo que tiene una susceptibilidad particular, quizs debido al contacto ntimo con portadores de n. meningitidis y a la mayor frecuencia de infecciones vricas. las radiografas de trax publicadas muestran un patrn de neumona aguda del espacio areo. la historia tpica consiste en fiebre que aumenta de modo gradual durante 2 a 3 semanas, seguida por dolor pleural 214 .b. anthracis es un bacilo grampositivo encapsulado que tpicamente aparece formando cadenas 139 . las esporas se encuentran en el suelo y en la materia orgnica descompuesta, donde germinan en condiciones apropiadas y pueden ser ingeridas por herbvoros, como cabras, ovejas y vacas. la infeccin humana se produce la mayora de las veces por contacto directo, que origina una enfermedad cutnea. con menos frecuencia la infeccin se debe a ingestin de carne contaminada o a inhalacin de tierra contaminada. en las sociedades industrializadas el carbunco ha sido tradicionalmente una enfermedad laboral que afectaba sobre todo a operarios encargados de manipular pieles y en la industria de tejidos, curtidos y lanas. hoy da se teme el posible uso del microorganismo para fines de bioterrorismo 215, 216 .despus de la inhalacin las esporas son captadas por los macrfagos alveolares y transportadas a los ganglios linfticos mediastnicos en un plazo de horas, sin producir una lesin pulmonar especfica. en los ganglios linfticos las esporas germinan y se transforman en bacilos germinativos, que se multiplican y producen diversos factores de virulencia 217 . entre stos se incluyen el polipptido capsular, que confiere resistencia a la fagocitosis, y la toxina del carbunco, que favorece el edema y la formacin de citocinas inflamatorias por los macrfagos tisulares 218 . la toxina liberada en el torrente sanguneo puede causar edema, hemorragia, necrosis y shock, 216 . desde el punto de vista anatomopatolgico, la alteracin inicial es una mediastinitis hemorrgica, que puede dar paso a extensin directa de los grmenes hasta la pleura 215 y la posterior aparicin de grandes derrames pleurales. en los pulmones se puede encontrar lesin alveolar difusa como complicacin de la sepsis o de la toxemia; la neumona infecciosa verdadera es infrecuente 216 .las manifestaciones radiogrficas ms frecuentes incluyen derrames pleurales bilaterales, ensanchamiento del mediastino y opacidades intersticiales o zonas de consolidacin unilaterales o bilaterales [219] [220] [221] . la tc muestra tpicamente edema de la grasa mediastnica y adenopatas mediastnicas e hiliares con atenuacin alta como consecuencia de la hemorragia [220] [221] [222] . los ganglios exhiben refuerzo marcado despus de la administracin de contraste intravenoso, un dato muy indicativo del diagnstico en un paciente con el antecedente de un posible contagio 221 .los sntomas iniciales tienen carcter inespecfico y son fiebre leve, malestar general, mialgias, tos seca, nuseas, vmitos y molestias torcicas 215 . unos das despus del contagio puede aparecer disnea intensa, hipotensin y hemorragia. son frecuentes los signos de meningitis 215 . el aumento del tamao de los ganglios linfticos mediastnicos puede causar compresin traqueal y estridor 216 . la exploracin fsica puede revelar estertores diseminados y signos de derrame pleural. cuando no se trata no es raro que se produzca la muerte dentro de las primeras 24 horas 218 .si no existe una exposicin laboral especfica ni contacto con otros pacientes diagnosticados recientemente, la naturaleza inespecfica de los sntomas iniciales dificulta el diagnstico. se debe tener en cuenta la posibilidad de esta infeccin en cualquier persona hasta entonces sana que presente un cuadro febril agudo con evolucin rpida hacia el shock. el ensanchamiento radiogrfico del mediastino aumenta de modo significativo la probabilidad del diagnstico en un contexto adecuado 216 . el hallazgo de nuseas y vmitos, disnea, alteraciones neurolgicas, auscultacin anormal, taquicardia, hematocrito alto, elevacin de las transaminasas, albmina baja, recuento leucoctico normal y sodio srico bajo apoya la sospecha diagnstica, mientras que la presencia de rinorrea, faringitis, mialgia y cefalea, la disminuye 223, 224 . la positividad del cultivo y la tincin de gram de la sangre o de otras muestras apropiadas confirman el diagnstico; el examen del esputo rara vez tiene utilidad.l. monocytogenes es un bacilo grampositivo corto que se puede encontrar en la tierra, el agua, los desperdicios, muchos animales domsticos y, a veces, las vas areas superiores, los genitales y el tracto digestivo inferior de portadores humanos asintomticos. en la mayora de los casos la infeccin de las personas adultas es espordica y no guarda relacin con una fuente de contagio identificable. se cree que la transmisin ocurre por ingestin o por contacto directo con animales contaminados, especialmente pat y queso no pasteurizado 225 , o con otros productos animales, o a travs del contacto con portadores humanos. la listeriosis afecta predominantemente a recin nacidos, embarazadas, huspedes inmunodeprimidos y personas mayores con alguna enfermedad crnica debilitante; muchos de los pacientes afectos sufren neoplasias malignas linforreticulares. en los adultos la enfermedad suele adoptar la forma de meningitis, asociada frecuentemente a septicemia. en una pequea proporcin de casos se produce infeccin pulmonar o pleural 226 .las corinebacterias son bacilos o cocobacilos grampositivos que poseen tumefacciones irregulares en un extremo, lo que les proporciona el aspecto de mazas 159 . corynebacterium diphtheriae (el germen causante de la difteria) es el miembro ms importante del gnero como causa de enfermedad humana. la listeriosis se manifiesta tpicamente por faringitis con formacin de la clsica membrana, que se puede extender a la laringe y provocar obstruccin de las vas areas superiores 227 ; el germen no se ha descrito como causa de neumona. aunque se suele considerar que los dems miembros del gnero, aparte de c. diphtheriae, son comensales o contaminantes cuando se encuentran en los cultivos, se ha demostrado que algunos de ellos pueden causar enfermedad pulmonar significativa, sobre todo en huspedes inmunodeprimidos 228 .r. equi es un cocobacilo grampositivo dbilmente acidorresistente. la infeccin se ha documentado con ms frecuencia en pacientes con sida (vase pgina 424). sin embargo, tambin se ha descrito en otras formas de inmunodepresin 229 y, rara vez, en pacientes por lo dems sanos. los signos radiolgicos son una opacidad o una zona de consolidacin redonda, muchas veces en un lbulo superior. la cavitacin es frecuente 230 . la neumona suele ser de comienzo insidioso y se acompaa de cansancio, fiebre y tos seca.los bacilos gramnegativos se pueden dividir en tres grupos principales: 1) enterobactericeas, entre ellas el grupo klebsiella-enterobacter-serratia, e. coli, yersinia pestis y diversas especies de los gneros morganella, proteus, shigella y salmonella; 2) grmenes distintos de las enterobactericeas que fermentan los azcares, entre ellos los gneros aeromonas, pasteurella y vibrio, y 3) microorganismos distintos de las enterobactericeas que no fermentan los azcares, como stenotrophomonas maltophilia y los gneros acinetobacter, alcaligenes, burkholderia, chryseobacterium y pseudomonas.las enterobactericeas son un gran grupo de bacilos gramnegativos, conocidos con frecuencia como coliformes, cuyo hbitat natural es el tracto intestinal de los humanos y los animales 159 . constituyen una causa importante de neumona nosocomial y adquirida en la comunidad en ciertos grupos de pacientes, como los ancianos y los pacientes con una enfermedad crnica subyacente 99 . el miembro ms importante del grupo desde el punto de vista clnico es k. pneumoniae, un microorganismo encapsulado inmvil ubicuo en el medio ambiente, sobre todo en el agua; se encuentra tambin en el tracto digestivo humano normal 231 . la bacteria es una causa frecuente de infeccin grave, y se ha identificado en ms del 10% de los pacientes con bacteriemia; hasta el 25% de esos pacientes sufre neumona nosocomial 232 . adems, entre el 1% y el 5% de todos los casos de neumona adquirida en la comunidad se debe a klebsiella 233 . la neumona se encuentra sobre todo en varones de ms de 50 aos, muchos de ellos alcohlicos crnicos 234 . la enfermedad broncopulmonar crnica y, en menor grado, la diabetes mellitus y la debilidad general, tambin parecen predisponer a la infeccin 12 .el gnero enterobacter contiene especies mviles, pero por lo dems similares a klebsiella, que se pueden agrupar con las especies de este ltimo gnero en las pruebas de laboratorio habituales. los microorganismos patgenos (la mayora de las veces enterobacter aerogenes y en ocasiones enterobacter cloacae) suelen causar neumona nosocomial 235 . s. marcescens es un saprofito frecuente del suelo, el agua y las alcantarillas. la mayora de las infecciones se adquiere en el hospital y afecta a pacientes ancianos y debilitados, la mayora de los cuales ha recibido tratamiento antibitico. tambin se han descrito brotes epidmicos relacionados con la esterilizacin deficiente de los broncoscopios 236 .k. pneumoniae suele llegar a los pulmones por la aspiracin de secreciones orales, y las zonas que se afectan con ms frecuencia son la porcin posterior de un lbulo superior y la regin superior de un lbulo inferior. en algunos casos se observa una consolidacin homognea que recuerda a la neumona aguda del espacio areo causada por s. pneumoniae; tambin se puede encontrar una distribucin focal con formacin de abscesos y cavitacin. la obstruccin vascular puede producir cavidades grandes que contienen fragmentos de pulmn necrtico (gangrena pulmonar) 237 . es frecuente la extensin de la infeccin a la pleura, con el consiguiente empiema. los gneros enterobacter y serratia suelen causar neumona hemorrgica necrosante, muchas veces con formacin de abscesos 238 .la neumona por klebsiella se manifiesta de modo caracterstico en las radiografas como una consolidacin parenquimatosa homognea que contiene un broncograma areo. en comparacin con la neumona neumoccica, muestra una mayor tendencia a la formacin de exudado inflamatorio voluminoso que produce expansin lobar con el consiguiente abombamiento de las cisuras interlobares (vase figura 6-3, pgina 227) 56 , mayor tendencia a la formacin de abscesos y cavidades (figura 6-17) 239 y una mayor frecuencia de derrame pleural y empiema 240 . en ocasiones la neumona experimenta slo resolucin parcial y pasa a una forma crnica con cavitacin y positividad persistente de los cultivos; en estos casos el cuadro radiogrfico simula al de la tuberculosis.el comienzo de la neumona aguda por klebsiella suele ser brusco con postracin, dolor al respirar, cianosis, fiebre moderada y disnea intensa. la expectoracin es con frecuencia verdosa, purulenta y con hebras de sangre, y en ocasiones de color rojo ladrillo y gelatinosa (esputos en jalea de grosella) 12 . puede haber durante algn tiempo malestar general, escalofros y disnea 241 , pero muchos pacientes se encuentran en shock cuando llegan al hospital. los signos fsicos corresponden en general a la consolidacin parenquimatosa. la cifra de leucocitos suele estar moderadamente elevada. una cifra normal o disminuida de leucocitos indica un pronstico desfavorable. se ha descrito bacteriemia en aproximadamente el 25% de los casos 239 .la infeccin por klebsiella-enterobacter-serratia tiene una mortalidad de aproximadamente el 50%, y la muerte suele ocurrir dentro de las primeras 48 horas desde el comienzo de la enfermedad.e. coli es un comensal importante del intestino delgado y grueso. la neumona afecta principalmente a pacientes debilitados. el germen es responsable de aproximadamente el 5% al 20% de las neumonas adquiridas en el hospital o en una residencia de ancianos 242 y de aproximadamente el 1% al 5% de las infecciones adquiridas en la comunidad suficientemente graves para necesitar ingreso hospitalario 243 . es probable que la mayora de los casos se contraiga por aspiracin de secreciones contaminadas procedentes de las vas areas colonizadas.las manifestaciones radiogrficas suelen corresponder a una bronconeumona. la afectacin es en general multilobar con marcada predileccin anatmica por los lbulos inferiores. la cavitacin resulta infrecuente, mientras que el derrame pleural es frecuente 244 . desde el punto de vista clnico la infeccin se caracteriza por aparicin brusca de fiebre, escalofros, disnea, dolor pleurtico, tos y expectoracin amarilla. puede haber sntomas digestivos como nuseas, dolor abdominal, disfagia, diarrea y vmitos. el diagnstico de presuncin precisa el crecimiento predominante o puro de e. coli en el cultivo de esputo; las colonias ocasionales tienen poca importancia, sobre todo en pacientes que reciben tratamiento antibitico.la infeccin pleuropulmonar por el gnero salmonella es infrecuente. la que producen por cepas no tifoideas se suele encontrar en pacientes inmunodeprimidos 245, 246 . la neumona puede ser secundaria a la aspiracin de contenido digestivo infectado o a la siembra durante una bacteriemia. el empiema es secundario la mayora de las veces a enfermedad pulmonar, aunque tambin se puede deber a extensin transdiafragmtica desde un foco abdominal 247 . las manifestaciones pulmonares incluyen bronconeumona, formacin de abscesos y sdra 248 . la evolucin de la enfermedad suele ser prolongada, con escalofros, fiebre y dolor pleural; la tos es con frecuencia seca, aunque en ocasiones se encuentra expectoracin purulenta.los microorganismos de los gneros proteus y morganella se encuentran ampliamente distribuidos en la naturaleza y se pueden aislar en las heces de personas sanas. el germen ms frecuente como causa de infeccin humana es proteus mirabilis. al igual que e. coli, proteus participa con ms frecuencia en las infecciones del tracto urinario y de heridas, y slo de modo ocasional causa enfermedad pulmonar. la infeccin suele aparecer sobre un fondo de enfermedad respiratoria crnica, por ejemplo bronquiectasias, o en pacientes con traqueostomas 249 . el aspecto radiolgico tpico corresponde a una consolidacin homognea no segmentaria, predominantemente en la porcin posterior de los lbulos superiores o en la porcin superior de los lbulos inferiores; es frecuente la formacin de abscesos. desde el punto de vista clnico el comienzo y el curso de la evolucin de la neumona son ms insidiosos que los que se observan en otras neumonas por gramnegativos.y. pestis es un pequeo bacilo inmvil algo pleomorfo que capta el colorante con ms avidez en los dos extremos, lo que le proporciona un aspecto bipolar. es la causa de la peste, una enfermedad endmica en muchas partes del mundo 250 . entre 1988 y 2002 se declararon un total de 112 casos humanos en 11 estados del oeste de ee.uu. 250 . patogenia y caractersticas anatomopatolgicas. el bacilo es un parsito primario de roedores salvajes; sin embargo, tambin se encuentra en animales domsticos, como perros y gatos 251 . en ee.uu. las ardillas terrcolas son el reservorio ms importante. la enfermedad se transmite de un animal a otro y de un animal a una persona a travs de pulgas o garrapatas que abandonan a su husped natural cuando muere. en las zonas endmicas hay casos espordicos (peste selvtica) en personas como veterinarios de animales pequeos y granjeros o tramperos que entran en contacto con animales del campo 252 . en ocasiones, y con unas consecuencias ms ominosas, la enfermedad se extiende a las ratas urbanas, con riesgo de epidemias de infeccin humana. aunque habitualmente se contagia por la picadura de una garrapata o una pulga, la enfermedad tambin se transmite a los carnvoros por la ingestin de roedores infectados y, rara vez, a los seres humanos por la inhalacin de microorganismos procedentes de pacientes con peste neumnica o por exposicin en el laboratorio 253 . si se aerosoliza, el microorganismo representa un arma potencial de bioterrorismo 254, 255 .cuando la pulga pica a otro animal los grmenes se mezclan con la sangre ingerida y son regurgitados hacia la herida. en los seres humanos la inoculacin inicial da lugar al cabo de 1 a 5 das a una lesin cutnea local, habitualmente en las piernas. los ganglios linfticos regionales aumentan de tamao y aparecen muy dolorosos, con la piel suprayacente firme y de color prpura, lo que da lugar a la formacin de los bubones caractersticos de la peste bubnica. la enfermedad puede pasar a una fase septicmica con afectacin de los pulmones (peste neumnica secundaria), a partir de los cuales la transmisin de grmenes de persona a persona por va area puede producir directamente neumona (peste neumnica primaria). desde el punto de vista anatomopatolgico esta ltima forma se caracteriza inicialmente por bronquitis y bronquiolitis graves, seguidas de bronconeumona hemorrgica, que se hace confluente con rapidez y forma grandes zonas de consolidacin homognea. al microscopio la necrosis suele ser prominente y abundan los microorganismos. los ganglios linfticos regionales aparecen agrandados y edematosos. la peste neumnica secundaria carece de la distribucin lobulillar que se observa en la enfermedad primaria y afecta al parnquima pulmonar de modo ms o menos difuso; sin embargo, las alteraciones histolgicas son idnticas a las que se observan en la forma primaria. manifestaciones radiolgicas. el patrn radiogrfico corresponde a una consolidacin homognea no segmentaria que puede ser extensa y en ocasiones simula el edema de pulmn bilateral difuso; no se produce cavitacin. la enfermedad grave puede imitar al sdra 256 . puede haber derrame pleural. en ocasiones las manifestaciones radiogrficas torcicas se limitan al aumento del tamao de los ganglios hiliares y paratraqueales 257 . manifestaciones clnicas. la peste neumnica primaria es fulminante y cursa con fiebre alta, disnea, cianosis y empeoramiento rpido. se pueden observar tos y expectoracin espumosa sanguinolenta, y es comn el dolor pleural. la mayora de los pacientes presenta leucocitosis moderada. es frecuente la aparicin de cid en la fase terminal, que se manifiesta con petequias cutneas y, a veces, equmosis masivas (muerte negra). el diagnstico se debe sospechar ante la combinacin de neumona confluente y aumento del tamao de los ganglios linfticos mediastnicos en la radiografa de trax, adenopatas dolorosas en la exploracin fsica y antecedentes de contacto con roedores o gatos en una zona endmica. el diagnstico se confirma mediante tincin de gram y cultivo de muestras de sangre, esputo o material aspirado de un ganglio linftico aumentado de tamao. en la segunda semana de la enfermedad aparecen anticuerpos, que pueden verse con aglutinacin o eli-sa 255 . el diagnstico tambin se puede confirmar mediante rcp 255 .la tasa de mortalidad de los casos declarados a la organizacin mundial de la salud entre 1980 y 1994 fue de aproximadamente el 10% 258 . los casos se deben declarar inmediatamente a las autoridades sanitarias.las pasteurelas son bacilos inmviles de aspecto bipolar en la tincin de gram. p. multocida infecta sobre todo a los animales y es una causa importante de enfermedad en los animales domsticos 269 . los pacientes infectados suelen tener antecedentes de contacto con animales y la enfermedad es frecuente sobre todo en granjeros 250 . el germen es un patgeno respiratorio infrecuente y el aislamiento de p. multocida en el esputo suele ocurrir en presencia de neumopata crnica, por ejemplo bronquiectasias, bronquitis crnica y/o enfisema 259 . a veces este aislamiento refleja simplemente la colonizacin del pulmn anormal; sin embargo, algunos casos se han asociado a agravamiento de la enfermedad subyacente, probablemente por bronquitis aguda. el germen puede provocar tambin bronconeumona aguda, muchas veces asociada a empiema y en ocasiones a la formacin de un absceso 259 . las manifestaciones anatomopatolgicas, radiolgicas y clnicas de todas esas formas de la infeccin son inespecficas.b. pseudomallei es la causa de la melioidosis, una enfermedad endmica similar al muermo de los animales y los seres humanos.en la naturaleza, el microorganismo es un saprofito que se encuentra en la tierra, el agua dulce, los arrozales y diversos productos vegetales. la enfermedad afecta principalmente a los roedores, los gatos y los perros y tiene carcter endmico en el sudeste de asia y el norte de australia 261 . la infeccin humana se produce predominantemente en varones adultos durante la estacin hmeda, probablemente por contacto de piel lesionada con tierra o agua contaminadas 262 . en las regiones endmicas la melioidosis es una causa relativamente frecuente de sepsis y/o neumona adquirida en la comunidad. la presencia de enfermedades subyacentes, en particular diabetes mellitus y alcoholismo, aumenta la susceptibilidad 263 . el perodo de incubacin de la infeccin aguda puede ser de tan slo tres das; sin embargo, la enfermedad tiene con ms frecuencia carcter latente y no se reactiva hasta meses o aos ms tarde, muchas veces con motivo de otras enfermedades o de intervenciones quirrgicas 261 .la melioidosis aguda se caracteriza desde el punto de vista anatomopatolgico por abscesos de tamao variable entre microscpicos y de 3 cm de dimetro. aunque los abscesos se pueden encontrar en prcticamente cualquier rgano, son ms frecuentes en los pulmones, el hgado y el bazo 264 . el examen microscpico suele mostrar microorganismos abundantes. la enfermedad crnica se manifiesta por focos de inflamacin granulomatosa similares a los del linfogranuloma venreo; en estos casos tpicamente es difcil encontrar los grmenes.la enfermedad aguda se caracteriza desde el punto de vista radiogrfico por opacidades nodulares irregulares de 3 a 15 mm de dimetro diseminadas ampliamente por ambos pulmones o por zonas de consolidacin segmentarias o lobares 265 . la consolidacin puede ser multilobar o limitarse a un solo lbulo y puede tener carcter focal o confluente. al progresar, los ndulos tienden a aumentar de tamao, confluir y cavitarse; aunque se observa rara vez en la evaluacin inicial, entre el 40% y el 60% de los pacientes acaba por desarrollar cavitacin. la tc y la ecografa demuestran con frecuencia abscesos en el hgado y el bazo 266 . el derrame pleural o el empiema se encuentran en el momento del ingreso o pocas semanas ms tarde en aproximadamente el 15% de los pacientes 265 . la forma crnica de la enfermedad se caracteriza por opacidades nodulares, opacidades lineales irregulares, zonas de consolidacin y cavitacin 265 . esta forma suele afectar de modo predominante o exclusivo a los lbulos superiores; sin embargo, en contraste con la tuberculosis tiende a respetar los vrtices pulmonares, raras veces produce retraccin superior de los hilios y es raro que se calcifique.el espectro clnico de la melioidosis es amplio e incluye septicemia fulminante aguda, enfermedad subaguda y una forma crnica; muchas personas experimentan tambin una infeccin subclnica 261 . la enfermedad ha sido llamada bomba de relojera mdica debido a la tendencia a la agudizacin cuando disminuyen las defensas del husped tras un perodo de portador prolongado y asintomtico 261 . la enfermedad puede tener carcter local o diseminado. el comienzo de la melioidosis aguda suele ser brusco, pero puede estar precedido por un perodo breve de malestar general, anorexia y diarrea. los sntomas pueden incluir fiebre alta, escalofros, tos, expectoracin purulenta con hebras de sangre, disnea y dolor pleurtico, seguido con rapidez por signos de diseminacin bacterimica, como abscesos miliares viscerales y seos. el cuadro clnico de la melioidosis crnica imita a la tuberculosis pulmonar, y los pacientes afectos suelen tener fiebre, tos productiva y prdida de peso 267 . son frecuentes el dolor torcico pleurtico y la hemoptisis.la positividad del cultivo establece el diagnstico. una prueba serolgica positiva proporciona datos de infeccin actual o pasada; aunque la especificidad de los resultados para enfermedad activa disminuye con la edad, los ttulos muy altos tienen utilidad diagnstica 268 . la prueba de elisa en sangre u orina mejora la sensibilidad y la especificidad de las pruebas serolgicas y es un mtodo de diagnstico rpido 269, 270 . la rcp se ha usado tambin para la identificacin rpida del germen en muestras de la capa leucoctica y de pus.b. cepacia tiene importancia sobre todo como causa de infeccin oportunista en pacientes con fibrosis qustica (vase pgina 676) 271, 272 . existen pruebas convincentes de que el germen se transmite entre pacientes que tienen esa enfermedad y de que su presencia empeora el pronstico 273 . el microorganismo es responsable tambin del aumento de la morbilidad y la mortalidad de los pacientes sometidos a trasplante de pulmn 274 , y se ha documentado que causa neumona nosocomial en pacientes inmunodeprimidos a travs de nebulizadores contaminados 275 .p. aeruginosa es un bacilo gramnegativo mvil que puede aparecer en forma de bacterias aisladas, en parejas y, ocasionalmente, en cadenas cortas. se encuentra ampliamente distribuido en el suelo, el agua, las plantas y los animales, y est presente muchas veces, en nmero pequeo, en el intestino y la piel de personas sanas.la neumona por p. aeruginosa es la forma ms frecuente y letal de infeccin pulmonar nosocomial 276 . produce aproximadamente el 20% de los casos de neumona nosocomial en los pacientes adultos de la uci 277 y es la causa ms frecuente de traqueobronquitis nosocomial en pacientes sometidos a ventilacin mecnica 278 . el germen prolifera en ambientes hmedos como sumideros, baos, nebulizadores y duchas, y se cree que muchas infecciones proceden de esas fuentes 159 ; ciertos brotes epidmicos de infeccin tambin se han atribuido a contaminacin del equipo de terapia respiratoria y de broncoscopia 236, 279 . varios factores de riesgo aumentan la probabilidad de neumona por p. aeruginosa en la uci, como estancia prolongada por la gravedad de la enfermedad subyacente, ventilacin mecnica prolongada y tratamiento antimicrobiano previo 280 . el germen es responsable tambin de aproximadamente el 5% al 10% de los casos de neumona adquirida en la comunidad de gravedad suficiente para justificar el ingreso en el hospital 281 .la neumona suele deberse a la aspiracin de microorganismos desde la va area superior colonizada. la fuga de secreciones subglticas hacia las vas areas inferiores tambin se ha relacionado con riesgo de neumona en pacientes intubados 282 . la colonizacin de la orofaringe est precedida por el aumento de la adherencia de los grmenes al epitelio de las vas areas superiores, un proceso que tambin es favorecido por las fimbrias que se extienden desde su superficie 159 , y la mayor afinidad de los grmenes por las clulas epiteliales en proceso de reparacin 283 . p. aeruginosa produce diversas enzimas y sustancias txicas potentes que favorecen la invasin local y la enfermedad sistmica mediante la inhibicin de la limpieza mucociliar y de la reaccin inflamatoria pulmonar 31, 159, 282, 284 . el lipopolisacrido derivado de la cpsula del microorganismo (endotoxina) tiene una importancia particular como causa de fiebre, shock, oliguria, leucocitosis, cid y sdra 159 . el aspecto anatomopatolgico es tpicamente el de una bronconeumona aguda.las manifestaciones radiolgicas suelen corresponder a una bronconeumona y son mltiples zonas bilaterales de consolidacin 285 . esas zonas pueden tener una distribucin lobulillar, subsegmentaria o segmentaria y ser focales o confluentes (figura 6-18) 285 .es frecuente que la consolidacin afecte a todos los lbulos 285 , aunque tiende a predominar en los inferiores.entre el 20% y el 25% de los pacientes muestra formacin de abscesos, cavitacin y derrames pleurales unilaterales o bilaterales, en general pequeos 285 . en ocasiones se ven mltiples opacidades nodulares, habitualmente en pacientes con bacteriemia 286, 287 .una infeccin del tracto respiratorio superior puede preceder a la neumona, cuyo comienzo es tpicamente brusco con escalofros, fiebre, disnea intensa y tos productiva de esputos abundantes, amarillos o verdosos, en ocasiones con hebras de sangre. aunque el empiema es frecuente, el dolor pleural resulta infrecuente. no existen caractersticas especiales que distingan esta neumona de la que producen otras bacterias 276 . el recuento leucoctico suele ser normal en la fase precoz, pero habitualmente aumenta hasta una media de aproximadamente 20.000/mm 3 ; sin embargo, no resulta rara la leucopenia con neutropenia 287 . el diagnstico se establece en general por la positividad de los cultivos de esputo o de sangre. la tasa de mortalidad es muy alta en los pacientes sometidos a ventilacin mecnica.s. maltophilia (x. maltophilia, pseudomonas maltophilia) es un bacilo gramnegativo ampliamente distribuido en el medio ambiente. se ha convertido en un patgeno nosocomial importante en los pacientes inmunodeprimidos, con cncer o sometidos a trasplantes de rganos 288 . tambin coloniza las vas areas de pacientes con fibrosis qustica grave 289 ; al igual que sucede con b. cepacia, esta colonizacin puede empeorar en el curso de la evolucin de la enfermedad.los gmenes del gnero acinetobacter son cocobacilos encapsulados inmviles ampliamente distribuidos en el suelo y el agua 159 . aunque se les suele considerar contaminantes o comensales cuando se cultivan en muestras clnicas, estos grmenes pueden causar una neumona bacterimica aguda que con frecuencia es mortal 290 . en el contexto de la uci el contagio se puede producir por contacto con las manos.b. henselae causa la enfermedad por araazo de gato. aunque las lesiones se suelen limitar a la piel, en ocasiones se ha descrito neumona 291 . el germen causa tambin la angiomatosis bacilar, una entidad que se caracteriza por proliferacin vascular local en la piel y las mucosas (entre ellas del rbol traqueobronquial) en pacientes con sida 292 .bordetella pertussis y bordetella parapertussis son los patgenos responsables de la tos ferina (pertusis) 293 . el primero est encapsulado y constituye la causa ms importante; b. parapertussis origina una forma relativamente leve de la enfermedad, muchas veces subclnica. aunque en general se asuma que la tos ferina haba sido erradicada en gran parte gracias a la inmunizacin, ahora sabemos que la inmunidad puede ser no muy duradera, y que la enfermedad se est produciendo con ms frecuencia en adultos 294, 295 .el germen produce varios factores de virulencia que favorecen la adherencia al epitelio respiratorio, causan lesin de las clulas ciliadas, ayudan a evitar las defensas del husped y producen diversos efectos sistmicos 296 . desde el punto de vista anatomopatolgico, la enfermedad se caracteriza por traqueobronquitis y bronquiolitis y se asocia a necrosis epitelial focal (a veces extensa). el moco intraluminal suele ser abundante y provoca obstruccin parcial o completa de las vas areas, con zonas focales de hiperinsuflacin y atelectasia. los grmenes se pueden identificar mediante tincin de gram junto a las clulas epiteliales. la bronconeumona causada por la infeccin bacteriana sobreaadida puede alterar el aspecto anatomopatolgico tpico.los signos radiogrficos publicados son atelectasia, consolidacin segmentaria (habitualmente en los lbulos inferiores o en el lbulo medio) y adenopatas hiliares 297 . sin embargo, es posible que algunas de esas alteraciones se deban a sobreinfeccin bacteriana.la tos ferina aguda es ms frecuente en nios menores de dos aos, en los que muchas veces tiene una evolucin prolongada y debilitante. el cuadro clnico caracterstico est formado por accesos de tos paroxstica que terminan en estridor. el diagnstico puede ser difcil en los adultos, puesto que en ellos se encuentran con menos frecuencia el estridor tpico y los vmitos y el cuadro es muchas veces poco ms que una tos paroxstica leve y de escasa duracin. de hecho, algunos investigadores han encontrado que la infeccin representa una causa frecuente de tos prolongada en los adultos que no tienen motivo aparente de tos en la evaluacin inicial 298 . los espasmos de tos tambin son menos intensos y la evolucin menos prolongada en los pacientes vacunados 299 .la tos ferina aguda causa linfocitosis moderada o intensa. el diagnstico definitivo depende de la positividad de los cultivos de muestras farngeas, que se obtienen con ms facilidad durante la fase catarral inicial de la enfermedad 296 si existe relacin epidemiolgica con un caso conocido 294 . la prueba de anticuerpos fluorescentes directos se ha mostrado til en casos 244 c a p  t u l o 6  enfermedades infecciosas de los pulmones f i g u r a 6 -1 8bronconeumona aguda: pseudomonas aeruginosa. mujer de 38 aos ingresada en coma profundo por una sobredosis de barbitricos. varios das despus del ingreso una radiografa anteroposterior mostr consolidacin masiva de todos los lbulos de ambos pulmones, y la porcin superior del lbulo superior izquierdo era la menos afecta. tambin se observaba broncograma areo en todas las zonas. ( dudosos; sin embargo, la confirmacin precisa cultivo, serologa (especialmente elisa) o rcp 295, 296 .la enfermedad puede tener consecuencias graves; provoca ms de 500.000 muertes anuales, sobre todo entre los nios de pases en vas de desarrollo 296 . las bronquiectasias saculares eran una complicacin relativamente frecuente cuando an no se dispona de antibiticos; sin embargo, los estudios de seguimiento en pacientes tratados con esos frmacos han demostrado que esa complicacin es ahora relativamente rara 300 .f. tularensis es un bacilo pleomorfo inmvil, causante de la tularemia 301 . la enfermedad es ms frecuente en roedores y otros mamferos pequeos; los insectos (garrapatas, tbanos y mosquitos) actan como reservorios y vectores. las personas se pueden infectar por diversos mecanismos, como: 1) penetracin del germen en una herida abierta de las manos mientras se desuellan animales infectados, como conejos o ratas almizcleras; 2) contagio de animal a ser humano por picaduras de insectos vectores o directamente por araazos o mordeduras de gatos; 3) ingestin de agua o carne procedente de animales infectados contaminadas 302 y 4) inhalacin de microorganismos procedentes de material de cultivo en el laboratorio o de una fuente ambiental 303 . este ltimo mecanismo est relacionado con la inclusin de f. tularensis en la lista de microorganismos con posible uso como armas de bioterrorismo. dado el mecanismo de transmisin, la mayor parte de los casos se produce en zonas endmicas rurales; sin embargo, se encuentra un nmero sorprendentemente alto en las ciudades cuando el mdico sagaz interroga sobre contactos recientes con animales en parques, zoolgicos y zonas boscosas de los suburbios.la enfermedad pulmonar suele aparecer como consecuencia de la diseminacin hematgena de microorganismos desde otras localizaciones; en ocasiones est causada por la aspiracin de secreciones farngeas o por inhalacin. desde el punto de vista anatomopatolgico, los pulmones presentan mltiples ndulos blancos grisceos de necrosis por coagulacin y un infiltrado inflamatorio en gran parte mononuclear 303 . los microorganismos son tpicamente difciles de identificar.la manifestacin radiogrfica ms frecuente es una consolidacin del espacio areo que tiene carcter focal en aproximadamente el 80% de los pacientes y segmentario o no segmentario en el resto 304 . se produce aumento del tamao de los ganglios linfticos hiliares en el 25% al 50% de los casos, y derrames pleurales con aproximadamente la misma frecuencia. las adenopatas suelen ser ipsolaterales respecto a las zonas de consolidacin. se produce cavitacin en aproximadamente el 15% al 20% de los pacientes que tienen zonas de consolidacin 304 .la exposicin al microorganismo produce lceras cutneas perifricas, adenopatas perifricas y/o sntomas de tipo tifoideo. los signos relacionados con la infeccin pleuropulmonar aparecen al cabo de 1 a 14 das y son fiebre alta (normalmente >40), escalofros, malestar general, debilidad y cefaleas. la faringe se afecta con frecuencia, con manifestaciones variables entre la faringitis simple y la amigdalitis ulcerada 301 . los signos fsicos torcicos son mnimos en la mayora de los pacientes. los datos de laboratorio resultan inespecficos 301 .el diagnstico se establece por la positividad del cultivo. el aumento de los ttulos de aglutininas en muestras tomadas con un intervalo de dos semanas tambin confirma la infeccin reciente. se puede establecer un diagnstico de presuncin por el hallazgo de un solo ttulo de 1:160 o superior o mediante la deteccin de antgeno en el anlisis de fluorescencia 301 .h. influenzae es un cocobacilo inmvil pleomorfo que a veces se presenta como parejas o cadenas cortas y con mucho representa la especie ms importante del gnero como causa de infeccin del tracto respiratorio 305 . en los adultos el microorganismo se asla con ms frecuencia en muestras de pacientes con epoc 306 . otras enfermedades subyacentes crnicas, como alcoholismo y diabetes mellitus 305 , tambin constituyen factores de riesgo importantes. se ha dicho que h. influenzae es responsable de aproximadamente el 5% al 40% de las neumonas adquiridas en la comunidad en las que se consigue identificar algn germen [307] [308] [309] . h. influenzae es tambin una causa importante de neumona nosocomial leve o moderada en pacientes que no tienen factores de riesgo particulares de neumona, as como de neumona muy grave en enfermos hospitalizados recientemente a los que no se han administrado antibiticos 243 .es posible que la infeccin crnica por h. influenzae sea ms frecuente de lo que en general se piensa. por ejemplo, en una serie de 115 pacientes que haban tenido sntomas durante por lo menos un mes y alteraciones radiogrficas, el cultivo cuantitativo de muestras tomadas con cepillo protegido identific el microorganismo en 53 casos (46%) 310 ; las dos terceras partes de esos pacientes sufran enfermedades asociadas significativas, y los componentes del tercio restantes eran pacientes por lo dems sanos. como patgeno del tracto respiratorio inferior, h. influenzae causa con frecuencia slo bronquitis aguda. tambin puede producir en ocasiones epiglotitis potencialmente mortal en adultos 311 .las manifestaciones radiolgicas de la infeccin por h. influenzae son variables. entre el 50% y el 60% de los pacientes presenta un patrn de bronconeumona con zonas de consolidacin de distribucin focal o segmentaria 312 . la consolidacin puede ser unilateral o bilateral y suele afectar sobre todo a los lbulos inferiores. en el 30% al 50% de los pacientes el patrn corresponde a una consolidacin del espacio areo no segmentaria aguda similar a la que produce s. pneumoniae. ese patrn se puede encontrar solo o en combinacin con bronconeumona 312 . en el 15% al 30% de los casos se observa un patrn intersticial reticular o reticulonodular, aislado o en combinacin con consolidacin del espacio areo. en ocasiones se han descrito cavidades. se encuentran derrames pleurales en aproximadamente el 50% de los pacientes; el empiema es infrecuente.las manifestaciones clnicas son inespecficas. se ha estimado que la tasa de mortalidad de la neumona bacterimica por h. influenzae puede alcanzar el 57%, lo que refleja la gravedad habitual de las enfermedades coexistentes 313 .los grmenes del gnero legionella son cocobacilos gramnegativos que se tien dbilmente y que son responsables de la enfermedad de los legionarios. el serogrupo 1 de legionella pneumophila provoca la gran mayora de los casos, una afirmacin que se basa en parte en la falta de pruebas para la identificacin de otras especies y serogrupos 314 . despus del reconocimiento de la enfermedad de los legionarios en filadelfia durante 1976 se han identificado en todo el mundo muchos brotes epidmicos relacionados con una fuente comn 315, 316 , as como casos espordicos 317 . la mayora de los pacientes presenta neumona, con frecuencia grave y asociada a signos de afectacin del hgado, los riones y el sistema nervioso central 318 ; esta combinacin de signos clnicos se ha denominado enfermedad de los legionarios. a veces se encuentra un sndrome de tipo gripal que no se acompaa de signos de afectacin del tracto respiratorio bajo; este cuadro se conoce comnmente como fie-bre de pontiac porque se describi por primera vez durante una epidemia ocurrida en pontiac, michigan 319 .no se conoce la incidencia exacta de neumona por l. pneumophila en ee.uu., y las estimaciones han oscilado entre 13.000 y 250.000 casos anuales 320, 321 . los estudios prospectivos han documentado la presencia del microorganismo en el 2% al 25% de los pacientes hospitalizados con neumona 322, 323 , lo que lo convierte en uno de los grmenes ms frecuentes en ese contexto; como consecuencia, es obligatorio hacer un tratamiento eficaz contra el microorganismo en los pacientes que tienen neumona grave de causa indeterminada 324 . la incidencia publicada del gnero legionella ha variado entre el 1% y el 40% en los pacientes con neumona nosocomial; esta variacin depende en parte de las tcnicas que se utilizan para identificar la infeccin y en parte de la presencia o ausencia de una fuente ambiental de infeccin. a pesar de su elevada frecuencia como causa de infeccin nosocomial en algunos estudios, el microorganismo parece ser una causa claramente poco frecuente de neumona en los pacientes sometidos a ventilacin mecnica 14 . los principales factores de neumona por legionella incluyen tabaquismo, neumopata crnica e inmunosupresin (sobre todo por corticoides) 325 .el hbitat natural de legionella parece ser las biopelculas o los protozoos del agua 326 . algunos investigadores han demostrado una incidencia mxima de la enfermedad durante el verano y la primera parte del otoo, quizs a causa de la preferencia del microorganismo por el agua templada 326 . cuando la enfermedad aparece en brotes es frecuente recuperar bacterias de las torres de refrigeracin de los sistemas de aire acondicionado y en los condensadores de evaporacin 327 , y el probable mecanismo de la infeccin es la formacin de aerosoles de partculas de agua infectadas. sin embargo, la asociacin de infeccin nosocomial por legionella con el agua potable indica que la aspiracin de las secreciones de las vas areas superiores colonizadas puede tener importancia en este contexto 328 . patogenia y caractersticas anatomopatolgicas. una vez que el microorganismo llega a los pulmones entra en el citoplasma de diversas clulas, principalmente los macrfagos alveolares, por medio de fagosomas. esta entrada puede estar mediada en parte por los receptores del complemento y de las inmunoglobulinas de la superficie de los macrfagos 329 ; sin embargo, tambin es importante la invasin de las clulas epiteliales por la bacteria. una vez dentro de la clula, el microorganismo parece tener la capacidad de evitar la fusin de los fagosomas con los lisosomas y evitar as la accin bactericida de los macrfagos; ms adelante los fagosomas se asocian ntimamente al retculo endoplsmico de la clula y las bacterias comienzan a multiplicarse. los microorganismos experimentan diversos cambios morfolgicos y probablemente funcionales que favorecen su capacidad de invadir otras clulas y perpetuar la infeccin despus de salir de la clula original 330 . despus de invadir nuevas clulas las bacterias vuelven a adoptar una forma vegetativa y experimentan otra vez replicacin intracelular.adems de ser una clula que es atacada por la bacteria, el macrfago alveolar es tambin una clula efectora importante para la resistencia del husped. en modelos experimentales la resistencia a la infeccin guarda relacin con la activacin de los macrfagos y el consiguiente aumento de la capacidad para inhibir la replicacin del microorganismo 331 . los linfocitos cooperadores t h 1 tienen una importancia particular en esta respuesta inmunitaria celular. no est clara la funcin de los neutrfilos en la contencin de la infeccin, y la neutropenia no parece guardar relacin con el aumento del riesgo de neumona 324 .el aspecto macroscpico tpico es una bronconeumona que cuando se observa en piezas de autopsia suele ser extensa y con-fluente 332 . no es infrecuente la formacin de abscesos 333 . desde el punto de vista microscpico los espacios areos alveolares aparecen llenos ms o menos uniformemente de una mezcla de leucocitos polimorfonucleares, eritrocitos, macrfagos, fibrina y restos necrticos; la leucocitoclasia es tpicamente marcada. se puede observar vasculitis y trombosis de los vasos pequeos. aunque la identificacin de cocobacilos gramnegativos en las secreciones respiratorias o los tejidos puede ser un dato importante para el diagnstico 334 , los grmenes se identifican de modo ms fiable mediante inmunofluorescencia directa o tcnicas de inmunohistoqumica 335 . manifestaciones radiolgicas. el patrn radiogrfico caracterstico es una consolidacin del espacio areo inicialmente perifrica y sublobar similar a la que se observa en la neumona aguda por s. pneumoniae (figura [6] [7] [8] [9] [10] [11] [12] [13] [14] [15] [16] [17] [18] [19] . en muchos casos la zona de consolidacin aumenta posteriormente hasta ocupar todo un lbulo o gran parte del mismo o afectar lbulos contiguos del mismo lado 336, 337 . la progresin de la neumona suele ser rpida y afecta a la mayor parte de un lbulo en tres o cuatro das, muchas veces a pesar de readministrar un tratamiento antibitico adecuado; este comportamiento se ve rara vez en la neumona aguda del espacio areo por s. pneumoniae 336, 338 . existe tendencia a la afectacin bilateral conforme progresa la enfermedad.en los pacientes inmunocompetentes se observa formacin de abscesos con posterior cavitacin en aproximadamente el 5% de los casos 339 . en contraste, la cavitacin es muy frecuente en los pacientes inmunodeprimidos (figura 6-20) 340, 341 . se puede producir derrame pleural, habitualmente en el acm de la enfermedad. el aumento de los ganglios linfticos hiliares es muy infrecuente. el patrn radiogrfico que se asocia a la infeccin por otras especies del gnero legionella es similar al descrito para l. pneumophila 342, 343 . manifestaciones clnicas. se ha estimado que el perodo de incubacin oscila entre 2 y 10 das 344 . los sntomas iniciales habituales son fiebre (a veces alta y continua), malestar general, mialgia, escalofros, confusin, cefalea y diarrea. los sntomas respiratorios ms frecuentes son tos seca sin sntomas previos del tracto respiratorio alto y, cuando progresa la neumona, disnea 345 . con el paso del tiempo la tos se puede hacer productiva y asociarse a hemoptisis. se produce dolor pleural en alrededor de la tercera parte de los pacientes 346 . la fiebre puede persistir durante ms de dos semanas, y la mejora de las radiografas no suele comenzar hasta el final de la segunda semana 344 . la neumona por legionella muestra mayor tendencia a organizarse que otras neumonas bacterianas 347 y pueden quedar secuelas permanentes 348 .los sntomas que reflejan afectacin de otros rganos, en especial los sistemas digestivo, renal y nervioso central, son mucho ms frecuentes en la enfermedad de los legionarios que en la neumona por otros grmenes. es frecuente que los pacientes refieran diarrea acuosa y en ocasiones dolor abdominal. muchos pacientes presentan confusin e incluso obnubilacin; adems de esta encefalopata, los posibles trastornos neuromusculares incluyen miositis, disfuncin cerebelosa, vejiga neurgena y neuropata perifrica. puede haber hematuria y proteinuria; la insuficiencia renal se suele asociar a shock. puede estar aumentada la concentracin de bilirrubina. el recuento leucoctico suele ser inferior a 15.000/mm 3 , con desviacin a la izquierda. la linfopenia es frecuente, con cifras de 1.000/mm 3 o menos 349 .aunque algunos de esos sntomas y signos son tpicos de la legionelosis, ninguno de ellos distingue de modo fiable esa enfermedad de otras neumonas nosocomiales o adquiridas en la comunidad 324, 350 . sin embargo, la constelacin de hiponatremia, aumento de la concentracin de creatina fosfocinasa (por la rabdomilisis), falta de respuesta a un antibitico betalactmico y presencia de diarrea y cefalea son datos que deben indicar el diagnstico 351 .la confirmacin del diagnstico precisa la positividad del cultivo, de la prueba de inmunofluorescencia, de la hemaglutinacin de anticuerpos o de la deteccin del antgeno mediante sondas de adn o radioinmunoanlisis. la determinacin de antgeno en orina tiene una sensibilidad insuficiente para guiar la actuacin clnica debido a que slo puede detectar de modo fiable las infecciones por l. pneumophila del serogrupo 1 314 . de modo similar, el cultivo de esputo es poco sensible y precisa tcnicas especiales de laboratorio que no estn disponibles en todos los centros. el tiempo necesario para recibir los resultados tambin hace que esa prueba sea poco til para guiar el tratamiento 314 .la neumona por legionella es una enfermedad grave. muchos pacientes precisan ventilacin asistida, y las tasas de mortalidad oscilaban en las primeras series entre el 10% y el 25% 5, 352 . sin embargo, la mortalidad ha disminuido de forma sustancial durante la dcada de 1990, quizs como resultado de la aplicacin de normas teraputicas que incluyen la administracin de antibiticos eficaces para el tratamiento emprico de la neumona tanto adquirida en la comunidad como nosocomial 353, 354 .los componentes de la familia treponemataceae son microorganismos mviles de forma de espiral, en general muy finos, que se ven mejor con microscopia de campo oscuro, tcnicas de anticuerpos fluorescentes y tincin argntica de los cortes tisulares. dos gneros -leptospira y treponema-se asocian a enfermedad pulmonar en los seres humanos.l. interrogans es una espiroqueta aerobia muy fina que se distribuye ampliamente en la naturaleza, sobre todo como saprofito o parsito de roedores y de muchos animales domsticos. la infeccin humana se origina la mayora de las veces por contacto con agua o suelo pantanoso contaminado y tiene su mxima prevalencia en los trpicos. las manifestaciones clnicas de la leptospirosis se suelen asociar a sntomas y signos de insuficiencia renal y heptica (enfermedad de weil) 355 . aunque se puede demostrar afectacin pulmonar en el 20% al 70% de los pacientes 356 , la enfermedad grave es rara 357 . los pacientes afectos suelen presentar conjuntivitis e hipersensibilidad muscular, datos que segn algunos autores constituyen indicios valiosos para el diagnstico 358 . entre las dems manifestaciones se incluyen cefaleas, esca- lofros, nuseas y vmitos, piuria, hematuria y hepatomegalia. los sntomas respiratorios incluyen tos y ocasionalmente hemoptisis, a veces intensa 359 . puede aparecer sdra. el diagnstico se puede confirmar mediante cultivo de los microorganismos en sangre y orina y mediante elisa 356 .t. pallidum es una espiroqueta fina responsable de la sfilis, una enfermedad que tiene manifestaciones clnicas variadas, que habitualmente se adquiere por contacto sexual con una persona infectada y que clsicamente progresa por las fases primaria, secundaria y terciaria. la sfilis pulmonar se encuentra tanto en la sfilis congnita como en la adquirida. la primera (neumona alba) forma parte de un espectro de afectacin sifiltica de mltiples rganos y en general produce parto de feto muerto o muerte temprana del recin nacido. la sfilis adquirida se asocia rara vez a afectacin pulmonar, que se encuentra con algo ms de frecuencia durante la fase terciaria. puede adoptar dos formas principales: enfermedad parenquimatosa fibrogomatosa y arteritis pulmonar. tambin se han descrito derrame pleural 360 y neumonitis subaguda con un patrn radiogrfico de infiltracin reticulonodular 360 en pacientes con infeccin por vih y sida, respectivamente.en la infeccin humana se han identificado ms de 30 gneros y 200 especies de anaerobios; de hecho, la infeccin del pulmn por anaerobios suele ser polimicrobiana 159 . entre los grmenes ms importante se incluyen los bacilos gramnegativos bacteroides, fusobacterium, porphyromonas y prevotella; los bacilos grampositivos actinomyces, eubacterium y clostridium; los cocos grampositivos peptostreptococcus y peptococcus; y los cocos gramnegativos veillonella 361 . son frecuentes las infecciones mixtas por anaerobios y aerobios, sobre todo en los casos de infeccin nosocomial 362 .debido a la necesidad de tcnicas especiales para la toma de muestras y su cultivo, se desconoce la incidencia exacta de infecciones anaerobias. sin embargo, cuando se han hecho esfuerzos particulares se han encontrado microorganismos anaerobios en el 20% al 35% de los pacientes que tienen neumona nosocomial o adquirida en la comunidad 128 . se observa predominio significativo de los varones (3 o 4:1) 363 . se cree que muchos casos guardan relacin con la aspiracin de secreciones orales contaminadas. en consecuencia, las situaciones clnicas que aumentan el nmero de grmenes en esas secreciones (como gingivitis o periodontitis) y las que elevan el riesgo de aspiracin (como accidente cerebrovascular, disfagia, trastornos por convulsiones, abuso de drogas y alcoholismo) constituyen factores de riesgo de la enfermedad 364 . los pacientes que presentan enfermedad a pesar de una buena higiene oral quizs tengan una lesin endobronquial que interfiera con la eliminacin de los microorganismos aspirados hasta el parnquima distal 365 .el sndrome de lemierre es una forma infrecuente de infeccin anaerobia en la que el foco primario se localiza en la faringe, con tromboflebitis sptica secundaria de la vena yugular interna que produce infeccin metastsica en los huesos, las articulaciones, los pulmones y la pleura 366 . el germen causal puede pertenecer a los gneros fusobacterium o bacteroides; los adultos jvenes parecen ser especialmente susceptibles. la bacteriemia por bacteroides fragilis suele guardar relacin con intervenciones quirrgicas abdominales o con enfermedades ginecolgicas u obsttricas 367 . la invasin temprana de las venas regionales es un dato caracte-rstico de esa infeccin, con la consiguiente tromboflebitis y, en muchos casos, tromboembolia pulmonar 368 .los miembros del gnero clostridium, generalmente clostridium perfringens, causan a veces infeccin pleuropulmonar, como enfermedad primaria o asociada a bacteriemia despus de un intento de aborto en condiciones spticas 369 . la primera forma se suele encontrar en pacientes que tienen enfermedades pulmonares o cardacas subyacentes o despus de tromboembolias pulmonares 360 . el empiema es relativamente frecuente; aunque con frecuencia se produce despus de la toracentesis, puede aparecer de forma espontnea en una persona por lo dems sana. la formacin de gas puede producir pioneumotrax 370 .las bacterias anaerobias son una causa particularmente frecuente de empiema. por ejemplo, en un estudio que se realiz en tres hospitales equipados con laboratorios de investigacin para anaerobios esos grmenes se recuperaron en el lquido pleural de 63 (76%) de 83 pacientes adultos que no haban recibido tratamiento antimicrobiano ni haban sido sometidos a ciruga torcica 371 . la mayora de estas infecciones es polimicrobiana.el patrn radiogrfico tpico es una bronconeumona que vara entre zonas segmentarias localizadas de consolidacin, una consolidacin focal bilateral y una consolidacin multilobar confluente extensa (figura 6-21). la distribucin refleja el flujo sanguneo por el efecto de la gravedad; los segmentos posteriores de los lbulos superiores y los segmentos superiores de los lbulos inferiores se suelen afectar cuando la aspiracin se produce en decbito, mientras que la afectacin es ms frecuente en los segmentos basales de los lbulos inferiores cuando la aspiracin se produce en postura erguida 372 . es relativamente frecuente la formacin de abscesos y la cavitacin 373, 374 . puede aparecer empiema con o sin anomalas parenquimatosas visibles 373 . en ocasiones el aumento del tamao de los ganglios linfticos hiliares o mediastnicos se asocia a un absceso, una combinacin que recuerda a la que se observa en pacientes que tienen cncer de pulmn 375 .las manifestaciones clnicas son variables. en algunos casos la neumona es aguda y resulta indistinguible de la que produce s. pneumoniae 374 ; en otros pacientes se complica con la formacin de abscesos o empiema y tiene un comienzo insidioso y una evolucin prolongada. en la fase inicial de la infeccin la tos es con frecuencia seca y el material expectorado, si existe, rara vez presenta carcter ptrido. cuando se produce cavitacin, en general 7 a 10 das o ms despus del comienzo de la neumona, la expectoracin aumenta y se hace ptrida en el 40% al 75% de los casos 376 . el mal olor del esputo indica siempre la presencia de grmenes anaerobios. sin embargo, cuando no hay abscesos esa expectoracin ptrida se encuentra slo en el 5% de los pacientes 377 . se produce dolor pleural en aproximadamente el 50% de los casos, y hemoptisis en el 25% 378 . los signos fsicos son inespecficos; las acropaquias son frecuentes en casos de infeccin crnica 379 .en la mayora de los casos, el recuento leucoctico est aumentado leve o moderadamente. se pueden encontrar anemia y prdida de peso en la enfermedad crnica 362 . el diagnstico definitivo slo se puede establecer con tcnicas especiales y en general se establece slo un diagnstico de presuncin 380 . el cultivo del material expectorado tiene poco valor para el diagnstico, puesto que las muestras siempre estn contaminadas por la flora oral. para considerar que es patgeno de manera segura el microorganismo se debe aislar en un espacio cerrado, como la cavidad pleural o la peritoneal, o en otras muestras que normalmente son estriles, como la sangre.el pronstico es bueno con un diagnstico precoz y el inicio temprano del tratamiento 381 . el tratamiento antibitico disminuye mucho la incidencia de formacin de abscesos. sin embargo, la tasa de mortalidad de los pacientes que llegan a presentar abscesos pulmonares oscila entre aproximadamente el 5% y el 10%, y la mayora de las muertes ocurre en pacientes que tienen una enfermedad subyacente grave 382 . en los pacientes que responden al tratamiento la cavidad se cierra progresivamente, pero puede precisar un perodo prolongado antes de desaparecer por completo. el seguimiento a largo plazo puede mostrar quistes y/o bronquiectasias residuales 383 .epidemiologa la tuberculosis es una enfermedad que tiene una gran importancia social y econmica. se ha estimado que la tercera parte de la poblacin mundial est infectada por bacilos tuberculosos. las tendencias actuales indican que en 2006 presentarn enfermedad activa casi 12 millones de pacientes 384 , con ms de 2 millones de fallecimientos 385, 386 .se considera que la tuberculosis es una pandemia cuya cronologa abarca siglos 386 . como veremos ms adelante, ciertos facto-res sociales y medioambientales favorecen la diseminacin de la enfermedad una vez que afecta a una poblacin susceptible. la epidemia alcanza su mximo al cabo de aproximadamente 50 a 100 aos y despus disminuye a lo largo de varios siglos, conforme la seleccin natural modifica la resistencia intrnseca (gentica) de la poblacin. en poblaciones que estn en la rama ascendente de la epidemia la tuberculosis afecta predominantemente a los jvenes y se manifiesta como una enfermedad primaria progresiva. en la rama descendente la infeccin primaria es controlada por una respuesta inmunitaria eficaz y la enfermedad es ms frecuente en los pacientes mayores, en los que se aprecian manifestaciones caractersticas de la reactivacin. (este concepto de la enfermedad no niega la importancia de los programas especficos de nutricin y vivienda que se han diseado para limitar el desarrollo de la infeccin y su diseminacin.)durante el siglo xix y la primera parte del xx se observ disminucin de la morbilidad y de la mortalidad de la tuberculosis en muchas zonas del mundo, y el proceso se aceler por la introduccin de quimioterapia efectiva en la dcada de los cincuenta. sin embargo, el desmantelamiento de los mecanismos de control y vigilancia de la tuberculosis en muchas regiones, la aparicin de la infeccin por el vih y la aparicin de resistencia a los frmacos se han asociado a una recrudescencia significativa de la enfermedad c a p  t u l o 6  enfermedades infecciosas de los pulmones 249neumona por anaerobios: neumona del espacio areo con formacin de un absceso. la primera radiografa (a) de esta mujer alcohlica de 45 aos de edad revel una consolidacin homognea masiva del lbulo inferior derecho y una consolidacin focal del pulmn izquierdo. veinticuatro horas ms tarde (b) la neumona se haba extendido a la mayor parte del pulmn derecho y a una zona grande del izquierdo. durante las dos semanas siguientes, en las que recibi tratamiento antibitico, desapareci la mayor parte de la neumona del pulmn izquierdo (c); sin embargo, apareci una cavidad de paredes gruesas en el pulmn derecho. ( 387 . la descripcin de las caractersticas epidemiolgicas de la enfermedad que produce m. tuberculosis se debe dividir en dos partes: la de la infeccin y la de los casos que presentan enfermedad clnica evidente (tuberculosis). (las caractersticas particulares de la tuberculosis asociada a la infeccin por el vih se presentan en la pgina 425.) aparicin de la infeccin. en la mayora de los casos la infeccin se contagia mediante la inhalacin de ncleos goticulares que transportan microorganismos 388 . el riesgo de infeccin guarda relacin con la contagiosidad del paciente infectado en primer lugar, la adecuacin de las defensas antimicrobianas de la persona expuesta, la frecuencia del contacto entre ambos y el entorno en el que tiene lugar el contacto. el grado de contagiosidad de la fuente en s mismo guarda relacin con diversas variables, como la extensin y la naturaleza de la enfermedad tuberculosa, la frecuencia de la tos y la virulencia del microorganismo causal 389 . la aparicin de enfermedad cavitaria es importante para la contagiosidad, ya que crea un entorno local ms favorable para la proliferacin de las bacterias y proporciona una ruta de salida relativamente fcil desde el pulmn. la extensin de la afectacin pulmonar, asociada o no a la formacin de cavidades, tambin guarda relacin con el riesgo de diseminacin. cuanto ms extensa sea la enfermedad, mayor ser el nmero de microorganismos y mas intensa la tos 390 . este ltimo factor tiene una importancia particular en la creacin de ncleos goticulares cargados de bacterias 391 . como cabra esperar, los pacientes que tienen extensiones positivas son ms contagiosos que los que tienen extensiones negativas (que tienen un menor nmero de microorganismos en el esputo), y cuanto mayor sea el nmero de grmenes en las muestras positivas, mayor ser el grado de contagiosidad 392 . la carga de grmenes tambin guarda relacin con la velocidad a la que se negativiza el cultivo de esputo tras la institucin del tratamiento antituberculoso.puesto que el germen se transfiere de una persona a otra por medio de gotitas suspendidas en el aire, el contacto entre pacientes contagiosos y personas no infectadas es un factor de riesgo claro, sobre todo si se produce en un lugar mal ventilado. de hecho, se ha demostrado que las personas que estn en contacto ntimo con una persona infectada tienen un riesgo dos veces mayor de positividad de la prueba de la tuberculina que los que slo tienen un contacto ocasional 393 . la mayor incidencia de infeccin en las personas que viven en zonas relativamente pobladas, como crceles, albergues, suburbios de grandes ciudades y campamentos de refugiados, se explica al menos en parte por esa observacin. los trabajadores que estn en contacto con los pacientes de esas zonas tambin tienen un mayor riesgo 394 . no es sorprendente que la transmisin del microorganismo ocurra con frecuencia en el hogar y que la infeccin, a veces generalizada, pueda tener su origen en un solo caso activo en el colegio o en el centro de cuidados de da 395 . los trabajadores sanitarios son otro grupo que tiene mayor riesgo 396 ; en algunos contextos la incidencia de conversin de la prueba con derivado protenico purificado (purified protein derivative, ppd) parecer ser muy alta 397 .se conoce mal el efecto de los factores del husped sobre el contagio de la infeccin. la herencia parece ser importante, a juzgar por estudios en animales de experimentacin en los que se han podido obtener razas resistentes o sensibles a la enfermedad 398 . se sabe desde hace tiempo que ciertos grupos tnicos, como los afroamericanos y los nativos norteamericanos, experimentan una mayor tasa de infeccin y de enfermedad que la poblacin de raza blanca.aunque es probable que esas observaciones estn influenciadas hasta cierto punto por factores socioeconmicos y otros factores ambientales, existen pruebas de que al menos parte de la diferencia se debe a la herencia 399, 400 . cualquiera que sea la base patognica, est claro que los inmigrantes que llegan a norteamrica y europa occidental desde pases en vas de desarrollo tienen un riesgo de contagio mucho mayor que la poblacin general de estas regiones y que representan una importante fuente potencial de enfermedad futura. aparicin de la enfermedad. se ha estimado que la tuberculosis slo aparece en aproximadamente el 10% de los pacientes infectados por m. tuberculosis 384 . aunque la posibilidad de aparicin de enfermedad clnica persiste durante toda la vida de la persona infectada, el riesgo es mayor durante los dos aos siguientes a la infeccin inicial, perodo en el que se ha estimado una incidencia de hasta el 4% al ao 401 . la enfermedad puede guardar relacin con la progresin de un foco primario de infeccin (tuberculosis primaria o primaria progresiva) o con la aparicin de una enfermedad nueva meses o aos despus de la curacin de la infeccin inicial (tuberculosis posprimaria). esta ltima forma se debe con frecuencia a la reactivacin de un foco endgeno de infeccin que se adquiri en pocas anteriores de la vida 402 ; sin embargo, en algunos contextos una fuente exgena (es decir, una reinfeccin) es responsable de hasta el 50% de los casos 403, 404 .aunque no se conoce bien el mecanismo preciso por el que la infeccin se transforma en enfermedad clnicamente evidente, se han identificado varios factores de riesgo 393, 405 . est claro que esos factores de riesgo no son completamente independientes entre s y en muchos casos es probable que intervenga una combinacin de varios factores 406 . tambin es probable que muchos factores asociados al aumento del riesgo de infeccin eleven tambin el riesgo de enfermedad clnica.la tuberculosis sigue afectando sobre todo a grupos pobres y marginales 407 . se encuentran tasas de prevalencia altas en vagabundos 408 , presidiarios 409 y refugiados procedentes de zonas de guerra 410 . la infeccin simultnea por el vih es un factor importante en alguno de esos contextos 386 . como era de esperar, el abuso de drogas y de alcohol se asocia tambin a condiciones socioeconmicas adversas, que facilitan tanto la infeccin como la aparicin de enfermedad clnica 406, 411 . tambin hay pruebas de que el alcohol puede modificar la respuesta a la infeccin por su efecto sobre el sistema inmunitario 412 .aunque la tuberculosis puede aparecer a cualquier edad, las tasas de incidencia varan mucho en los diferentes grupos. las tasas son en general relativamente altas durante los primeros aos de la vida, disminuyen durante la adolescencia y aumentan de forma marcada en la poca media de la vida y en la vejez 413 . la razn de la proporcin relativamente alta de casos en ancianos es compleja y probablemente guarda relacin con varios factores, como mayor prevalencia de infeccin hace 50-70 aos en algunas poblaciones, disminucin de la inmunidad, malnutricin, coexistencia de enfermedades como diabetes mellitus y neoplasias malignas y el tratamiento de las mismas, y vida comunitaria en residencias de ancianos 413 . hay datos de que la residencia en un hogar para ancianos tiene una importancia particular; algunos investigado-res han encontrado que la tasa de incidencia en esos contextos llega a ser 14 veces mayor que la de la poblacin general y cuatro veces mayor que la de personas de la misma edad que no residen en instituciones cerradas 414 . para complicar el problema, se ha observado que la tuberculosis de los ancianos tiende a estar avanzada en el momento del diagnstico, se asocia ms frecuentemente a enfermedad miliar, se manifiesta con caractersticas clnicas atpicas y muchas veces se asocia a una mala tolerancia a los frmacos 415 .las razones de la mayor incidencia de tuberculosis en ciertos grupos tnicos son complejas y probablemente multifactoriales. aunque es indudable que los factores socioeconmicos tienen una influencia importante 416 , se considera probable que tambin tenga importancia la susceptibilidad relacionada con factores genticos 417 . en ee.uu. las tasas de incidencia son ms altas en los afroamericanos, los nativos norteamericanos y los inmigrantes recientes procedentes de pases con una prevalencia alta de enfermedad 418 .la emigracin desde pases en vas de desarrollo hasta norteamrica y europa que se ha producido en el pasado reciente ha tenido una influencia importante en la tasa de incidencia de las dos regiones. aunque la mayora de los pacientes afectados haba estado en su nueva residencia cinco aos o menos cuando present la enfermedad, no se puede pasar por alto la posibilidad de que comience bastante despus de ese intervalo 419 ; por ejemplo, de los 500.000 refugiados que llegaron a ee.uu. desde el sudeste asitico durante la dcada de los setenta, el 60% tena una reaccin positiva al ppd 420 . para complicar el problema, se ha observado que un nmero significativo de inmigrantes que posteriormente presentan tuberculosis est infectado por grmenes resistentes a los frmacos 421 .diversas observaciones epidemiolgicas indican tambin que la susceptibilidad hereditaria es un factor de riesgo importante. por ejemplo, se ha encontrado que la la aparicin de tuberculosis es significativamente mayor en parejas de gemelos monocigticos que en dicigticos 422 , y varios investigadores han demostrado la relacin entre el fenotipo hla o alteraciones gnicas y la presencia de tuberculosis en grupos seleccionados de pacientes 423, 424 .varios trastornos se han asociado a aumento del riesgo de tuberculosis 425 . el aumento de la incidencia en pacientes con diabetes mellitus es de 2 a 3,5 veces 426 ; este aumento es similar al aumento de la incidencia de diabetes en los pacientes que tienen tuberculosis 427 . tambin hay pocas dudas de que la silicosis predispone a la tuberculosis 428 , probablemente por el efecto de la slice sobre la funcin de los macrfagos alveolares 429 . la prevalencia de tuberculosis en los trabajadores con silicosis depende en gran parte de la prevalencia de tuberculosis en la poblacin general de la que proceden 430 . se ha encontrado un pequeo aumento del riesgo de tuberculosis en los pacientes sometidos a gastrectoma parcial por lcera pptica o a derivacin yeyunoileal para el tratamiento de la obesidad 431, 432 . los posibles mecanismos causales incluyen desnutricin y disminucin de la funcin inmunitaria. otra asociacin bien conocida es la de la tuberculosis con la insuficiencia renal crnica. aunque el riesgo aumenta incluso en los pacientes que no necesitan dilisis, el efecto es mucho mayor en los que estn sometidos a hemodilisis, en los que se ha estimado que la incidencia es de 6 a 16 veces superior a la esperada 433 .los pacientes inmunodeprimidos tambin tienen un aumento claro del riesgo de enfermedad micobacteriana 434 . con mucho, la enfermedad inmunosupresora subyacente ms importante es la infeccin por el vih, que tiene una gran influencia en la incidencia y la gravedad de la evolucin de la tuberculosis en todo el mundo 435 . la presencia del virus aumenta la probabilidad de que la infeccin tuberculosa primaria progrese hasta la enfermedad clnicamente manifiesta y de que la enfermedad latente se reactive 436 . esos efectos se complican por la incidencia relativamente alta de grmenes resistentes a los frmacos en algunas zonas y por el mayor riesgo de enfermedad diseminada y extrapulmonar. los pacientes sometidos a trasplante de rganos tambin tienen mayor riesgo de tuberculosis, con tasas de hasta el 8% al 12% documentado en regiones con prevalencia local alta de tuberculosis 437 .el tratamiento inmunosupresor se asocia tambin a la aparicin de tuberculosis. la administracin de corticoides es un factor de riesgo bien conocido, y hay datos de que el uso de antiinflamatorios no esteroideos puede tener el mismo efecto 438 . los pacientes que reciben infliximab para el tratamiento de trastornos inflamatorios crnicos tambin tienen mayor riesgo de enfermedad por reactivacin 439 . aunque la patogenia es probablemente compleja, es probable que la inmunosupresin que se relaciona con el tratamiento o con la enfermedad subyacente participe en el aumento de la incidencia de la tuberculosis en los pacientes que tienen neoplasias malignas 440 .m. tuberculosis tiene la capacidad de presentar resistencia a los efectos de los frmacos antituberculosos 441 . esta resistencia puede ser primaria (en pacientes que no han recibido tratamiento farmacolgico previo) o secundaria (porque el paciente no haya seguido un tratamiento correcto). la resistencia a mltiples frmacos se define como la resistencia a dos o ms medicamentos de primera lnea (generalmente isoniacida y rifampina) 421 . desde el punto de vista histrico, la resistencia a mltiples frmacos ha sido ms frecuente en pases en vas de desarrollo, en los que el costo y la disponibilidad de los frmacos y los programas de sanidad pblica han hecho que fuera casi segura la aparicin de esa resistencia en una proporcin significativa de pacientes 442 . sin embargo, los inmigrantes de esos pases pueden traer con ellos grmenes resistentes cuando llegan a las regiones desarrolladas, lo que da lugar a un aumento de la resistencia primaria en los nuevos lugares de residencia 386 . de hecho, aunque existe variacin significativa de la presencia de grmenes resistentes en los diferentes grupos de edad, grupos tnicos y centros hospitalarios, en ciertas regiones y determinados grupos de poblacin de ee.uu. la incidencia de resistencia a los frmacos, en particular a mltiples frmacos, es ahora alarmantemente alta 386, 404 . el factor de riesgo ms importante es el tratamiento previo de la tuberculosis 386 ; muchos pacientes tienen tambin antecedentes de abuso de drogas y de infeccin por el vih 443 .tradicionalmente se ha aceptado que la enfermedad que aparece inmediatamente despus del primer contacto con m. tuberculosis tena manifestaciones anatomopatolgicas, radiolgicas y clnicas distintas a las que se observan en caso de reinfeccin o de reactivacin de una enfermedad previa; en consecuencia, la tuberculosis se ha estudiado en general bajo los encabezamientos de enfermedad primaria y enfermedad posprimaria. sin embargo, conviene recordar que probablemente las alteraciones anatomopatolgicas y radiolgicas de la enfermedad posprimaria guardan relacin, al menos en parte, con la hipersensibilidad y la inmunidad adquirida; puesto que esta caracterstica aparece en general de 1 a 3 semanas despus del comienzo de la infeccin inicial, es posible la aparicin de una forma posprimaria de la enfermedad durante la infeccin primaria si sta no es controlada por los mecanismos de defensa del husped. adems, hay datos de estudios de identificacin gentica de que las manifestaciones radiolgicas de la tuberculosis son similares en los pacientes que parecen haber adquirido la infeccin recientemente y en los que tienen datos de infeccin remota (y, por inferencia, enfermedad por reactivacin [posprimaria]) 444 . las descripciones que siguen se deben considerar teniendo en cuenta esos puntos.tradicionalmente se ha considerado que la tuberculosis pulmonar primaria apareca predominantemente en nios y que era frecuente sobre todo en regiones con riesgo anual de infeccin alto. sin embargo, al disminuir la incidencia de la enfermedad en muchas regiones desde la primera parte del siglo xx, con el consiguiente aumento del nmero de personas no sensibilizadas, la forma primaria de la enfermedad parece ser ahora ms frecuente que antes en los adultos 445 .dos factores parecen tener una importancia particular en la aparicin de la tuberculosis: 1) la capacidad del germen para sobrevivir y multiplicarse dentro de los macrfagos y para persistir durante muchos aos en condiciones desfavorables en un estado inactivo pero viable dentro del tejido necrtico y de clulas aparentemente normales (latencia) 446 y 2) la capacidad del husped de generar una respuesta inmunitaria celular eficaz 447 . la interrelacin entre esos dos procesos determina en gran parte si la infeccin llega a establecerse o no y, una vez establecida, la extensin y la naturaleza de la enfermedad 384, 448 . la aparicin de esta enfermedad, que se manifiesta desde el punto de vista anatomopatolgico por necrosis y, finalmente, fibrosis, parece guardar relacin sobre todo con una reaccin de hipersensibilidad tarda mediada por linfocitos t sensibilizados 449 . tambin hay datos de que los linfocitos t citotxicos participan de forma directa en las respuestas inmunitarias 450 . por otra parte, m. tuberculosis ha desarrollado diversas propiedades destinadas a evitar las respuestas inmunitarias del husped, como una cpsula bien desarrollada, factores de virulencia como catalasa y sulftidos 451, 452 , inhibicin del reconocimiento de las clulas infectadas por parte de las clulas efectoras de la inmunidad y resistencia a las propiedades antimicrobianas de los macrfagos alveolares y tisulares 448, 453 .como ya se ha dicho, la infeccin primaria se suele producir en los seres humanos por inhalacin de ncleos goticulares cargados de bacilos. los microorganismos se depositan en la superficie de las vas areas transicionales y los alvolos, donde son fagocitados por los macrfagos alveolares. aunque estos macrfagos pueden destruir algunos bacilos 454 , muchos grmenes sobreviven, se multiplican y acaban por matar al macrfago. los monocitos transportados por la sangre son atrados hacia esta regin y al llegar a ella se diferencian en macrfagos, ingieren bacilos libres e interactan con los linfocitos t para liberar diversos mediadores, como el interfern  y el factor de necrosis tumoral , que participan en la diferenciacin de los macrfagos en histiocitos epitelioides y en la formacin de granulomas 455, 456 . las clulas dendrticas tambin contribuyen a la aparicin de granulomas por medio de sus propiedades presentadoras del antgeno, y favorecen la inmunidad tanto adquirida como innata contra los microorganismos persistentes 457, 458 .al cabo de varias semanas (coincidiendo con la aparicin de hipersensibilidad), los granulomas estn bien formados y su porcin central experimenta necrosis (figura 6-22) 459 . conforme progresa la enfermedad los focos necrticos individuales tienden a aumentar de tamao y confluir, lo que origina focos relativamente grandes de restos necrticos rodeados por una capa de histiocitos epitelioides y clulas gigantes multinucleadas. a su vez, estas clulas estn rodeadas por capas de clulas mononucleares -linfocitos y monocitos procedentes de la sangre-y fibroblastos. estas tres zonas -clulas epitelioides, clulas mononucleares y fibroblastos-aslan los bacilos tuberculosos dentro de una regin relativa-mente definida de parnquima pulmonar y en la mayora de los casos evitan que la enfermedad se extienda ms. al llegar a este punto el foco inflamatorio puede ser visible a simple vista y el material necrtico central aparece blanco y friable (similar al queso de cabra); este aspecto se conoce como necrosis caseosa y es caracterstico, aunque no diagnstico, de la necrosis tuberculosa. aunque las consecuencias de estas reacciones son claramente beneficiosas para el husped porque localizan y destruyen un nmero sustancial de bacterias, tambin conllevan el inconveniente fundamental de provocar destruccin tisular.el foco inicial de enfermedad parenquimatosa se conoce como foco de ghon. aumenta de tamao conforme progresa la enfermedad o, con mucha ms frecuencia, experimenta cicatrizacin. en el segundo caso los fibroblastos de la periferia del foco necrtico proliferan y forman colgeno. aunque este proceso a veces da lugar a la conversin de toda la zona en una cicatriz fibrosa densa, es ms frecuente que el material necrtico central persista y quede separado del parnquima pulmonar adyacente por una cpsula fibrosa bien desarrollada (vase figura en color 6-4). en esta etapa es frecuente la calcificacin distrfica del material necrtico, con frecuencia en un grado suficiente para poderla ver en las radiografas. a pesar de que la enfermedad est inactiva, es posible que queden grmenes viables dentro de las zonas necrticas encapsuladas, que actuarn como foco de reactivacin en pocas posteriores de la vida.durante la fase temprana de la infeccin los grmenes se suelen extender a los ganglios linfticos regionales, y la combinacin de foco de ghon y ganglios afectos se conoce como complejo de ranke. la evolucin de la enfermedad en los ganglios linfticos es similar a la del parnquima, y es inicialmente inflamacin granulomatosa y necrosis, seguidas por fibrosis y calcificacin; sin embargo, el grado de reaccin inflamatoria es tpicamente mayor en los ganglios linfticos que en el parnquima, lo que hace que este foco de infeccin sea ms visible radiogrficamente. debido a su localizacin anatmica, estas adenopatas pueden originar una serie de complicaciones, como un aumento del tamao suficiente que comprima el bronquio adyacente (con la consiguiente atelectasia) y extensin extraganglionar de la reaccin inflamatoria (con tumefaccin o ulceracin local de la mucosa de las va areas).adems de la diseminacin hasta los ganglios regionales, los grmenes tambin pueden pasar al torrente sanguneo (y, por tanto, a los tejidos extrapulmonares) a travs de los linfticos eferentes o de los vasos vecinos al foco de ghon. aunque esta diseminacin hematgena probablemente sea frecuente 460 , en la enfermedad primaria suelen faltar las manifestaciones clnicas de la tuberculosis extrapulmonar localizada o miliar, probablemente como consecuencia del pequeo nmero de grmenes que se diseminan y de la eficacia de la defensa del husped. a pesar de todo, la dispersin sistmica de los microorganismos es importante porque crea zonas diminutas de infeccin que persisten y actan como focos de reactivacin potencial en pocas posteriores.en un pequeo nmero de pacientes con tuberculosis primaria la enfermedad parenquimatosa local progresa en la zona del foco de ghon inicial o en otro lugar del pulmn (generalmente en los segmentos apicales o posteriores de los lbulos superiores). esta evolucin se conoce como tuberculosis primaria progresiva, y es similar a la enfermedad posprimaria tanto en su morfologa como en su evolucin (vase figura en color 6-5).el mayor estudio sobre las manifestaciones radiolgicas de la tuberculosis primaria en nios se basa en la revisin de 252 casos consecutivos, de los que se dispuso de radiografas de trax en 191 461 . se identific consolidacin del espacio areo en aproximadamente el 70% de esos casos; el pulmn derecho se afect con ms frecuencia que el izquierdo, la afectacin fue bilateral en el 15% de los casos y no se encontr predileccin significativa por ninguna regin particular del pulmn. la consolidacin del espacio areo tambin representa la manifestacin ms frecuente de la enfermedad en los adultos 462 . suele ser homognea, densa y anatmicamente limitada a un segmento (figura 6-23) o, con ms frecuencia, a un lbulo 463 . la enfermedad es multifocal en aproximadamente el 25% de los casos y bilateral en el 10% 461, 462 . se produce enfermedad miliar y/o cavitacin en aproximadamente el 2% al 5% de los casos 461, 462 .la radiografa de trax identifica aumento del tamao de los ganglios linfticos en aproximadamente el 90% al 95% de los nios con enfermedad primaria 461, 464 . la mayor parte presenta afectacin hiliar, con ms frecuencia en el lado derecho; aproximadamente el 50% exhibe lesiones hiliares y mediastnicas (habitualmente en la regin paratraqueal derecha) 461 . el aumento del tamao de los ganglios linfticos es menos frecuente en los adultos y se ha encontrado en aproximadamente el 10% al 30% de los pacientes 462, 465 . al igual que en los nios, las adenopatas suelen ser unilaterales e hiliares o paratraqueales (vase figura 6-23). pueden ser la nica alteracin; de hecho, este aspecto debe indicar la enfermedad. aunque el aumento bilateral del tamao de los ganglios linfticos o la presencia de adenopatas sin consolidacin parenquimatosa no excluye el diagnstico, este cuadro es infrecuente en los adultos (excepto en los pacientes con sida) 462 .en la tc aproximadamente el 50% de los ganglios afectos presenta atenuacin baja (<30 unidades hounsfield [uh]) y el 50% tiene atenuacin de tejidos blandos (>35 uh) 466 . tras la administracin intravenosa de contraste aproximadamente el 60% de los ganglios linfticos afectos muestra una atenuacin relativamente baja en la regin central y refuerzo perifrico (rodete) (figura 6-24), el 20% presenta refuerzo heterogneo y el 20% muestra refuerzo homogneo o ausencia de refuerzo 466 .las radiografas de trax de los nios que han tenido tuberculosis primaria muestran datos de calcificacin de la lesin pulmo- nar en aproximadamente el 10% al 15% de los casos, y de los ganglios linfticos en aproximadamente del 5% al 35% 461, 464 . aunque un complejo de ranke calcificado es una prueba razonable de tuberculosis primaria (figura 6-25), se pueden encontrar los mismos signos radiogrficos como secuela de una infeccin mictica. se ha descrito atelectasia, habitualmente lobar y del lado derecho, en el 10% al 30% de los nios que tienen tuberculosis 461, 464 . esta lesin suele deberse a la compresin bronquial por adenopatas; la enfermedad endobronquial es responsable con menos frecuencia 464 . esta complicacin resulta menos frecuente en los adultos; tiende a afectar al segmento anterior de un lbulo superior y puede simular un cncer de pulmn 467 .se ha descrito derrame pleural en el 5% al 10% de los nios y en el 30% al 40% de los adultos 461, 462, 464 . se suele asociar a alteraciones parenquimatosas; sin embargo, es la nica manifestacin radiolgica de la enfermedad en aproximadamente el 5% de los pacientes adultos 462 .la decisin de clasificar un caso de tuberculosis como primario se basa muchas veces en los datos de edad joven, conversin reciente de la prueba cutnea con tuberculina y signos radiogrficos de adenopatas hiliares o mediastnicas o de derrame pleural 462, 468 . sin embargo, como ya se ha dicho, la distincin clnica y radiolgica entre enfermedad primaria y posprimaria no es siempre clara. la mayora de los pacientes con infeccin primaria permanece asintomtica. ese hecho qued bien ilustrado en un estudio de 715 nios en los que la prueba de la tuberculina se hizo positiva entre el nacimiento y los 5 aos de edad 469 ; slo 136 de los 611 nios con estudios de seguimiento apropiados mostraron cambios en las radiografas de trax. slo desarrollaron tuberculosis clnica 55 (9%); los dems nios estaban clnicamente bien. la tos y la fiebre son los sntomas torcicos ms llamativos. puede haber tambin prdida de peso, hemoptisis, sudoracin, dolor torcico, eritema nudoso y letargia 464 . pueden aparecer otras manifestaciones por la diseminacin de la enfermedad a rganos extrapulmonares, como las meninges o el pericardio.patogenia y caractersticas anatomopatolgicas. la tuberculosis primaria tiende a localizarse inicialmente en los segmentos apicales y posteriores de los lbulos superiores. se ha postulado que tal localizacin guarda relacin con la po 2 relativamente alta en esas zonas como consecuencia de la relacin ventilacinperfusin elevada 470 o con la disminucin del drenaje linftico por reduccin del flujo sanguneo arterial pulmonar 471 . cualquiera que sea el mecanismo, se cree que la mayora de los casos que se originan en esas localizaciones estn causados por grmenes que se diseminaron por va hematgena durante la infeccin primaria.desde el punto de vista anatomopatolgico, la secuencia de acontecimientos es similar a la que se ha descrito para la infeccin primaria excepto porque la necrosis se produce probablemente con ms rapidez por la presencia de hipersensibilidad. adems, en contraste con la tuberculosis primaria, en la que la fibrosis y la cicatrizacin representan la regla, la enfermedad posprimaria tiende a progresar con focos de inflamacin y necrosis que aumentan de tamao hasta ocupar porciones cada vez mayores del parnquima pulmonar. durante este proceso la comunicacin con las vas areas es frecuente y permite el drenaje de material necrtico con formacin de una cavidad (vase figura en color 6-6). la formacin de cavidades depende de la licuacin del material caseoso, un proceso que puede estar mediado por enzimas procedentes de las clulas inflamatorias vecinas al tejido necrtico 472 . la importancia de la formacin de cavidades radica en la comunicacin con el medio externo que proporciona una va de salida para los microorganismos. la comunicacin tiene dos efectos importantes: en primer lugar, permite el suministro continuo de aire bien oxigenado al interior de la cavidad, lo que en teora aumenta la multiplicacin extracelular de las bacterias; en segundo lugar, proporciona un medio para la diseminacin de los grmenes hacia otras partes del pulmn y a otras personas.como en la tuberculosis primaria, la evolucin de la enfermedad a partir de este punto depende en gran parte de la relacin entre la respuesta del husped y la virulencia del microorganismo. cuando prevalece la defensa del husped se produce curacin gradual con formacin de cicatrices parenquimatosas localizadas o extensas, muchas veces calcificadas y en ocasiones acompaadas de enfisema, bronquiectasias y/o cavidades residuales (vase figura en color 6-7). estas alteraciones pueden aparecer solas, pero se ven con ms frecuencia asociadas a focos bien delimitados de parnquima necrtico. estos focos varan entre 1 mm y varios centmetros de dimetro y crean y mantienen la comunicacin con el rbol traqueobronquial (con formacin de una cavidad crnica) o pierden la comunicacin y aparecen ocupados por material caseoso (para formar un tuberculoma) 473 . la aparicin de un micetoma (habitualmente por grmenes del gnero aspergillus) dentro de una cavidad crnica representa una complicacin frecuente (vase pgina 282).cuando la defensa del husped es insuficiente la enfermedad progresa localmente por expansin de la regin de necrosis e inflamacin o a distancia en otras partes del pulmn o del cuerpo por diseminacin de las bacterias a travs de las vas areas, los linfticos o el torrente sanguneo. la diseminacin endobronquial de material necrtico licuado procedente de una cavidad puede producir infeccin tuberculosa en el mismo lbulo o en otros lbulos de cualquiera de los dos pulmones. esta infeccin aparece inicialmente en la regin de las vas areas transicionales y suele causar una reaccin inflamatoria granulomatosa tpica que da lugar a la aparicin de mltiples ndulos parenquimatosos (vase figura en color 6-8). en algunos pacientes las grandes cantidades de protenas tuberculosas que ocupan bruscamente los cinos pueden causar una reaccin inflamatoria exudativa sin un componente granulomatoso significativo; esta reaccin se puede asociar a necrosis parenquimatosa generalizada y destruccin rpida de lbulos enteros.la diseminacin de microorganismos a travs de los linfticos o de la vasculatura pulmonar puede producir tuberculosis miliar de los pulmones, el hgado, el bazo, la mdula sea y otros muchos rganos. en los pulmones el aspecto es una multitud de ndulos de 1mm-2 mm de dimetro diseminados al azar por el parnquima y la pleura (vase figura en color 6-9). los ndulos tienden a ser ligeramente mayores en los vrtices que en las bases de los pulmones; suelen ser aproximadamente del mismo tamao y tener la misma antigedad histolgica, lo que hace pensar en un solo episodio de diseminacin. sin embargo, a veces se pueden observar al mismo tiempo focos activos y focos cicatrizados parcial o totalmente, lo que indica episodios repetidos o prolongados de diseminacin hematgena 474 . tiene importancia recordar que los pulmones pueden servir de asiento a la tuberculosis miliar sin signos de una fuente de infeccin pulmonar, y es probable que en esos casos la diseminacin se haya iniciado en un rgano extrapulmonar; la frecuencia de estos casos ha aumentado desde la introduccin de los frmacos antituberculosos 474 .la afectacin del rbol traqueobronquial es frecuente y se puede encontrar en casos de enfermedad tanto aguda como crnica. la primera se caracteriza por una inflamacin granulomatosa necrosante tpica en la pared de las vas areas, y aparece sobre todo cuando la infeccin es extensa o progresa con rapidez. en la mayora de los casos se debe a la diseminacin de los grmenes dentro de la luz de las vas areas o a lo largo de canales linfticos peribronquiales desde una zona de cavitacin o neumona localizada. aunque esta afectacin de la va area se suele asociar a enfermedad parenquimatosa evidente, en ocasiones la infeccin bronquial persiste cuando ya han cicatrizado las lesiones perifricas, lo que proporciona una fuente potencial de esputos cargados de bacterias sin alteraciones radiogrficas significativas. la enfermedad crnica de la va area se manifiesta principalmente por bronquiectasias, que se pueden formar por dos mecanismos: 1) el mecanismo ms frecuente es la destruccin y la fibrosis del parnquima pulmonar, que producen retraccin y dilatacin bronquial irreversible, y 2) fibrosis mural y estenosis bronquial secundarias a infeccin endobronquial localizada. puesto que la gran mayora de los casos de tuberculosis primaria afecta a los segmentos apicales y posteriores del lbulo superior, las bronquiectasias se suelen encontrar en esas zonas; debido al drenaje bronquial adecuado los sntomas suelen ser mnimos (bronquiectasia seca).la enfermedad vascular tambin es frecuente en la tuberculosis posprimaria. las arterias y las venas pulmonares de una zona de infeccin tuberculosa activa pueden mostrar vasculitis y trombosis, y se debe usar la tincin acidorresistente de cualquier lesin de vasculitis pulmonar granulomatosa necrosante para excluir una etiologa tuberculosa. en ocasiones una arteria de tamao pequeo o medio contigua a la cpsula fibrosa de la pared de una cavidad, con contacto en general tangencial, experimenta dilatacin localizada (aneurisma de rasmussen). la posterior rotura puede producir una hemorragia grave y, en ocasiones, la muerte. manifestaciones radiolgicas. se observan zonas focales de consolidacin en la radiografa de trax y la tcar de aproximadamente el 50% al 70% de los pacientes con tuberculosis posprimaria 475, 476 . en la mayora de los casos la consolidacin se limita a un segmento o a porciones de varios segmentos de un lbulo, tpicamente los segmentos apical y posterior de un lbulo superior 477 . en ocasiones la enfermedad evoluciona hasta afectar a todo el lbulo (neumona lobar tuberculosa) o, despus de la diseminacin endobronquial de la enfermedad, a varios lbulos 465, 477 . rara vez la enfermedad afecta a todos los lbulos y produce insuficiencia respiratoria 478 .en las radiografas la zonas de consolidacin tienen bordes mal definidos y muestran tendencia a confluir, muchas veces con focos satlites pequeos en el pulmn adyacente (figura 6-26). es frecuente la acentuacin de las marcas broncovasculares que se dirigen hacia el hilio ipsolateral. se identifica aumento asociado del tamao de los ganglios hiliares o mediastnicos en las radiografas de aproximadamente el 5% al 10% de los pacientes 465, 475 . las adenopatas mediastnicas (definidas como un ganglio linftico >10 mm de dimetro en el eje menor) se ven con ms frecuencia en la tcar 476, 479 ; como en la enfermedad primaria, estos ganglios suelen mostrar refuerzo heterogneo o un centro de atenuacin baja con refuerzo perifrico despus de la administracin intravenosa de contraste 480 .se identifica cavitacin en las radiografas de trax del 20% al 45% de los pacientes (figura 6-27) 475, 481 y con algo ms de frecuencia en la tcar 481, 482 . la mayora de las cavidades se localiza en los segmentos apicales o posteriores de los lbulos superiores o en los segmentos superiores de los lbulos inferiores 477 . pueden ser nicas o mltiples y tener paredes finas o gruesas. aproximadamente el 20% presenta un nivel aire-lquido. despus del trata-miento adecuado una cavidad puede desaparecer o permanecer como un espacio qustico lleno de aire de paredes finas.se ha descrito que la presencia de un solo ndulo mayor de 1 cm de dimetro (tuberculoma), con o sin ndulos menores adyacentes, es la alteracin principal o nica en las radiografas de trax de aproximadamente el 5% de los pacientes 465, 475 . la lesin aparece como una opacidad redonda u oval situada la mayora de las veces en un lbulo superior 483 . suele medir de 1 a 4 cm de dimetro y tpicamente es lisa y bien definida; en ocasiones presenta un margen mal definido, lobulado o espiculado (figura 6-28) 484 . en la mayora de los casos se pueden identificar pequeos ndulos discretos en la vecindad inmediata de la lesin principal (lesiones satlites) 483 . de modo similar a los granulomas causados por otros grmenes infecciosos, los tuberculomas muestran con frecuencia refuerzo escaso o nulo en la tc despus de la administracin de contraste intravenoso 485 . la mayor parte de estas lesiones permanece estable durante mucho tiempo y muchas de ellas se calcifican. la calcificacin suele ser difusa, pero tambin puede ser central o punteada 463, 486 .se han descrito opacidades nodulares de 2 a 10 mm de dimetro y localizadas en una o dos regiones del pulmn, habitualmente en los segmentos apicales de los lbulos superiores o los segmentos superiores de los lbulos inferiores, como manifestacin radiolgica principal o nica en aproximadamente el 20% al 25% de los pacientes (figura 6-29) 465, 475 . con ms frecuencia estas opacidades se asocian a zonas focales de consolidacin 465, 476 . en la tcar presentan una distribucin centrolobulillar y muchas veces se asocian a opacidades lineales ramificadas (figura 6-30), un aspecto que ha sido comparado con el de un rbol en brote 479 . se ha demostrado que estas alteraciones reflejan la presencia de material necrtico dentro de las luces de bronquiolos terminales y respiratorios y de un exudado inflamatorio en sus paredes y en el parnquima adyacente 479, 481 . se puede sospechar una diseminacin endobronquial ms extensa cuando se ven mltiples ndulos de 2 a 10 mm de dimetro en dos o ms lbulos o en un lbulo distinto del que contiene la cavidad o la zona de consolidacin. esta diseminacin se observa en el 10% al 20% de los pacientes en la radiografa de trax y en casi todos en la tcar 465, 475, 487 . por orden descendente de frecuencia se pueden encontrar tambin ndulos de 4 a 8 mm de dimetro de bordes mal definidos (localizados habitualmente tambin con una distribucin centrolobulillar), zonas de consolidacin lobulillar y engrosamiento de los tabiques interlobulillares 477, 479 .cuando se ve por primera vez, la tuberculosis miliar aparece en las radiografas como un incontable nmero de ndulos de 1 a 2 mm de dimetro (figura 6-31a); sin un tratamiento adecuado esos ndulos pueden crecer hasta los 2 mm-3mm de dimetro 71 . en la tcar los ndulos suelen estar bien definidos y medir de 1 a 4 mm de dimetro (figura 6-31b) 488, 489 . aunque algunos de ellos pueden estar relacionados con los vasos, los tabiques interlobulillares o las superficies pleurales, y la mayora tiene una distribucin aleatoria en relacin con las estructuras del lobulillo pulmonar secundario 197 . entre las dems alteraciones que pueden verse se incluyen engrosamiento nodular de los tabiques interlobulillares y de las cisuras interlobares, irregularidad nodular de los vasos y zonas de atenuacin en vidrio esmerilado 42, [488] [489] [490] .se ven bronquiectasias en la tcar de muchos pacientes, sobre todo en los que tienen enfermedad cicatrizada 487 . las bronquiectasias son bilaterales en aproximadamente el 60% de los casos y unilaterales en el resto 482 . los lbulos superiores son los que se afectan con ms frecuencia 482 . la mayora de las veces la alteracin no se aprecia con facilidad en las radiografas. manifestaciones clnicas. los sntomas ms frecuentes de la tuberculosis posprimaria son inespecficos e incluyen la aparicin insidiosa de astenia, debilidad, anorexia, prdida de peso y febrcula (a veces con escalofros) 491 . la tos es la manifestacin pulmonar ms frecuente. tpicamente se asocia a expectoracin y ha persistido desde una supuesta infeccin del tracto respiratorio superior 492 . la hemoptisis suele ser leve, pero preocupa debido a que indica cavitacin o ulceracin de la va area, con el consiguiente aumento del riesgo de contagio. como era de esperar, la tos resulta particularmente frecuente y molesta en los pacientes que tienen afectacin traqueobronquial 493 .en algunos pacientes el sntoma inicial es el dolor pleurtico, muchas veces asociado a fiebre. este dolor se ve con ms frecuencia en adultos jvenes, la mayora de los cuales tiene probablemente enfermedad primaria. rara vez el dolor pleurtico est relacionado con la presencia de neumotrax. la ronquera suele ser una manifestacin de afectacin larngea; como era de esperar, tpicamente se asocia a positividad de la extensin y del cultivo de esputo y a un grado alto de contagiosidad 425 . la disnea es poco frecuente y suele indicar enfermedad extensa, la mayora de las veces una bronconeumona tuberculosa o una enfermedad miliar complicada con sdra 478 . en ocasiones hay fiebre alta de comienzo agudo, sudoracin, tos con expectoracin, dolor pleurtico y taquicardia, lo que tambin indica neumona bacteriana no tuberculosa.la exploracin del trax raras veces proporciona informacin til para el diagnstico. si se identifica una lesin apical en la radiografa de trax, la presencia de estertores en la auscultacin despus de toser indica la actividad de la enfermedad. se pueden or estertores y roncus sobre las zonas afectas que han experimentado diseminacin bronquial reciente. una sibilancia localizada debe indicar la posible afectacin de la pared bronquial. cuando el comienzo de la enfermedad se caracteriza por dolor con la respiracin se puede en ee.uu. la tuberculosis miliar suele aparecer en pacientes ancianos que tienen otras enfermedades crnicas simultneas, como alcoholismo, diabetes mellitus, insuficiencia renal o neoplasias malignas hematolgicas o slidas 494 . en los pacientes ms jvenes la infeccin por el vih es un factor de riesgo importante. el comienzo de la enfermedad miliar suele ser insidioso; la mayor parte de los pacientes ha tenido sntomas inespecficos como fiebre, prdida de peso, debilidad, anorexia y sudoracin nocturna durante ms de ocho semanas 495 . la cefalea y el dolor abdominal deben indicar la afectacin de las meninges y del peritoneo. el examen del fondo de ojo revela tubrculos coroideos en el 30% al 60% de los pacientes 496 . la hepatomegalia, con o sin esplenomegalia, no es infrecuente 494 . aunque la enfermedad miliar se puede asociar a otros tipos de tuberculosis pulmonar, en la mayora de los pacientes representa la nica manifestacin de la enfermedad tuberculosa. cuando se considera el diagnstico es importante recordar que del 10% al 30% de los pacientes no muestra ndulos en las radiografas estndar, incluso cuando se revisan de forma retrospectiva 71 . adems, la prueba cutnea con 5 unidades de tuberculina (ut) es negativa en al menos el 25% al 50% de los pacientes 494 .como se ha dicho previamente, la diseminacin hematgena es una complicacin frecuente de la tuberculosis primaria; aunque los datos clnicos de afectacin de los tejidos y rganos extrapulmonares son poco frecuentes durante la infeccin inicial, pueden aparecer sntomas y signos ms adelante, a veces muchos aos despus de la siembra inicial. esta reactivacin puede aparecer en cualquier tejido u rgano del cuerpo, pero afecta con ms frecuencia a los riones, las glndulas suprarrenales, las trompas de falopio, los epiddimos y los huesos (en particular, la columna vertebral dorsal). en hasta el 75% de los casos la radiografa de trax muestra alguna alteracin compatible con tuberculosis a distancia. antes de aparecer la epidemia de sida, aproximadamente el 15% de los casos de tuberculosis afectaba a rganos extrapulmonares sin enfermedad pulmonar 497 . debido a que el riesgo de enfermedad extrapulmonar es mucho mayor en los pacientes que tienen sida 498 , la incidencia de esa forma de la infeccin est aumentando. de hecho, los pacientes estadounidenses con tuberculosis extrapulmonar son con frecuencia ancianos, de raza negra o diagnosticados de sida; habitualmente presentan un cuadro de fiebre de origen desconocido y muchos tienen enfermedad miliar.aunque la afectacin de los ganglios linfticos extramediastnicos es mucho menos frecuente que la de los ganglios hiliares y mediastnicos, sigue siendo la forma ms frecuente de tuberculosis extrapulmonar en la poblacin sin sida, en la que representa aproximadamente el 20% al 25% de los casos 499 . parece ser ms frecuente en los nios y los adultos jvenes que han inmigrado desde pases en vas de desarrollo 499 . los pacientes afectos suelen presentar tumefaccin indolora en el cuello o en la regin supraclavicular. aunque la mayor parte de las adenopatas se localiza en el mismo lado del cuello, no es infrecuente la afectacin de ambos lados o de otros grupos glanglionares 500 . la progresin de la enfermedad puede producir extensin hacia la piel con formacin de un tracto sinusal. se puede encontrar aumento rpido del tamao de los ganglios linfticos. a veces este aumento de tamao se observa durante el tratamiento y se ha propuesto que puede representar una reaccin inmunitaria 501 . muchas veces las radiografas de trax no revelan signos de tuberculosis actual ni pasada 502 .la segunda localizacin ms frecuente de la tuberculosis extrapulmonar en los adultos corresponde al sistema genitourinario. el descubrimiento de piuria, hematuria y albuminuria en un paciente que ha tenido tuberculosis pulmonar o que muestra signos radiogrficos de lesiones pulmonares cicatrizadas debe indicar una afectacin renal 503 . la tuberculosis del tracto genital femeni-c a p  t u l o 6  enfermedades infecciosas de los pulmones 259tuberculosis miliar. una imagen del pulmn izquierdo en la radiografa anteroposterior de trax (a) muestra numerosos ndulos bien definidos de no suele aparecer como salpingitis y ooforitis y se manifiesta clnicamente por dolor plvico y trastornos menstruales; sin embargo, conviene sealar que los trastornos menstruales son frecuentes en la tuberculosis pulmonar sin afectacin genital y que su presencia no significa necesariamente extensin de la enfermedad. se produce afectacin de los huesos y de las articulaciones en aproximadamente el 10% de los casos de tuberculosis extrapulmonar en pacientes sin sida, con ms frecuencia en pacientes ancianos 497 . la tuberculosis de la columna (enfermedad de pott) es la forma ms frecuente de enfermedad esqueltica y afecta a las vrtebras dorsales inferiores o lumbares superiores 504 . las manifestaciones radiogrficas tempranas son irregularidad de las placas terminales vertebrales, disminucin de la altura del espacio discal intervertebral y esclerosis del hueso adyacente. al progresar la enfermedad se aprecia tendencia a la deformidad anterior del cuerpo vertebral y aparicin posterior de cifosis y abscesos para-vertebrales (estos ltimos asociados a desplazamiento de la interfase paraespinal) 505 (figura 6-32). la tc es superior a la radiografa para evaluar la presencia de abscesos paraespinales y la afectacin del conducto raqudeo 506, 507 .la meningitis tuberculosa se ve con ms frecuencia en los nios que tienen enfermedad primaria progresiva o miliar y en pacientes con sida 508 . los sntomas incluyen cefalea, somnolencia, irritabilidad, vmitos y, a veces, rigidez del cuello. el diagnstico se establece mejor mediante el cultivo de bacilos tuberculosos en el lquido cefalorraqudeo, y se han encontrado cultivos positivos en aproximadamente el 50% al 80% de los casos 509 .la complicacin cardaca ms frecuente de la tuberculosis es la pericarditis. en zonas del mundo que tienen una elevada prevalencia de fondo de tuberculosis la pericarditis es relativamente frecuente 510 . se puede manifestar por acumulacin de lquido con relativamente poco engrosamiento pericrdico y puede producir 260 c a p  t u l o 6  enfermedades infecciosas de los pulmones f i g u r a 6 -3 2 espondilitis tuberculosa. la radiografa posteroanterior de trax (a) muestra ndulos miliares en el pulmn y desplazamiento de las interfases paraespinales (flechas). la radiografa lateral (b) muestra destruccin del cuerpo vertebral d10 (v), que provoca cifosis localizada. la tc con contraste (c y d) muestra destruccin del cuerpo vertebral d10, formacin de un absceso paraespinal con centro de atenuacin baja y refuerzo perifrico (flechas rectas) y erosin cortical del cuerpo vertebral d9 adyacente (flecha curva). ( taponamiento; de manera alternativa, habitualmente en casos de larga evolucin, se encuentra fibrosis pericrdica marcada, muchas veces con calcificacin distrfica y acompaada de manifestaciones clnicas de pericarditis constrictiva.la afectacin de los tractos respiratorio superior y digestivo sola ser bastante frecuente en pacientes que tenan enfermedad pulmonar avanzada, pero esta afectacin ha sido erradicada en gran parte por la quimioterapia. a pesar de todo, se siguen comunicando casos de laringitis tuberculosa 511 . la afectacin del tracto digestivo se suele localizar en la zona ileocecal o el recto, y la afectacin rectal puede asociarse a abscesos perianales o isquiorrectales; en ocasiones se produce peritonitis. la biopsia heptica revela granulomas en aproximadamente el 25% de los pacientes con tuberculosis, habitualmente en casos de enfermedad miliar; sin embargo, este hallazgo se asocia rara vez a signos clnicos o bioqumicos de disfuncin heptica 512 .las tcnicas para el diagnstico de la tuberculosis son numerosas y tienen grados variables de complejidad y costo, as como de sensibilidad y especificidad. se ha sealado que con el empleo de tcnicas modernas la identificacin de m. tuberculosis y la obtencin de datos sobre sensibilidad del germen a los frmacos deben ser posible en 10 a 14 das y en 15 a 30 das, respectivamente 513 ; conforme las tcnicas de biologa molecular se estandaricen mejor y se encuentren disponibles con ms facilidad esos tiempos de espera experimentarn un acortamiento significativo.numerosos investigadores han estudiado las indicaciones y las limitaciones de la prueba cutnea de la tuberculina para el diagnstico de la tuberculosis; instituciones como la american thoracic society y los centers for disease control and prevention han publicado revisiones de sus resultados y guas para la realizacin y la interpretacin de la prueba 514, 515 .el material que se utiliza es un precipitado proteico procedente de filtrados de bacilos muertos por calor y cultivados en un medio sinttico 516 . el ppd de concentracin intermedia (5 ut) es la forma usada para la prueba diagnstica y se debe administrar mediante el mtodo de mantoux. se inyectan 0,1 ml de solucin por va intradrmica en el antebrazo (habitualmente en la superficie volar) con una aguja calibre 26 o 27 de bisel corto con el bisel dirigido hacia arriba. con una tcnica de inyeccin correcta se produce un habn bien definido de 5 a 10 mm de dimetro. en caso de inyeccin incorrecta se puede administrar una segunda dosis de prueba inmediatamente despus en un punto separado varios centmetros del que se utiliz para la primera inyeccin. la prueba se debe leer 2-3 das despus de la inyeccin 517 , y el dimetro de la induracin se mide en ngulo recto a la lnea de la inyeccin (es decir, en sentido transversal al eje largo del antebrazo) y se mide en milmetros. la interpretacin de una prueba como positiva depende del grado de induracin y de diversas variables clnicas, como la probabilidad de contacto previo con m. tuberculosis y la presencia de enfermedades o situaciones relacionadas con un aumento del riesgo de tuberculosis. as pues, dependiendo de las circunstancias se pueden considerar positiva una reaccin tan pequea como slo 5 mm o tan grande como 15 mm (tabla 6-1). en este contexto, el tamao de la reaccin positiva no tiene ningn significado diagnstico particular 518 .es importante recordar que la positividad de la prueba cutnea no indica necesariamente que hay una enfermedad activa. una vez que el paciente ha sido infectado por m. tuberculosis y presenta hipersensibilidad la reaccin sigue siendo positiva toda la vida, aunque puede disminuir con el paso del tiempo. as pues, la interpretacin del resultado de una prueba y su relacin con la actividad de la enfermedad en un caso concreto exigen tener en cuenta los datos clnicos y radiolgicos.el resultado falsamente positivo de la prueba con ppd se puede deber a una reaccin cruzada como consecuencia de la infeccin por micobacterias no tuberculosas o puede ser una respuesta a la vacunacin previa con bacilos de calmette-gurin (bcg). aunque se pueden encontrar reacciones grandes a la ppd en ciertos pacientes vacunados con bcg 510 , se ha recomendado considerar que esa reaccin es un indicador de infeccin por m. tuberculosis, sobre todo en personas que proceden de zonas geogrficas con alta prevalencia de tuberculosis o en personas que tienen mayor riesgo de tuberculosis por las enfermedades coexistentes 520 .el resultado falsamente negativo puede guardar relacin con errores en la realizacin y la interpretacin de la prueba o con de-c a p  t u l o 6  enfermedades infecciosas de los pulmones 261 tabla 6-1. criterios de positividad de la prueba de la tuberculina en funcin del grupo de riesgo reaccin  5 mm de induracin reaccin 10 mm de induracin reaccin 15 mm de induracinpacientes vih+ inmigrantes recientes (es decir, en los ltimos 5 aos) procedentes personas sin factores de riesgo de pases de prevalencia elevada de tuberculosis (tb) contacto reciente con casos de tb adictos a las drogas inyectables lesiones fibrosas en la radiografa residentes y trabajadores* en los siguientes contextos comunitarios de trax compatibles con tb previa de alto riesgo: presidios y crceles, residencias de ancianos y otras instituciones de asistencia a largo plazo para ancianos, hospitales y otros centros sanitarios, centros residenciales para pacientes con sida y refugios para vagabundos pacientes con trasplantes de rganos personal de laboratorio de micobacteriologa y otros pacientes inmunodeprimidos personas con las siguientes enfermedades que suponen un riesgo elevado: (que reciben el equivalente a silicosis, diabetes mellitus, insuficiencia renal crnica, algunos trastornos 15 mg/da de prednisona durante hematolgicos (p. ej., leucemias y linfomas), otras neoplasias malignas fectos de la inmunidad celular 521 . esos defectos pueden estar causados por diversos procesos, como infecciones agudas (sobre todo infecciones vricas, como el sarampin, pero tambin muchas infecciones bacterianas), sarcoidosis, insuficiencia renal crnica, neoplasias malignas, infeccin por el vih y tratamiento inmunosupresor 522 . la respuesta a la tuberculina tambin tiende a disminuir con la edad 523 . algunos pacientes con tuberculosis presentan anergia total; al parecer, tambin hay una anergia selectiva al ppd en algunos pacientes 524 . en conjunto se encuentran reacciones negativas a 5 ut en hasta el 10% al 20% de los pacientes que tienen una infeccin tuberculosa relativamente leve y cultivo de esputo positivo 525 . en contraste con la prdida de sensibilidad a la tuberculina que puede ocurrir en la vejez o como consecuencia de ciertos tratamientos y determinadas enfermedades, algunos pacientes tienen una reaccin aumentada cuando se repite la prueba cutnea. este fenmeno de refuerzo se puede definir como un aumento del tamao de la reaccin a la tuberculina de por lo menos 6 mm cuando se repite la prueba sin que en el intervalo se haya producido nueva infeccin micobacteriana ni se haya administrado la vacuna de bcg 520 . se cree que esta reaccin se produce en pacientes que han tenido previamente una infeccin micobacteriana, tuberculosa o no tuberculosa o que han sido vacunados con bcg; el estmulo inmunitario que se genera en estos pacientes por la administracin de las protenas del bacilo tuberculoso produce un aumento de la reaccin en pruebas posteriores 519 . como consecuencia de estas observaciones se ha recomendado repetir la prueba cutnea negativa al cabo de una semana cuando se prev la necesidad de repetirla ms adelante con alguna frecuencia, por ejemplo en los trabajadores sanitarios. si la segunda prueba es positiva (efecto de refuerzo) se debe considerar que el paciente ha tenido una infeccin micobacteriana y se le tratar de acuerdo con los dems signos clnicos, radiogrficos y analticos; si la segunda prueba tambin es negativa, la positividad de una tercera prueba realizada durante los aos siguientes representar probablemente la presencia de una nueva infeccin. si la prueba se positiviza despus de un resultado negativo previo, cuanto mayor sea el tamao de la induracin, mayor ser la probabilidad de que el resultado positivo se deba a conversin (es decir, infeccin reciente) y no a un fenmeno de refuerzo 520 .el material que se utiliza para el diagnstico bacteriolgico puede tener distintos orgenes, como esputo espontneo o inducido, lquido de lavado bronquial, lquido pleural, peritoneal o cefalorraqudeo y muestras de tejidos. en general, el esputo es el ms fcil de obtener y es la fuente ms til de microorganismos en la enfermedad pulmonar. en los pacientes que no tienen expectoracin espontnea, la inhalacin de una solucin salina hipertnica (3%) templada con un nebulizador ultrasnico induce la produccin de material suficiente para el estudio en casi todos los casos 526 . las muestras de esputo que se obtienen inmediatamente despus de la broncoscopia tambin son tiles debido a la tos profunda que suele producirse despus de la endoscopia. una muestra combinada de esputo que se recoge a lo largo de un perodo de 12 a 24 horas puede ser til cuando otros mtodos no resultan eficaces o apropiados 527 .puede estar indicada la broncoscopia cuando se sospecha el diagnstico de tuberculosis pulmonar y el paciente no expectora, o si las muestras de esputo proporcionan resultados negativos. la prueba puede tener un elevado rendimiento para el diagnstico mediante extensin y cultivo 528 con muestras que se obtienen mediante cepillado o lavado y, a veces, con biopsia 529 ; en conjunto, el rendimiento diagnstico de los cultivos en pacientes que tienen extensiones de esputo negativas es de aproximadamente el 65% 526 .en funcin de la situacin clnica, otras muestras lquidas pueden establecer el diagnstico. las muestras de orina se deben obtener por la maana al levantarse y preferiblemente durante la porcin media de la miccin; se aconseja obtener mltiples muestras 515 . el lquido pleural, pericrdico, cefalorraqudeo o peritoneal se debe someter a anlisis bioqumico y estudio citolgico adems de las extensiones y los cultivos. la frecuencia de cultivos positivos con esos lquidos es variable; los cultivos de lquido pleural son positivos en aproximadamente el 15% de los casos 530 , mientras que las cifras correspondientes al lquido cefalorraqudeo oscilan entre el 50% y el 80% 509 y las del lquido pericrdico varan entre el 20% y el 30% 510 . embargo, el nmero de grmenes necesario para considerar que una extensin es positiva es grande y en conjunto slo del 60% al 80% de los pacientes con tuberculosis pulmonar presenta extensiones positivas 515 . la identificacin de grmenes en los frotis durante el tratamiento puede representar la presencia de bacilos no viables o contaminacin por micobacterias no tuberculosas 540 ; sin embargo, se deben considerar las posibilidades de incumplimiento teraputico y de grmenes resistentes a los frmacos.el cultivo es mucho ms sensible que el examen microscpico de los frotis para establecer el diagnstico de tuberculosis, y constituye la nica prueba ampliamente disponible que permite estudiar la sensibilidad del germen a los antibiticos. los cultivos falsamente positivos son poco frecuentes y en general se deben a contaminacin cruzada de las muestras de laboratorio 541 . una limitacin tcnica ms importante es el tiempo: los cultivos en medio estndar pueden tardar hasta 6 a 8 semanas en proporcionar resultados. una de las tcnicas ms utilizadas para reducir ese intervalo es la radiometra. con esta tcnica se inocula una muestra concentrada en un medio de cultivo lquido al que se ha aadido cido palmtico marcado con 14 c. las micobacterias metabolizan esa sustancia a 14 co 2 , que se puede detectar con un instrumento de bactec y cuantificar como ndice de crecimiento. utilizando esta tcnica se puede detectar el germen al cabo de tan slo 7 a 8 das en pacientes que tienen extensiones positivas y en 16 a 20 das cuando las extensiones son negativas 542 . mediante el uso del mtodo bactec se puede diferenciar m. tuberculosis de otras especies micobacterianas mediante tcnicas bioqumicas 543 o con sondas de cido nucleico 544 . adems de su rapidez, el mtodo bactec tiene una mayor sensibilidad para la deteccin de micobacterias (aproximadamente el 70% al 95%, comparado con el 60% al 80% del cultivo habitual) 545 , una ventaja que tiene una utilidad particular en los pacientes que tienen extensiones negativas.como en otras enfermedades infecciosas, el uso de la serologa para diagnosticar la tuberculosis ha sido objeto de una investigacin extensa 546 . el rendimiento de las pruebas vara con el antgeno que se utilice y con el umbral diagnstico especfico que se utilice; la sensibilidad y la especificidad han oscilado en varios estudios entre el 70% y el 80% y entre el 90% y el 98%, respectivamente 547 . el empleo sistemtico de la serologa para diagnosticar la tuberculosis se ve algo limitado por esos datos, y es probable que esta tcnica sea ms til en situaciones especficas, como la enfermedad extrapulmonar 548 . como se podra esperar, la prueba tiene una utilidad escasa en los pacientes inmunodeprimidos 549 .tambin se ha usado el anlisis de liberacin de interfern  en sangre completa, que evala la inmunidad celular frente a la tuberculina. las respuestas no se afectan por la vacunacin con bcg 456, 550 y pueden ser un instrumento para el cribado de poblaciones de alto riesgo de tuberculosis, como los inmigrantes procedentes de zonas de alta prevalencia de la enfermedad y los contactos de casos con enfermedad activa.las tcnicas de hibridacin del adn, anlisis del polimorfismo de la longitud de los fragmentos de restriccin y rcp son muy prometedoras para conseguir una identificacin y caracterizacin ms rpidas y fiables de las micobacterias 551 . mediante la amplificacin del adn presente en las muestras clnicas, la rcp puede aumentar mucho la probabilidad de detectar microorganismos 539, 552 y ha permitido a algunos investigadores identificar al bacilo tuberculoso en casi todos los pacientes que tenan extensiones positivas y en ms de la mitad de los que tenan cultivos negativos 456, 539 . adems, puesto que la sonda de adn puede ser especfica para micobacterias particulares, la negatividad de la prueba es til para aclarar con rapidez si los microorganismos acidorresistentes identificados en un frotis pertenecen o no a la especie m. tuberculosis. a pesar de esas ventajas, la rcp tiene tambin limitaciones significativas. es relativamente cara y es poco til para diferenciar entre enfermedad activa tratada recientemente y enfermedad antigua 553, 554 . adems, algunos autores han estimado que se obtienen resultados falsamente positivos en hasta el 5% de las muestras 456 . por ltimo, la sensibilidad de la rcp es menor en los casos que tienen frotis negativos que en los que tienen extensiones positivas. as pues, su uso en este contexto se debe limitar a los pacientes con sospecha clnica alta de tuberculosis 539, 553 .el anlisis del polimorfismo de la longitud de los fragmentos de restriccin (plfr) (huella digital gentica) se ha convertido en una prueba particularmente til para la investigacin epidemiolgica de la tuberculosis 555 . esta tcnica se basa en el uso de secuencias de insercin de adn especficas (la que ms se ha investigado es is6110) que aparecen en un nmero variable de copias y en diferentes posiciones en distintas cepas de micobacterias. mediante la deteccin de distintos patrones de secuencias en los aislados clnicos se puede adquirir informacin fiable respecto al origen de los brotes epidmicos locales de tuberculosis 556 . tambin se puede obtener informacin similar mediante espoligotipado 557 , un procedimiento en el que las secuencias separadoras del genoma de m. tuberculosis se amplifican con una tcnica de rcp y despus se identifican mediante el uso de secuencias de adn oligomricas sintticas. aunque esta tcnica tiene menos potencia discriminatoria que la plfr, posee la ventaja de no precisar el cultivo del microorganismo.el examen citolgico de las muestras que se obtienen mediante aspiracin transtorcica con aguja puede tener utilidad para el diagnstico 558 . sin embargo, se pueden producir resultados falsamente positivos si la interpretacin se basa nicamente en las alteraciones citolgicas, y el diagnstico definitivo depende del cultivo de los microorganismos o de su identificacin dentro de fragmentos tisulares 559 . al interpretar los resultados de la aspiracin transtorcica con aguja se debe recordar que una de las causas ms frecuentes de diagnstico falsamente positivo de malignidad en estas muestras es la tuberculosis 560 . la aspiracin con aguja fina tambin se ha usado con xito para el diagnstico de la tuberculosis extrapulmonar 561 .el recuento leucoctico suele ser normal en la tuberculosis pulmonar, pero puede aumentar hasta 10.000 a 15.000/mm 3 . la anemia es frecuente en la enfermedad pulmonar crnica o miliar, y posiblemente guarde relacin con la amortiguacin de la respuesta a la eritropoyetina que inducen las citocinas 562 . en la enfermedad miliar se ha descrito tambin reaccin leucemoide, linfopenia 563 y pancitopenia 564 .la hipercalcemia tambin es frecuente, y su incidencia vara entre aproximadamente el 5% y el 50% en las distintas revisiones 565 . la probabilidad de hipercalcemia guarda relacin posiblemente con varios factores, como exposicin al sol, ingesta de vitamina d y forma de enfermedad tuberculosa 556 . se puede asociar a hipopotasemia, probablemente como resultado de la lesin tubular distal que produce un exceso de calcio, lo que permite que aumente la excrecin renal de potasio 567 . algunos pacientes con tuberculosis pulmonar presentan hiponatremia 568 , que es ms frecuente en la meningitis tuberculosa 496 ; probablemente representa el efecto de la secrecin inadecuada de hormona antidiurtica. en un estudio de 50 pacientes con tuberculosis pulmonar avanzada se encontr que el 92% presentaba datos de sndrome de enfermedad eutiroidea y que el 73% de los varones tena hipogonadismo hipo-gonadotrfico 569 . en varios estudios se han encontrado signos de hipoadrenalismo en el 0% al 55% de los pacientes 569 .en ausencia de bronquitis crnica y enfisema la mayora de los pacientes con tuberculosis pulmonar muestra poca afectacin de la funcin respiratoria, incluso en casos de enfermedad avanzada. puesto que la enfermedad interfiere por igual con la ventilacin y la perfusin, no se producen alteraciones de la relacin v . /q . 570 . se encuentra una excepcin a esta regla general en la tuberculosis miliar, en la que las pruebas de funcin pulmonar muestran con frecuencia un patrn restrictivo y una reduccin de la capacidad de difusin; a pesar del tratamiento y la normalizacin de la radiografa de trax, la capacidad de difusin puede permanecer bastante por debajo de los valores normales tericos 571 .en los pases desarrollados, antes del sida, los pacientes fallecidos por tuberculosis activa eran muchas veces ancianos y pacientes con otras enfermedades crnicas; la probabilidad de morir por tuberculosis (muchas veces no reconocida) era similar a la de morir por las otras enfermedades subyacentes 572 . despus de la aparicin del sida ha cambiado algo la demografa, y en ee.uu. la mortalidad mxima corresponde ahora al grupo de edad comprendido entre los 25 y los 55 aos; los fallecimientos se producen sobre todo en afroamericanos e hispanoamericanos 406 . aunque este cambio se relaciona con la infeccin por el vih, cuya progresin parece ser acelerada por la tuberculosis 573 , el abuso de alcohol o drogas en ausencia de sida tambin parece ser un factor de riesgo importante de muerte 406 .en conjunto la tasa de mortalidad a los 4-5 aos de la tuberculosis no tratada parece ser de aproximadamente el 50% 574 . sin embargo, el diagnstico oportuno y la quimioterapia adecuada pueden reducir mucho esa tasa (en al menos un 95%); en ee.uu. la tasa ha disminuido progresivamente durante la segunda mitad del siglo xx desde el 12,4 por 100.000 en 1953 hasta el 0,6 por 100.000 en 1993 575 . la causa de muerte es variable. algunos pacientes fallecen de modo brusco por hemorragia pulmonar masiva o por insuficiencia respiratoria relacionada con bronconeumona tuberculosa extensa y/o sdra 478, 576 . en otros casos no se encuentra una causa definida de muerte, ni siquiera en la autopsia; en este grupo el mecanismo probable es la arritmia cardaca 577 .la aparicin de tuberculosis miliar se asocia a un pronstico particularmente malo; por ejemplo, en un estudio aproximadamente el 25% de los pacientes falleci una mediana de 6 das despus de iniciar el tramiento 494 . en un nmero significativo de casos la enfermedad se identific por primera vez en la autopsia 578 . la causa de muerte es variable en estos pacientes; en algunos intervienen otras complicaciones, como sdra o cid 579 .en las zonas en vas de desarrollo del mundo, como el frica subsahariana, donde los tratamientos de la infeccin por vih y de la tuberculosis suelen ser subptimos, aproximadamente el 30% de los pacientes vih positivos fallece dentro de los 12 meses siguientes al comienzo del tratamiento de la tuberculosis 580 . sin embargo, muchas de estas muertes se deben a enfermedades relacionadas con el vih distintas a la tuberculosis 581 .el bcg es una cepa no virulenta de mycobacterium bovis que se utiliza mucho para la preparacin de una vacuna profilctica contra m. tuberculosis. se estima que se han administrado aproxima-damente 3.000 millones de dosis de vacuna desde la obtencin de la cepa 582 . aunque su eficacia no es uniforme, todava se aconseja como medio de prevencin en algunos pacientes y poblaciones de alto riesgo 583 . de acuerdo con un metaanlisis de los informes publicados hasta 1994, los autores estimaron que la vacuna reduca el riesgo de tuberculosis en aproximadamente un 50% 584 .las complicaciones sistmicas y la enfermedad mortal como consecuencia de la infeccin diseminada por bcg son infrecuentes, pero se han documentado en algunos pacientes, sobre todo nios con sndromes de inmunodeficiencia 585 . los preparados de vacuna de bcg y los residuos de bacilos muertos extrados con metanol tambin se han usado como inmunoestimulantes inespecficos para tratar enfermedades neoplsicas, en particular el carcinoma de vejiga 586 . puesto que estos preparados se administran a pacientes que pueden tener una inmunodeficiencia a causa de la quimioterapia o de la neoplasia, y debido a que se suelen emplear repetidamente y a dosis altas, la incidencia de complicaciones, en particular de neumonitis por bcg, es significativamente mayor que con la vacunacin antituberculosa 587 .la enfermedad puede estar causada por infeccin directa 588 , por reactivacin de la infeccin latente 587 o por un fenmeno de hipersensibilidad 589 . el tratamiento con bcg se ha relacionado tambin con la aparicin de lesiones en las radiografas y en la tcar indistinguibles de las que se observan en casos de tuberculosis miliar 509 . el examen histolgico de las biopsias de los pacientes afectos ha mostrado granulomas necrosantes similares en todos los aspectos a los de la tuberculosis miliar, pero en los que rara vez se identifican microorganismos 591 . cuando la enfermedad aparece en los tres meses siguientes al tratamiento intravesical los pacientes presentan fiebre y sntomas de enfermedad sistmica 592 . en los pacientes que tienen manifestaciones tardas la mayor parte presenta una enfermedad localizada indicativa de reactivacin de una infeccin en el tracto genitourinario, las vrtebras o los tejidos blandos retroperitoneales 592 .una proporcin pequea pero creciente de las infecciones micobacterianas est causada por micobacterias no tuberculosas (mnt). en total, aproximadamente 20 especies se relacionan con la enfermedad humana 593 ; sin embargo, algunas de stas constituyen ejemplos de colonizacin o contaminacin de la muestra y no una verdadera infeccin 594 . de los diversos esquemas de clasificacin propuestos para estos bacilos, el de runyon ha obtenido una aceptacin casi universal 595 . de acuerdo con ste, los microorganismos se pueden clasificar en cuatro grupos segn las caractersticas de los cultivos (principalmente la presencia o ausencia de pigmento y la velocidad de crecimiento).la mayora de las infecciones pulmonares por mnt se debe a unas pocas especies, como mycobacterium kansasii, el complejo mycobacterium chelonae y mycobacterium avium-intracellulare; sin embargo, se estn viendo con ms frecuencia especies nuevas o especies que antes no eran patgenas, sobre todo en pacientes inmunodeprimidos 596 , y determinados grmenes especficos pueden ser importantes en regiones geogrficas particulares. la mayora de las infecciones se puede clasificar en cuatro grupos clnicos: enfermedad pulmonar y linfadenitis cervical de pacientes inmunocompetentes, enfermedad diseminada en pacientes inmunodeprimidos y enfermedad cutnea localizada 597 .al igual que la tuberculosis, la incidencia de enfermedad por mnt vara de forma considerable en todo el mundo. como consecuen-cia de la epidemia de sida, la proporcin de enfermedades tuberculosas causadas por mnt, en particular por el complejo m. avium, ha aumentado de forma significativa durante los ltimos 20 aos. tambin existen indicios de que est aumentado el nmero de casos en la poblacin sin sida, al menos en algunas zonas del mundo 598, 599 ; las razones posibles incluyen el envejecimiento de la poblacin, la mejora de los mtodos para detectar grmenes en las muestras clnicas, el mayor conocimiento de la enfermedad por parte de los mdicos y la mayor exposicin de los pacientes a las fuentes de los microorganismos 600 . los datos sobre la incidencia de enfermedad causada por grmenes especficos estn influidos tambin por la marcada variacin de su distribucin geogrfica.muchos pacientes diagnosticados de enfermedad pulmonar por mnt tienen otras neumopatas subyacentes. las enfermedades que se asocian con ms frecuencia son epoc, tuberculosis o micosis cicatrizadas, bronquiectasias, proteinosis alveolar, neumoconiosis (en particular, silicosis) y fibrosis qustica [601] [602] [603] . tambin se ha observado aumento del riesgo de infeccin por mnt en los pacientes que tienen enfermedad reumatoide, diabetes mellitus, cardiopatas, alcoholismo, acalasia y gastrectoma parcial 604 . los pacientes inmunodeprimidos tienen tambin un mayor riesgo de infeccin por mnt; aunque ese aumento del riesgo se aplica en particular a los pacientes que tienen sida (vase pgina 428), tambin afecta a los que tienen neoplasias malignas (en particular, tricoleucemia) 605 , los que son sometidos a trasplantes de rganos 606 y los que reciben tratamiento con corticoides u otros frmacos inmunosupresores.la infeccin por mnt se puede adquirir por varios mecanismos, como inhalacin, ingestin o inoculacin directa despus de un traumatismo, o puede tener un origen yatrgeno 607 . aunque algunas especies se pueden transmitir de los animales a los seres humanos (p. ej., mycobacterium simiae), probablemente ocurra con poca frecuencia, y no se ha documentado de modo convincente la transmisin entre seres humanos 608 . puesto que muchos de estos grmenes se encuentran en el agua, la contaminacin del suministro de agua del hospital puede producir infeccin nosocomial verdadera y seudoinfeccin (esta ltima a veces se relaciona con la broncoscopia) 609 .en la mayora de los casos las caractersticas anatomopatolgicas e histolgicas de la enfermedad pulmonar por mnt son idnticas a las de m. tuberculosis, y se caracterizan por un grado variable de fibrosis, cavitacin, inflamacin granulomatosa y necrosis con caseificacin 610 . puede haber diseminacin bronquial y enfermedad miliar, aunque con menos frecuencia que en la tuberculosis. debido a la asociacin relativamente frecuente con una neumopata crnica subyacente, puede ser difcil identificar las alteraciones macroscpicas atribuibles a la infeccin, sobre todo a la infeccin precoz. no suele ser posible hacer un diagnstico histolgico definitivo de la naturaleza no tuberculosa de la enfermedad 611 , a excepcin de la infeccin diseminada por el complejo m. avium en los nios que tienen sndromes de inmunodeficiencia y en los pacientes con sida 612 . en esos pacientes la infeccin se manifiesta tpicamente como agregados de macrfagos repletos de microorganismos, muchas veces con reaccin granulomatosa y necrosis mnimas o nulas.en ocasiones las muestras de biopsia pulmonar de pacientes sin una inmunodepresin aparente muestran una inflamacin crnica inespecfica sin componente granulomatoso, y sin embargo crecen mnt en el cultivo 610 ; aunque el significado de este hallazgo no est claro, probablemente se deba considerar que el cultivo positivo est causado por colonizacin o contamina-cin, aun teniendo en cuenta la posibilidad de que las manifestaciones histolgicas sean atpicas.la superposicin considerable entre los patrones radiolgicos de la enfermedad pulmonar causada por mnt y por m. tuberculosis impide una distincin fiable entre las dos entidades en un caso particular (figura 6-33) 482, 613 . de hecho, uno de los patrones ms frecuentes son cavidades nicas o mltiples, muchas veces asociadas a signos radiogrficos de diseminacin endobronquial 482, 613 . a pesar de todo, ciertos patrones se ven con ms frecuencia en la infeccin por mnt y pueden ser tiles para indicar el diagnstico en el contexto clnico apropiado 614, 615 .un segundo patrn algo ms distintivo que se observa sobre todo en mujeres no inmunodeprimidas que estn infectadas por el complejo m. avium son ndulos pequeos bilaterales habitualmente bien delimitados que miden menos de 1 cm de dimetro y tienen una distribucin centrolobulillar 616, 617 . los ndulos estn distribuidos muchas veces de modo focal en todos los lbulos 482 , aunque en ocasiones predominan en los lbulos superiores o en el lbulo medio y la lngula 616, 618 . en la tcar la mayora de los pacientes presenta bronquiectasias, habitualmente con afectacin de varios lbulos y en ocasiones con afectacin de slo el lbulo medio y la lngula (figura 6-34) 619 . la extensin de las bronquiectasias y el nmero de ndulos tienden a ser mayores en los pacientes que tienen infeccin por m. avium-intracellulare que en los que tienen otras mnt o tuberculosis 482, 615 .las manifestaciones clnicas habituales de la infeccin por mnt son similares a las de tuberculosis y en un determinado paciente resultan indistinguibles de las tuberculosas. algunos pacientes no muestran datos de enfermedad pulmonar previa 260 ; como ya se ha dicho, muchos de estos casos corresponden a mujeres ancianas que tienen un patrn radiogrfico de bronquiectasias focales y ndulos no cavitados (sndrome de lady windermere) 661, 662 .aparte de los pacientes con sida, en los que la incidencia de infeccin diseminada por el complejo m. avium puede llegar al 15%-25%, la enfermedad diseminada por mnt es rara. prcticamente todos los pacientes tienen inmunodepresin por enfermedades subyacentes por su tratamiento 263 . en los pacientes infectados por el complejo m. avium el cuadro clnico inicial suele ser fiebre de origen desconocido; la enfermedad relacionada con m. kansasii y m. chelonae tiende a manifestarse por ndulos subcutneos o abscesos con drenaje 624 . la afectacin pulmonar es frecuente en caso de enfermedad diseminada, con un patrn radiogrfico miliar en la mayora de los pacientes y consolidacin parenquimatosa en aproximadamente el 25% 625 .en contraste con m. tuberculosis, cuya identificacin indica enfermedad, el aislamiento de mnt en el esputo representa no rara vez contaminacin ambiental del cultivo o colonizacin del tracto respiratorio 626 . el diagnstico resulta an ms difcil debido a que tanto la enfermedad como la colonizacin se asocian muchas veces a alteraciones pulmonares subyacentes 627 . en consecuencia, la interpretacin de la positividad de las extensiones o de los cultivos se debe hacer con mucho cuidado y a la luz de las manifestaciones clnicas y radiolgicas subyacentes. la american thoracic society ha publicado guas para el diagnstico segn tres categoras de manifestaciones clnicas (tabla 6-2). si se usan criterios estrictos de ese tipo, slo una pequea parte de los aislados de mnt se asocia a enfermedad clnicamente importante 628 . la enfermedad pulmonar causada por mnt tiende a progresar si no se trata 629 . como era de esperar, el pronstico vara tambin con la gravedad de cualquier enfermedad pulmonar subyacente 630 . la causa de la muerte es variable en los pacientes afectos; muchos de ellos, en particular los que tienen una enfermedad obstructiva de las vas areas, fallecen por cor pulmonale. como era de esperar, la enfermedad diseminada en un paciente inmunodeprimido es con frecuencia mortal 623 .los hongos pueden causar enfermedad pulmonar por varios mecanismos y en diversas circunstancias clnicas. algunos de ellos (como histoplasma capsulatum y coccidioides immitis) son patgenos primarios que infectan con ms frecuencia a personas sanas. se encuentran en zonas geogrficas especficas, por lo que se usa con frecuencia el trmino endmicas para referirse a estas infecciones, y los microorganismos habitan tpicamente en el suelo. en condiciones climatolgicas favorables germinan y producen esporas, que tras ser inhaladas por un husped susceptible cambian de forma (una caracterstica conocida como dimorfismo) y proliferan. en una persona que tiene una respuesta inflamatoria intacta y una inmunidad celular adecuada esa proliferacin casi siempre es limitada y la enfermedad resultante tiene carcter subclnico o leve y se manifiesta slo por positividad de la prueba cutnea. sin embargo, en algunos pacientes aparentemente normales la infeccin primaria fulminante o la enfermedad pulmonar crnica, con o sin diseminacin sistmica, pueden producir una morbilidad significativa y en ocasiones la muerte. estas complicaciones son mucho ms frecuentes en pacientes que tienen inmunodeficiencias subyacentes, como el sida 631 .un segundo grupo de microorganismos (como los gneros aspergillus y candida) son invasores oportunistas que afectan sobre todo a pacientes inmunodeprimidos o que tienen una enfermedad pulmonar subyacente. estos grmenes no son dimrficos y se suelen encontrar ampliamente distribuidos en el ambiente. la integridad de las barreras mucosas y una funcin fagoctica adecuada son los principales factores del husped determinantes de que la colonizacin progrese o no hasta una enfermedad clnicamente manifiesta. en este ltimo caso los hongos pueden estar presentes como saprofitos (p. ej., micetoma) o, ms frecuentemente, como microorganismos invasores que causan destruccin tisular.adems de la infeccin saproftica y de la invasora, algunos hongos (sobre todo del gnero aspergillus) pueden provocar enfermedad por una reaccin de hipersensibilidad exagerada sin invasin real de los tejidos (vase pgina 282). adems, la inhalacin de cantidades masivas de hongos provoca en ocasiones una reaccin pulmonar txica no alrgica (micotoxicosis, sndrome txico por polvo orgnico) (vase pgina 511).la familia actinomycetaceae, que incluye microorganismos como actinomyces israelii y el gnero nocardia, se clasifica en el grupo de las bacterias. sin embargo, como muchas de sus caractersticas clnicas y anatomopatolgicas son similares a las de los hongos, resulta conveniente considerarla junto con los hongos verdaderos.la histoplasmosis es una enfermedad mictica endmica causada habitualmente por el microorganismo dimrfico h. capsulatum 632 . su hbitat natural es el suelo que tiene un contenido alto de nitrgeno, que habitualmente procede del guano de aves o murcilagos. as pues, las zonas como gallineros, zonas de anidamiento de mirlos y palomas, cuevas infestadas de murcilagos o desvanes y otros lugares que tienen excrementos de aves constituyen las fuentes ms frecuentes de brotes epidmicos de infeccin. las situaciones en las que se forman nubes de polvo, como la demolicin de edificios, conllevan un riesgo particularmente elevado de causar enfermedad debido a la aerosolizacin de las esporas. no parece existir contagio de animal a ser humano ni entre seres humanos.aunque el microorganismo tiene una distribucin mundial, la mayora de los casos de enfermedad se ha descrito en norteamrica, sobre todo en las cuencas de los ros ohio, misisip y st. lawrence, donde se considera que histoplasma capsulatum es endmico. la infeccin es frecuente en esas regiones, y algunos estudios han encontrado positividad de la prueba cutnea con histoplasmina en hasta el 70%-80% de la poblacin 633 . sin embargo, incluso en las zonas endmicas los casos se distribuyen de forma no uniforme, lo que probablemente refleja la presencia de fuentes puntuales de suelo con contaminacin intensa 634 . aunque la enfermedad clnica puede aparecer en personas de cualquier edad, es ms frecuente y grave en lactantes, ancianos y pacientes inmunodeprimidos 635 . patogenia y caractersticas anatomopatolgicas. en condiciones ambientales apropiadas, los micelios de h. capsulatum producen microconidias de 2 a 5 m de dimetro que son inhaladas y se depositan en los espacios areos alveolares perifricos. la respuesta ms temprana del husped es un infiltrado de leucocitos polimorfonucleares 636 . esas clulas son incapaces de matar al microorganismo y se ven sustituidas pronto por linfocitos y macrfagos 637 . la inmunidad celular mediada por linfocitos, que se acompaa de inflamacin granulomatosa, necrosis y fibrosis, aparece de 1 a 2 semanas despus de la infeccin inicial 638 . el aspecto en esa fase es idntico tanto macroscpica como histolgicamente al de la tuber-c a p  t u l o 6  enfermedades infecciosas de los pulmones 267 tabla 6-2. criterios diagnsticos recomendados para la enfermedad pulmonar causada por micobacterias no tuberculosas (mnt)presencia de dos o ms muestras de esputo (o de esputo y lavado bronquial) con extensiones positivas para bacilos acidorresistentes y/o crecimiento moderado o intenso de mnt en el cultivo se han excluido otras causas razonables del proceso patolgico (p. ej., tuberculosis, enfermedad mictica)presencia de dos o ms muestras de esputo (o de esputo y lavado bronquial) con extensiones positivas para bacilos acidorresistentes y/o crecimiento moderado o intenso de mnt en el cultivo si el aislado es de mycobacterium kansasii o mycobacterium avium, ausencia de negativizacin de los cultivos de esputo con la limpieza bronquial o a las 2 semanas de instituir el tratamiento farmacolgico especfico contra las micobacterias (aunque slo se ha estudiado para esas dos especies, este criterio probablemente sea vlido tambin para otras especies de mnt) se han excluido otras causas razonables del proceso patolgico culosis primaria. en la mayora de los casos el foco de enfermedad parenquimatosa es demasiado pequeo para poder detectarlo en las radiografas; a veces los focos individuales de necrosis confluyen y aumentan de tamao hasta formar una o ms lesiones suficientemente grandes para resultar visibles. siempre hay diseminacin de los microorganismos hasta los ganglios linfticos regionales, y produce adenopatas que con frecuencia son ms prominentes que las que se observan en la tuberculosis primaria. las complicaciones de la enfermedad ganglionar son similares a las que se observan en fases ms avanzadas, e incluyen atelectasia y neumonitis obstructiva por compresin de la va area (vase figura en color 6-10) y, en los casos de larga evolucin, broncolitiasis 649 . tambin se produce diseminacin de microorganismos a travs de la sangre en fases precoces de la enfermedad, y muchas veces se producen pequeos focos de inflamacin granulomatosa, sobre todo en el hgado y el bazo. como en la tuberculosis primaria, esta diseminacin hematgena tiene rara vez significado clnico; sin embargo, los focos de enfermedad establecidos pueden experimentar calcificacin distrfica y actuar como marcadores radiogrficos de enfermedad previa.la curacin de la enfermedad parenquimatosa es rpida en la gran mayora de los casos. el aspecto morfolgico tambin es similar al de la tuberculosis y se caracteriza por focos de necrosis parenquimatosa rodeados por una cpsula fibrosa (vase figura en color 6-11); resulta frecuente la calcificacin distrfica. en los cortes tisulares la tincin argntica permite identificar grmenes en los focos de necrosis tisular en forma de levaduras redondas u ovales pequeas (3 a 5 m).a pesar de las muchas semejanzas entre la patogenia y la anatoma patolgica de la tuberculosis y la histoplasmosis, tambin hay diferencias fundamentales 640 . como en la tuberculosis, la infeccin inicial da lugar a la aparicin de inmunidad celular que se refleja en la adquisicin de propiedades fungicidas ms intensas por parte de los macrfagos alveolares. sin embargo, en contraste con la tuberculosis esa inmunidad parece ser ms efmera. por ejemplo, en un estudio de pacientes positivos para la histoplasmina, entre el 15% y el 20% se haba negativizado cuando se repiti la prueba al cabo de dos aos 641 ; adems, en la mayora de esos pacientes hubo positividad otra vez ms adelante, posiblemente por reinfeccin. a la vista de estas observaciones, los trminos primaria y posprimaria que se utilizan en la tuberculosis pueden no ser apropiados en el caso de la histoplasmosis. adems, en contraste con la reactivacin endgena de la enfermedad en la tuberculosis posprimaria, se supone que la neumona recurrente por h. capsulatum guarda relacin ms probablemente con una infeccin procedente de una fuente exgena 640 .la nomenclatura propuesta para designar los tipos de enfermedad causada por h. capsulatum es variable. utilizamos una divisin simple en histoplasmosis asintomtica y sintomtica. la sintomtica se puede dividir a su vez en las formas aguda, crnica y diseminada. es probable que estas categoras clnicas dependan de la combinacin del tamao y la virulencia del inculo inicial y del estado de inmunidad del husped 640 .la mayora de las infecciones (probablemente entre el 95% y el 99%) cursa sin sntomas 640 . sin embargo, las radiografas de trax de pacientes en los que la prueba cutnea se haba hecho positiva recientemente han revelado opacidades parenquimatosas pulmonares, con o sin aumento del tamao de los ganglios linfticos hiliares, en hasta el 10%-25% de los casos. es posible que la falta de sntomas refleje la exposicin de grado bajo en una persona no inmunizada o un inculo de tamao moderado en una persona inmunizada.los sntomas de tipo gripal quizs sean la manifestacin clnica ms frecuente de la histoplasmosis aguda. incluyen fiebre, cefalea, escalofros, tos y molestias retroesternales, estas ltimas relacionadas con la afectacin de los ganglios linfticos mediastnicos 640 . la exploracin fsica del trax es normal en la mayora de los casos. se puede encontrar hepatoesplenomegalia, con ms frecuencia en nios. a veces se observa eritema nudoso o eritema multiforme, habitualmente en mujeres jvenes y asociado en ocasiones a artralgias 640 ; en estos casos, el diagnstico suele resultar fcil en el contexto de un brote epidmico local de histoplasmosis. de modo ocasional el paciente tiene un cuadro ms grave con tos con expectoracin mucopurulenta, hemoptisis y dolores musculoesquelticos 650 . se pueden auscultar estertores, roce pleural y signos de consolidacin. el diagnstico diferencial incluye neumona aguda vrica o bacteriana. sin embargo, puesto que el aumento del tamao de los ganglios linfticos hiliares es infrecuente en esas infecciones, el hallazgo de estas adenopatas debe indicar el diagnstico de histoplasmosis aguda en zonas endmicas.la radiografa de trax es normal en la mayora de los pacientes 651 . los signos radiogrficos ms frecuentes son zonas nicas o mltiples mal definidas de consolidacin del espacio areo 652 . la enfermedad grave se caracteriza por consolidacin homognea no segmentaria del parnquima que simula una neumona bacteriana aguda del espacio areo (figura 6-35). en contraste con esta ltima, la enfermedad tiende a desaparecer en una zona y aparecer en otra. es frecuente el aumento del tamao de los ganglios linfticos hiliares, mientras que el derrame pleural es poco frecuente 651, 652 . en caso de exposicin intensa la radiografa puede mostrar opacidades nodulares bastante bien definidas y amplia- mente diseminadas, y las lesiones individuales miden 3-4 mm de dimetro 653 . estas alteraciones pueden no aparecer hasta una semana o ms despus del comienzo de los sntomas. en la mayora de los casos hay adenopatas hiliares 652 . histoplasmoma. esta forma relativamente frecuente de histoplasmosis pulmonar se puede asociar o no a antecedentes de enfermedad sintomtica previa 654 . la alteracin aparece tpicamente en la radiografa como un ndulo bien definido de 0,5 a 3 cm de dimetro, la mayora de las veces en un lbulo inferior 655 . aunque la lesin puede ser solitaria, muchas veces se ven lesiones satlites menores 649 . los ndulos pueden tener un foco central de calcificacin con formacin de una imagen en diana caracterstica o con calcificacin difusa (figura 6-36); esta calcificacin se identifica con frecuencia en la tc incluso cuando no es aparente en las radiografas 656 . las radiografas seriadas a lo largo de meses o aos pueden revelar un crecimiento moderado, incluso hasta el punto de indicar el diagnstico de neoplasia 657 . la presencia de calcificacin no significa necesariamente que un histoplasma est curado: estas lesiones tambin pueden aumentar de tamao, y el examen histolgico ha demostrado fibrosis aparentemente activa transcurridos 10 aos o ms desde su identificacin inicial. aunque no est clara la patogenia de este fenmeno, se ha propuesto que representa una reaccin similar a la que se observa en la mediastinitis fibrosante (vase pgina 850).la calcificacin de los ganglios linfticos tambin es frecuente en la infeccin cicatrizada y se puede ver aislada o asociada a un histoplasmoma. la broncolitiasis representa una complicacin ocasional (figura 6-37) 651 ; en muchos casos la tc revela calcificacin parabronquial y aclara la naturaleza de la alteracin 658 .histoplasmosis pulmonar crnica. en contraste con la mayora de los pacientes que tienen enfermedad aguda, que de forma tpica desaparece clnica y radiogrficamente sin tratamiento en cuestin de semanas o meses, algunos pacientes tienen una enfermedad pulmonar progresiva crnica. algunos de estos casos son prcticamente idnticos a la tuberculosis posprimaria, y los pacientes afectos tienen sobre todo lesiones de los lbulos superiores, que se caracterizan por fibrosis, necrosis, cavitacin e inflamacin granulomatosa. suele haber un fondo de enfisema pulmonar y la infeccin se puede extender hasta afectar al mediastino o localizaciones extratorcicas de modo similar a lo que ocurre en la forma crnica de la enfermedad. algunos autores han indicado que la carga infecciosa es escasa en esta situacin, y que la mayor parte de las alteraciones se debe a la respuesta inmunitaria frente a un nmero escaso de microorganismos 644 .el aspecto radiogrfico (figura 6-38) simula a la tuberculosis posprimaria 651 , y las manifestaciones ms tempranas son zonas segmentarias o subsegmentarias de consolidacin en los vrtices de los pulmones, que muchas veces dibujan zonas de enfisema cen-c a p  t u l o 6  enfermedades infecciosas de los pulmones 269histoplasmoma calcificado. la radiografa posteroanterior de trax (a) muestra un ndulo de 1,5 cm de dimetro en el lbulo inferior derecho (flecha); no se aprecia calcificacin. las imgenes de tcar (b y c) muestran calcificacin del ndulo, as como adenopatas hiliares derechas y subcarnicas calcificadas. histoplasmosis: broncolitiasis. en esta mujer de 45 aos con antecedentes de hemoptisis y episodios repetidos de tos con expectoracin de pequeas concreciones, la radiografa posteroanterior de trax (a) muestra ganglios linfticos calcificados hiliares (flecha) y paratraqueales derechos. los dos cortes de tc con colimacin de 6 mm (b y c) muestran un ganglio hiliar derecho calcificado (flecha recta) y un broncolito (flecha curva), dentro del bronquio segmentario anterior del lbulo superior derecho. histoplasmosis progresiva crnica. la imagen de la mitad superior del pulmn izquierdo (a) muestra una opacidad heterognea mal definida (flechas) que contiene una zona radiotransparente central correspondiente a una cavidad. el pulmn derecho no tena lesiones en aquella poca. aproximadamente un ao despus (b) la lesin apical izquierda ha desaparecido casi por completo, pero ahora se aprecia una enfermedad extensa en todo el lbulo superior derecho, junto con una prdida de volumen considerable (obsrvese la desviacin de la trquea hacia la derecha). el aspecto es similar al de la tuberculosis crnica. trolobulillar. las ampollas de paredes gruesas contienen en ocasiones niveles lquidos; con el paso del tiempo las ampollas pueden desaparecer por completo o aumentar gradualmente de tamao. las radiografas de trax seriadas tienden a mostrar prdida de volumen progresiva con aumento de la prominencia de las opacidades lineales.la histoplasmosis pulmonar crnica suele cursar con tos y expectoracin, que en algunos casos se debe probablemente a la epoc subyacente que inevitablemente se asocia a la histoplasmosis 659 . la fuga de material necrtico desde las cavidades o las ampollas se puede acompaar de fiebre. los pacientes quizs refieran prdida de peso, dolor torcico profundo, hemoptisis y malestar general. sin embargo, tambin pueden permanecer asintomticos 644 . el pronstico es variable; no obstante, la enfermedad suele progresar y precisa tratamiento 659 . la diseminacin generalizada es infrecuente. histoplasmosis mediastnica crnica. la afectacin del mediastino por la histoplasmosis puede dar lugar a diversas alteraciones clnicas y radiolgicas. a veces guardan relacin con una o ms adenopatas mediastnicas 660 . rara vez hay un depsito ms o menos difuso de tejido fibroso, que se supone est causado por una reaccin inmunitaria (mediastinitis fibrosante; vase pgina 850).excepto en los pacientes que tienen sida (vase pgina 433), la histoplasmosis diseminada clnicamente evidente es una entidad poco frecuente. aproximadamente la tercera parte de los pacientes son lactantes de menos de dos aos de edad; otro 20% de los casos corresponde a adultos inmunodeprimidos 661 . la histoplasmosis diseminada sintomtica se ha subdividido en los tipos agudo, subagudo y crnico de acuerdo con las caractersticas clnicas y anatomopatolgicas. el tipo agudo se caracteriza desde el punto de vista clnico por fiebre alta persistente, hepatoesplenomegalia prominente, anemia, leucopenia y trombocitopenia; algunos pacientes presentan tambin neumona intersticial. los signos en la radiografa y la tcar suelen ser similares a los de la tuberculosis miliar 490 .la histoplasmosis diseminada subaguda tiene una evolucin clnica que se prolonga meses. los sntomas y signos pueden incluir fiebre moderada, hepatoesplenomegalia entre leve y moderada y dolor abdominal (causado por ulceracin digestiva); a veces se encuentran signos de enfermedad de addison, meningitis, cerebritis focal o endocarditis. puede haber anemia, leucopenia y trombocitopenia.la histoplasmosis diseminada crnica es una forma relativamente leve de la enfermedad que cursa con fiebre escasa o nula, ausencia de hepatoesplenomegalia y datos de mielosupresin. el paciente tpico es un adulto de edad avanzada, y la evolucin de la enfermedad se prolonga meses o aos 659 . el diagnstico se establece con frecuencia despus del descubrimiento y la biopsia de una lcera orofarngea. la afectacin de rganos especficos puede producir enfermedad de addison, meningitis, endocarditis o laringitis 662 .el recuento leucoctico suele ser normal, pero puede aumentar hasta 15.000/mm 3 en pacientes con enfermedad epidmica aguda 642 y hasta 20.000/mm 3 en los casos de enfermedad cavitaria 643 . se encuentra leucopenia, anemia y trombocitopenia en aproximadamente el 50% de los pacientes con enfermedad diseminada sintomtica, mientras que esas alteraciones son poco frecuentes en otras variantes.el examen de las extensiones de esputo, lquido pleural o mdula sea para detectar microorganismos rara vez es positivo en los pacientes que tienen histoplasmosis aguda. los cultivos no suelen ser positivos en los pacientes asintomticos ni en los casos de enfermedad autolimitada, ni siquiera en los pacientes que tienen un cuadro agudo por exposicin a un inculo grande 644 ; durante la enfermedad ms grave o cuando hay cavidades de paredes finas el cultivo es positivo en no ms de la tercera parte de los pacientes. en los pacientes que tienen cavidades de paredes gruesas, el cultivo de esputo ha resultado positivo en el 50% al 70% de los casos (a condicin de recoger mltiples muestras). el empleo de sondas de adn especficas para histoplasma promete ser ms sensible que el cultivo en muchas de esas situaciones 645 . la frecuencia de resultados positivos de las extensiones y de los cultivos en los pacientes que tienen histoplasmosis diseminada vara con la gravedad de la enfermedad. en la forma aguda relativamente grave las extensiones de sangre y de mdula sea teidas de forma correcta son diagnsticas con frecuencia. los resultados de los cultivos suelen ser an ms tiles, y se deben tomar muestras de sangre, mdula sea, hgado e incluso orina para esas pruebas cuando se sospecha una enfermedad diseminada.aunque es til en los estudios epidemiolgicos, la prueba cutnea tiene una importancia escasa o nula en el diagnstico de pacientes individuales, puesto que el resultado positivo slo indica infeccin previa y no demuestra la presencia de enfermedad.se pueden emplear varios mtodos distintos para detectar anticuerpos sricos contra h. capsulatum. la mayor parte de los autores acepta que el uso de varias pruebas con antgenos tanto de micelios como de levaduras aumenta la exactitud diagnstica 646 . una elevacin del ttulo de cuatro veces en las determinaciones seriadas o un nico valor por encima de 1:32 es un dato convincente de infeccin reciente. en regiones geogrficas donde la prevalencia de positividad de la prueba cutnea es relativamente baja, algunos expertos aceptan que ttulos de 1:32 en la fase de levadura y de 1:8 para los micelios son muy indicativos de enfermedad activa 647 ; se ha considerado que los ttulos para levaduras de 1:8 y 1:16 proporcionan un diagnstico de presuncin. el valor de la prueba est dificultado por el retraso en la formacin de anticuerpos y por su falta de sensibilidad en los pacientes inmunodeprimidos 648 , as como en los que tienen enfermedad crnica o indolente 649 .la coccidioidomicosis est causada por el hongo dimrfico c. immitis 663, 664 . en su hbitat natural (el suelo) crece como un micelio de hifas tabicadas que producen numerosas artrosporas de 2 a 5 m. esas esporas son muy resistentes a la desecacin y poseen una gran virulencia. dentro de los tejidos los microorganismos aparecen como grandes esfrulas (la mayor parte de 20 a 40 m) con una cpsula gruesa y se reproducen mediante endosporulacin (es decir, el citoplasma de la esfrula experimenta escisin, en vez de gemacin, para producir esporas).dentro de ee.uu., la infeccin se encuentra sobre todo en california, especialmente en el valle del ro san joaqun. en las zonas donde el microorganismo es endmico la incidencia de infeccin es alta: aproximadamente el 25% de las personas recin llegadas presenta positividad de la prueba cutnea al cabo de 1 ao, y la cifra aumenta hasta el 50% a los 4 aos. se cree que la mayora de las infecciones que aparecen fuera de los territorios endmicos se relaciona con viajes a esas zonas 665 ; aunque la mayor parte de esos viajes ha sido reciente 666 , se han documentado casos de reactivacin muchos aos despus de la exposicin inicial. el riesgo de adquirir la infeccin es mayor en ambientes secos y con viento, que favore-cen la movilizacin de la tierra. aunque la coccidioidomicosis afecta habitualmente a diversos animales domsticos, no se cree que haya contagio de un animal a otro ni de un animal a un ser humano; tampoco es probable el contagio entre seres humanos.aproximadamente del 20% al 40% de los pacientes infectados presenta manifestaciones clnicas, y entre el 2% y el 3% tiene un cuadro de semanas o meses de duracin 667 ; se encuentran datos de enfermedad diseminada en menos del 0,1%. existen pruebas de que la enfermedad diseminada es ms frecuente en los filipinos y los afroamericanos que en los blancos, aunque se han cuestionado los datos epidemiolgicos que apoyan este concepto 668 . se ha documentado un mayor riesgo de infeccin en los nativos norteamericanos 669 , as como en ancianos, diabticos y fumadores 670 . los pacientes que tienen inmunodepresin por enfermedades como el sida o trasplantes de rganos tambin tienen una mayor susceptibilidad a la enfermedad, tanto pulmonar como diseminada 671, 672 .la reactividad cutnea a c. immitis es de larga duracin, pero acaba por desvanecerse con el paso del tiempo, lo que indica la posibilidad de una reinfeccin exgena en algunos habitantes de zonas endmicas. est bien documentada la reactivacin de la enfermedad quiescente en regiones no endmicas 669 , y se considera probable que algunos casos de enfermedad diseminada de comienzo tardo que se producen en zonas endmicas se deban a la prdida de inmunocompetencia en pacientes que experimentaron diseminacin asintomtica durante la infeccin primaria. puede aparecer tambin enfermedad aguda o crnica progresiva despus de un perodo de remisin posterior a la infeccin primaria, quizs como consecuencia del trastorno de las defensas del husped 673 . patogenia y caractersticas anatomopatolgicas. dentro del pulmn las artrosporas inhaladas se transforman en esporangios (esfrulas), que inducen con rapidez un exudado neutrfilo. aunque esta reaccin persiste con frecuencia, con el paso del tiempo se observa tambin inflamacin granulomatosa formada por granulomas y clulas gigantes multinucleadas aisladas que contienen esfrulas. la combinacin de inflamacin exudativa y granulomatosa se ve tambin en otras formas de coccidioidomicosis y es caracterstica de la enfermedad 674 . como cabra esperar, la aparicin de la reaccin granulomatosa puede ser deficiente en pacientes inmunodeprimidos 675 .en la mayora de los casos el foco neumnico sigue siendo relativamente pequeo y acaba por desaparecer hasta que slo queda una cicatriz diminuta. sin embargo, en algunos pacientes la enfermedad progresa hasta afectar a todo el lbulo o a todo el pulmn, con un patrn que recuerda al de la bronconeumona bacteriana confluente. en esos casos la necrosis puede ser extensa y asociarse a cavitacin. la bronquitis y la bronquiolitis ulceradas son con frecuencia prominentes, y pueden aparecer bronquiectasias en los pacientes que sobreviven. los ganglios linfticos hiliares y mediastnicos pueden estar aumentados de tamao y contener una cantidad sustancial de tejido necrtico y microorganismos; la erosin de la cpsula y la diseminacin del material infectado hacia estructuras adyacentes, como los bronquios y el mediastino, puede producir diseminacin de la enfermedad, de un modo similar a lo que se observa en la tuberculosis.la coccidioidomicosis puede adoptar varios patrones clinicopatolgicos que se suelen conocer como coccidioidomicosis primaria, primaria persistente, progresiva crnica y diseminada.como ya se ha dicho, la mayora de los pacientes que adquieren la infeccin por primera vez est asintomtica 667, 676 . cuando existen, los sntomas de la infeccin primaria suelen ser inespecficos y de tipo gripal. se observa un sndrome ms especfico, conocido como fiebre del valle, en el 5% al 20% de los pacientes que tienen enfermedad sintomtica. se puede encontrar en casos aislados o en forma de miniepidemias, y el cuadro incluye eritema nudoso o multiforme, artralgias y, a veces, eosinofilia. esta combinacin de anomalas se puede asociar tambin a sntomas de tipo gripal y debe indicar el diagnstico en una zona endmica.la manifestacin radiolgica ms frecuente son focos nicos o mltiples de consolidacin del espacio areo (figura 6-39) 677 . en ocasiones los focos evolucionan hacia la formacin de cavidades de paredes finas que pueden persistir o desaparecer espontneamente 678 . se producen derrames pleurales pequeos en aproximadamente el 20% de los casos 679 ; los derrames grandes son raros. se encuentra aumento del tamao de los ganglios linfticos en aproximadamente el 20% de los casos, rara vez sin afectacin parenquimatosa.la enfermedad primaria que persiste ms de seis semanas se conoce como coccidioidomicosis primaria persistente 668 . se puede asociar a neumona progresiva que afecta a porciones grandes de los pulmones, y en ocasiones se asocia a diseminacin miliar y muerte. con ms frecuencia se manifiesta como uno o varios ndulos histolgicamente similares a los tuberculomas 680 ; esos ndulos pueden persistir por tiempo indefinido y en ocasiones actan como focos de reactivacin. puede haber cavitacin dentro de una zona de neumona o por evacuacin del material necrtico presente dentro de un ndulo.desde el punto de vista radiogrfico, el ndulo tpico evoluciona a lo largo de aproximadamente 5 o 6 semanas como un foco de consolidacin que se hace ms pequeo, ms denso y mejor definido 679 . en ocasiones la ocupacin de la cavidad da lugar a opacidades nodulares 677 . los ndulos son en general solitarios, de 0,5 a 5 cm de dimetro y localizados en la periferia del pulmn 677 . en la mayora de los pacientes muestran atenuacin homognea en la tc; sin embargo, en algunos casos se observan zonas centrales de baja atenuacin como consecuencia de la necrosis, y en algunos casos se ven focos de calcificacin 681 . se ha descrito cavitacin en aproximadamente el 10% al 15% de los casos 681, 682 . las cavidades suelen ser nicas y se localizan en los lbulos superiores, y pueden tener paredes finas o gruesas (figura 6-40) 683 ; las de paredes finas muestran tendencia a cambiar de tamao, quizs como consecuencia de la aparicin de una comunicacin bronquiolar con un mecanismo valvular.la mayora de los pacientes con enfermedad nodular permanece asintomtica, incluso si hay cavitacin. de hecho, es posible que los ndulos no se descubran hasta meses o aos despus de abandonar el paciente una zona endmica. se detectan con ms frecuencia de modo casual y se estudian para descartar la posibilidad de una tumor maligno. la aspiracin transtorcica con aguja puede establecer el diagnstico porque muestra las esfrulas en muestras teidas con la tcnica de papanicolaou 684 . en contraste con la forma nodular de la enfermedad, la neumona coccidioidea persistente se acompaa frecuentemente de hemoptisis, fiebre, tos y expectoracin, sobre todo cuando existe cavitacin. se produce neumotrax y empiema en aproximadamente el 2% de los pacientes que tienen enfermedad cavitaria aguda, y esas alteraciones suelen precisar intervencin quirrgica.la coccidioidomicosis progresiva crnica es responsable de menos del 1% de los casos de enfermedad pulmonar coccidioi-coccidioidomicosis primaria. las imgenes del pulmn izquierdo en las radiografas posteroanterior (a) y lateral (b) muestran una consolidacin homognea de gran parte del segmento lingular del lbulo superior izquierdo. en las radiografas originales se poda identificar un broncograma areo dbil, que no se aprecia en la figura. el borde superior de la consolidacin est bien circunscrito y recuerda a una masa. 685 . algunos autores han descrito dos variedades, una fibronodular crnica y otra necrosante crnica, esta ltima asociada a cavitacin 676 . la enfermedad puede aparecer a continuacin de la coccidioidomicosis primaria o despus de un intervalo de tiempo variable durante el que la infeccin parece permanecer estable y no se acompaa de signos clnicos de actividad. el comienzo suele ser insidioso, con una evolucin prolongada de hasta 15 aos. aunque es posible la diseminacin, en general la enfermedad permanece limitada a los pulmones. las alteraciones radiogrficas recuerdan a las de la tuberculosis cavitaria crnica.la coccidioidomicosis diseminada es rara; puede aparecer como una complicacin de la enfermedad primaria o tras la reactivacin de la enfermedad latente en personas susceptibles. muestra un predominio considerable en varones y predileccin por los afroamericanos y los filipinos. su evolucin puede ser crnica e insidiosa o rpidamente mortal, y esta ltima forma se suele asociar a la enfermedad primaria. como era de esperar, los pacientes que tienen una inmunodeficiencia subyacente, en particular sida 686 , y los que estn recibiendo tratamiento inmunosupresor tienen un mayor riesgo.aunque la enfermedad diseminada puede afectar a cualquier rgano del cuerpo, aislado o en combinacin, las localizaciones principales son la piel, los huesos, las articulaciones y el sistema nervioso central, en particular las meninges. la afectacin pulmonar, que habitualmente es extensa, es la regla en los pacientes que fallecen 674 . la diseminacin hematgena que produce enfermedad miliar puede aparecer en fases tempranas de la evolucin o en un estadio avanzado de la enfermedad crnica, en el contexto de una diseminacin generalizada 687 . esta ltima situacin se puede complicar con sdra.la concentracin de hemoglobina est reducida en muchos pacientes que tienen enfermedad diseminada. el recuento leucoctico es normal o est algo elevado en la mayora de los pacientes, frecuentemente con eosinofilia significativa 688 , sobre todo en los casos que tienen eritema nudoso.las preparaciones en fresco de esputo o de exudados procedentes de lesiones cutneas o de otras zonas, tratadas con hidrxido de potasio al 10%, pueden revelar esfrulas que contienen las endosporas tpicas. se ha demostrado que cuando no se dispone de esputo o su examen no proporciona el diagnstico la fibrobroncoscopia es til para la obtencin de material 689 . no es difcil cultivar el microorganismo; sin embargo, es importante emplear mtodos apropiados para evitar el contagio de la enfermedad en el laboratorio, porque hay un riesgo significativo.las pruebas serolgicas con precipitacin en tubo (pt), aglutinacin de partculas de ltex (apl) e inmunodifusin (utilizando coccidioidina calentada, idtp) son muy tiles para el cribado y se hacen positivas de 1 a 3 semanas despus de la exposicin. tambin se ha utilizado la prueba de elisa, con resultados comparables a los de los otros mtodos 690 . la prueba de apl es ms sensible pero menos especfica que la de pt; sin embargo, ninguna de las dos proporciona resultados positivos en el lquido cefalorraqudeo de los pacientes que tienen meningitis 669 . la reaccin de fijacin del complemento se hace positiva en el lquido cefalorraqudeo de la mayora de los pacientes con meningitis y establece el diagnstico de diseminacin; se observa seropositividad en el 50% de los pacientes al cabo de 4 semanas y en el 90% a las 8 semanas. los ttulos sricos de fijacin del complemento por encima de 1:16 a 1:32 son poco habituales en la coccidioidomicosis primaria no complicada e indican un elevado riesgo de enfermedad primaria progresiva o diseminada 691 .la prueba cutnea se puede realizar con esferulina o coccidioidina, y la primera es ms sensible 692 . en la forma no diseminada relativamente benigna la prueba cutnea es positiva en prcticamente todos los pacientes a las tres semanas del comienzo de la infeccin. se puede hacer de nuevo negativa a los dos aos, aunque tambin puede permanecer positiva durante hasta diez aos. los pacientes que tienen enfermedad diseminada estn con frecuencia anrgicos, con reaccin negativa a la prueba cutnea. la combinacin de prueba cutnea negativa y ttulo de fijacin del complemento por encima de 1:16 es prcticamente patognomnica de enfermedad diseminada.la blastomicosis norteamericana est causada por el hongo dimrfico b. dermatitidis, que aparece como un micelio en los cultivos y probablemente tambin en su hbitat natural, y como una levadura a 37 c. en los tejidos las levaduras tienen forma redonda u oval, miden aproximadamente 10 a 15 m de dimetro y poseen paredes gruesas; se reproducen mediante yemas de base amplia.la enfermedad es ms frecuente en el hemisferio occidental, sobre todo en el centro y el sudeste de ee.uu. 693 y en el sur-centro de canad 694 . el microorganismo puede provocar miniepidemias a partir de fuentes puntuales o infeccin endmica espordica 695 .la falta de sensibilidad y especificidad de las pruebas cutneas y la serologa para detectar la infeccin por b. dermatitidis, y la imposibilidad de descubrir una fuente puntual de los brotes epidmicos, han impedido calcular con exactitud la incidencia de la enfermedad; sin embargo, estudios in vitro con linfocitos han demostrado que la probabilidad de representar una infeccin subclnica es significativamente mayor que la de enfermedad sintomtica 696 . los varones de mediana edad se afectan con ms frecuencia, y el predominio en varones tiene una relacin entre 5:1 y 15:1 695 . se cree que la infeccin est producida la mayora de las veces por inhalacin de esporas transportadas en el aire. aunque no se conoce con exactitud el hbitat natural del microorganismo, las comunicaciones de casos individuales y de grupos de casos indican la relacin de muchas infecciones con zonas boscosas, que contienen madera y materia vegetal en descomposicin como origen de muchas infecciones 697 . algunos casos parecen estar causados por reactivacin endgena 698 .el aspecto macroscpico de la blastomicosis aguda suele corresponder a una bronconeumona. como en la coccidioidomicosis, muchas veces coexisten formas de inflamacin exudativa y granulomatosa. la proporcin relativa de ambos componentes es muy variable, tanto en los pacientes individuales como en localizaciones distintas del mismo paciente 699 . no son raros los focos de bronquitis ulcerada 700 .el signo radiogrfico ms frecuente es la consolidacin aguda del espacio areo 701, 702 . la consolidacin puede ser focal o confluente y subsegmentaria, segmentaria o no segmentaria (figura 6-41). la siguiente alteracin ms frecuente es la presencia de masas nicas o mltiples 703 . se produce cavitacin en el 15% al 20% de los casos 701 . el aumento del tamao de los ganglios hiliares y mediastnicos es poco frecuente, incluso en la tc 704 . se han identificado derrames pleurales en las radiografas de trax del 10% al 15% de los casos, y prcticamente siempre se asocian a enfermedad parenquimatosa. la infeccin hiperaguda se suele acompaar de un patrn radiogrfico de diseminacin miliar 705 .aunque la infeccin pulmonar puede cursar con slo sntomas gripales, se manifiesta ms frecuentemente con sntomas de neumona aguda, como comienzo brusco de fiebre, escalofro, tos productiva y dolor torcico pleurtico 697 . las artralgias y las mialgias no son infrecuentes, y a veces se encuentra eritema nudoso. en algunos pacientes se auscultan estertores y roncus, pero rara vez se encuentran signos de consolidacin parenquimatosa. la enfermedad pulmonar puede progresar con rapidez y complicarse con diseminacin miliar y/o sdra 706 . una variedad ms indolente, que recuerda a la tuberculosis, se produce en ocasiones despus de la infeccin pulmonar inicial y puede constituir la primera manifestacin de la enfermedad 707 . esta variedad puede permanecer confi-nada a los pulmones, puede extenderse localmente en el trax o puede diseminarse a otros lugares. la diseminacin afecta con ms frecuencia a la piel, al hueso y al tracto genitourinario; el reconocimiento de la afectacin de esos rganos puede proporcionar el primer indicio del diagnstico 708 . se desarrollan lesiones seas en aproximadamente el 25% de los casos espordicos 693 . el recuento leucoctico es normal o slo est moderadamente elevado en la mayora de los pacientes, aunque puede aumentar por encima de 30.000/mm 3 cuando la enfermedad es extensa 709 .la identificacin del microorganismo en las extensiones y/o en los cultivos es la base del diagnstico en la mayora de los pacientes. los grmenes se pueden detectar mediante examen microscpico del esputo o de las secreciones que se obtienen de lesiones drmicas, subcutneas o de otros tejidos, tras su digestin en hidrxido de potasio al 10% o con la tincin de papanicolaou. probablemente debido a la frecuencia de afectacin de las vas areas, b. dermatitidis se identifica con una frecuencia particularmente elevada en las muestras de esputo. el crecimiento en medios de cultivo tarda entre una y varias semanas 710 . las pruebas cutneas no tienen valor prctico para el diagnstico 711 . las pruebas serolgicas estndar proporcionan sensibilidad baja (variable entre aproximadamente el 40% y el 85%), producen reaccin cruzada con otros hongos (en particular con h. capsulatum) y no estn disponibles con facilidad, factores que limitan mucho su utilidad 695 .la mortalidad de los pacientes declarados al wisconsin department of health entre 1986 y 1995 fue del 4,3% (29 de 670 pacientes) 712 . como caba esperar, la enfermedad aumenta de gravedad en los pacientes inmunodeprimidos; en una serie de estos pacientes la tasa de mortalidad fue de aproximadamente el 30% 713 .la blastomicosis sudamericana (paracoccidioidomicosis) est causada por el hongo dimrfico p. basiliensis. en los tejidos el microorganismo se presenta predominantemente como levaduras de forma redonda u oval y dimetro muy variable, entre 2 m para las yemas separadas recientemente y 60 m para las clulas madre maduras. de forma caracterstica la reproduccin tiene lugar mediante mltiples yemas de cuello estrecho que aparecen alrededor del permetro de la clula madre (disposicin en timn de barco).la enfermedad se encuentra principalmente en latinoamrica y se han descrito casos desde mxico hasta argentina 714 . la enfermedad clnica es bastante ms frecuente en varones y se encuentra con ms frecuencia entre los 25 y los 45 aos de edad. se cree que el hbitat natural del microorganismo es el suelo, y se afectan en particular los agricultores, los obreros manuales y otros trabajadores que tienen ocupaciones rurales. sin embargo, se han descrito muchos casos en habitantes de ciudades y en profesionales que no tienen contacto directo y continuado con el suelo. es probable que la mayora de las infecciones se deba a inhalacin, con neumona primaria y diseminacin sistmica secundaria. no se ha documentado la transmisin de animal a ser humano ni entre seres humanos.desde el punto de vista anatomopatolgico, la enfermedad pulmonar puede adoptar diversas formas 715, 716 , como: 1) mltiples ndulos lisos o lobulados que pueden confluir y recordar a la tuberculosis posprimaria, con o sin cavitacin; 2) ndulos solitarios (paracoccidioidomas); 3) focos de necrosis e inflamacin similares a la neumona bacteriana aguda, habitualmente en pacientes tratados con corticoides u otros frmacos inmunosupresores, y 4) ndulos miliares que representan una diseminacin hematgena. los signos histolgicos son una combinacin de inflamacin granulomatosa y exudativa. blastomicosis norteamericana. las radiografas de trax posteroanterior (a) y lateral (b) muestran una gran opacidad mal definida de densidad homognea en la lngula; la consolidacin no es segmentaria y no muestra signos de broncograma areo. la radiografa posteroanterior revela tambin destruccin de la porcin anterior de la quinta costilla derecha (flecha). se cultiv blastomyces dermatitidis en una muestra de esputo de 24 horas y en el lquido que se aspir de la tumefaccin que recubra la quinta costilla derecha.en la forma primaria de la enfermedad se puede observar una opacidad transitoria del espacio areo en las zonas medias del pulmn. los paracoccidioidomas (nicos o mltiples, slidos o cavitados) son la manifestacin principal en otros casos 717 . la enfermedad pulmonar progresiva puede recordar a la tuberculosis; sin embargo, los lbulos inferiores se afectan con ms frecuencia que los superiores y las radiografas muestran cavitacin en una proporcin menor de casos (figura 6-42) 718 . es posible el aumento del tamao de los ganglios linfticos hiliares, solo o asociado a cualquier forma de enfermedad pulmonar. las manifestaciones de la enfermedad crnica en la tcar incluyen engrosamiento de los tabiques interlobulillares, bronquiectasias por traccin, mltiples ndulos de tamao variable (entre 1 y 25 mm) que a veces estn cavitados, engrosamiento intersticial peribroncovascular, opacidades centrolobulillares y lneas intralobulillares (vase figura 6-42) 719 . estas alteraciones suelen ser bilaterales y simtricas, y afectan a todas las zonas pulmonares.los resultados de los estudios sobre la reaccin a la prueba cutnea indican que la infeccin es con frecuencia asintomtica o se asocia a molestias leves e inespecficas 714 . estas infecciones suelen desaparecer; con poca frecuencia se siguen de neumona progresiva y diseminacin. al parecer, la mayora de los cuadros clnicamente importantes guarda relacin con la reactivacin de un foco de infeccin primaria 714 , y tpicamente cursa con diseminacin hacia la piel y la mucosa oronasal, y afectacin pulmonar significativa 702 .en la gran mayora de los casos la criptococosis est causada por c. neoformans, un hongo unimorfo que adopta la forma de levadura tanto en su hbitat natural como en los animales y los seres humanos. aunque son muy pleomorfos, los microorganismos suelen ser redondos u ovales y miden 5 a 10 m de dimetro en los tejidos. la mayor parte de las cepas posee una cpsula bien definida que se ve como un halo pericelular en las preparaciones teidas con tinta china y con las tinciones estndar para mucina tisular.el microorganismo se encuentra en diversos hbitats naturales, uno de los ms importantes de los cuales son los excrementos secos de paloma. aunque se cree que muchos casos de enfermedad se contagian por inhalacin de microorganismos procedentes de esa fuente, el antecedente de exposicin repetida a las palomas se asocia pocas veces a aumento del riesgo de enfermedad criptoccica. no existen pruebas de transmisin de animales a seres humanos ni entre seres humanos. aunque la criptococosis puede aparecer en huspedes por lo dems normales, es mucho ms frecuente en pacientes que tienen una enfermedad pulmonar crnica, sida, enfermedades linfoproliferativas o autoinmunitarias y pacientes tratados con quimioterapia o corticoides 721 .la afectacin pulmonar puede adoptar varios patrones anatomopatolgicos 722 , como: 1) ndulos solitarios o mltiples relativamente bien definidos; 2) zonas mal definidas de consolidacin parenquimatosa con aspecto mucoide que recuerdan al carcinoma bronquioloalveolar secretor de mucina o a la neumona neumoccica, como consecuencia del gran nmero de microorganismos encapsulados; 3) ndulos miliares, y 4) proliferacin predominantemente intersticial de los microorganismos acompaada de reaccin celular mnima (sobre todo en pacientes que tienen sida 723 ). como en el caso de otras infecciones micticas, la reaccin inflamatoria frente a los criptococos es variable y se pueden encontrar respuestas exudativas o granulomatosas.las manifestaciones radiolgicas ms frecuentes de la infeccin pulmonar son ndulos nicos o mltiples y zonas de consolidacin 724, 725 . los ndulos suelen tener una localizacin subpleural y miden entre 0,5 y 4 cm de dimetro 726, 727 . las zonas de consolidacin pueden ser segmentarias, no segmentarias, parcheadas o con aspecto de masa (figura 6-43). la cavitacin es infrecuente en pacientes por lo dems sanos, pero se encuentra con frecuencia en pacientes inmunodeprimidos, sobre todo en los que tienen sida 727 . estos ltimos pacientes tienen tambin una mayor incidencia de enfermedad diseminada. esta enfermedad se puede manifestar con un patrn miliar o difuso de opacidades mal definidas 726, 728 . se ha descrito aumento del tamao de los ganglios linfticos hiliares y mediastnicos en aproximadamente el 40% de los pacientes con sida y del 10% al 25% de los que no tienen sida 725, 729 . el derrame pleural es infrecuente y no suele indicar diseminacin del microorganismo 729 .blastomicosis sudamericana. varn de 52 aos con fiebre y cefalea intensa pero sin sntomas respiratorios. la tc demostr granulomas intracerebrales. al ingreso la radiografa posteroanterior de trax (a) mostraba numerosos ndulos bilaterales de 0,5 a 2 cm de dimetro, as como adenopatas hiliares derechas y paratraqueales. la tc (b) revela que algunos ndulos estn cavitados. la biopsia por aspiracin con aguja fina de uno de los ndulos demostr paracoccidioides brasiliensis. (por cortesa del dr. arthur soores souza jr, instituto de radiodiagnostico rio preto, so paulo, brazil.) en pacientes sanos la enfermedad se limita generalmente a los pulmones. la infeccin inicial no suele provocar sntomas, es autolimitada y probablemente se detecta con poca frecuencia 730, 731 . cuando aparecen sntomas, son inespecficos. en ocasiones se encuentra insuficiencia respiratoria aguda con necesidad de ventilacin mecnica 732 . la diseminacin afecta al sistema nervioso central (donde causa habitualmente una meningitis de grado bajo, a veces con radiografa de trax normal), los tejidos cutneos y mucocutneos, los huesos y, con menos frecuencia, las vsceras. esta diseminacin es ms frecuente en pacientes inmunodeprimidos, y aparece semanas o meses despus del comienzo de la neumona; pocos pacientes sobreviven sin tratamiento 733 .se puede establecer un diagnstico de presuncin cuando se identifica c. neoformans en el esputo o en el lquido de lavado bronquial junto con los signos radiolgicos de la enfermedad. el diagnstico positivo se obtiene mediante tincin y cultivo apropiados del material que se obtiene mediante biopsia transbronquial, aspiracin transtorcica con aguja o biopsia pulmonar abierta, o por la deteccin del antgeno criptoccico en suero, lquido pleural o lquido de lavado broncoalveolar, en el contexto de un cuadro clnico compatible 731 . las pruebas cutneas no son muy tiles debido a la reactividad cruzada con otros hongos.p. jiroveci (p. carinii) es un microorganismo ubicuo que inicialmente se consideraba un protozoo, pero que ahora se clasifica entre los hongos 734 . in vivo el microorganismo puede adoptar dos formas 735, 736 : 1) quistes de paredes gruesas con forma redonda o semilunar que miden de 3 a 6 m de dimetro y 2) trofozotos extraqusticos que miden entre 1 y 5 m, son pleomorfos y muchas veces muestran proyecciones superficiales similares a seudpodos. se ha propuesto que el ciclo vital del microorganismo en el pulmn comienza con los trofozotos; los trofozotos crecen fuera de las clulas, maduran y se enquistan (figura 6-44). los quistes individuales experimentan despus maduracin mediante el desarrollo de esporozotos intraqusticos que se liberan al romperse el quiste y se transforman en trofozotos. tambin se ha indicado la posibilidad de que los trofozotos se puedan reproducir mediante fisin binaria 735 .aunque la infeccin por pneumocystis es frecuente en los seres humanos (a juzgar por la presencia de anticuerpos contra el microorganismo en una proporcin alta de personas sanas a una edad temprana 737 ), produce neumona clnicamente significativa casi exclusivamente en pacientes con enfermedades subyacentes, la ms importante de las cuales es el sida (vase pgina 428); otros pacientes que tienen riesgo incluyen los que han recibido trasplantes de pneumocystis jiroveci (carinii): ciclo reproductivo propuesto. la representacin esquemtica de un alvolo ilustra los posibles mecanismos del desarrollo de los quistes y la reproduccin del microorganismo. 738 , los que tienen neoplasias malignas linforreticulares u otras formas de tumor maligno (en general con el consiguiente tratamiento citotxico) 739 , vasculitis sistmicas o trastornos del tejido conjuntivo (habitualmente con administracin de corticoides y frmacos citotxicos) 740 , inmunodeficiencias congnitas y, rara vez, neoplasias secretoras de hormona adrenocortictropa 741 . pueden aparecer por primera vez sntomas o una alteracin radiogrfica en pacientes en los que se reduce el tratamiento con corticoides mientras se mantienen otros frmacos inmunosupresores 742 .no se ha demostrado de modo concluyente la forma de transmisin del microorganismo; sin embargo, dada su presencia casi invariable dentro de los pulmones, se supone que el contagio se produce por inhalacin. los resultados de algunos estudios serolgicos y moleculares 743, 744 , as como la documentacin del agrupamiento ocasional de casos de npc 745 , han indicado que la enfermedad se puede contagiar directamente por un paciente enfermo. sin embargo, la mayora de los investigadores no ha encontrado pruebas de esa diseminacin 746, 747 , y en general se cree que la mayor parte de los casos de enfermedad clnica se debe a reactivacin de una infeccin asintomtica (latente) adquirida tiempo antes 748 .no se conocen bien los factores que participan en la transformacin desde el estado de simbiosis hasta el de enfermedad, ni los mecanismos mediante los que p. jiroveci produce lesin tisular y enfermedad clnica 749 . est clara la importancia primordial de la alteracin de la funcin inmunitaria. adems de las observaciones clnicas que indican que hay una asociacin ntima entre inmunodepresin y neumona en seres humanos, estudios experimentales han demostrado la aparicin de la enfermedad en animales aislados que reciban corticoides 750 . este efecto guarda una relacin ms estrecha con la funcin de los linfocitos t, en particular los linfocitos cd4 +751 . se ha demostrado con ms claridad en los pacientes que tienen sida, en los que un recuento de cd4 + inferior a 200 clulas/l se asocia no rara vez a npc. adems, hay una relacin ms o menos lineal entre el recuento de cd4 + en sangre y el riesgo de contraer la enfermedad 752 .otras clulas inmunitarias e inflamatorias, en particular los linfocitos cd8 + y los macrfagos alveolares, tienen tambin una funcin importante en la patogenia 751 . por ejemplo, datos experimentales han demostrado el reclutamiento de linfocitos cd8 + hacia los pulmones durante la infeccin para potenciar la respuesta del husped 753 . los macrfagos alveolares se unen a los microorganismos y los fagocitan 754 , y a continuacin son estimulados para liberar diversas sustancias proinflamatorias, entre las que tiene una importancia particular el factor de necrosis tumoral  755 . los resultados de estudios en animales y las observaciones en pacientes con sida han indicado que los leucocitos polimorfonucleares pueden tener una funcin protectora 756 . tambin es posible que participe la inmunidad humoral; por ejemplo, en un estudio se encontr una deficiencia relativa de anticuerpos igg en los pacientes que tenan sida y npc en comparacin con los que tenan sida sin npc 757 .se han documentado alteraciones tanto cuantitativas como cualitativas del surfactante en el lquido del lba de pacientes con sida antes la aparicin de npc 758 , y se ha propuesto que estas alteraciones pueden relacionarse con la transformacin del microorganismo desde saprofito hasta patgeno. en la mayora de los casos de enfermedad activa los microorganismos se encuentran predominantemente dentro de los espacios areos alveolares; se identifican rara vez en el intersticio alveolar o en otras localizaciones del cuerpo, lo que indica que tienen una capacidad invasora limitada. los trofozotos no producen toxinas conocidas.en el caso tpico de npc el examen histolgico demuestra un infiltrado intersticial alveolar de linfocitos y clulas plasmticas, proliferacin de clulas epiteliales de tipo ii y un exudado eosinfilo finamente vacuolado (espumoso) en los espacios areos alveolares (vase figura en color [6] [7] [8] [9] [10] [11] [12] . este ltimo est formado por quistes y trofozotos, mezclados con material procedente del husped que incluye surfactante, fibrina y protenas de la matriz, como fibronectina y vitronectina 759 . el exudado es muy caracterstico de la infeccin por pneumocystis y se puede identificar en cortes tisulares y en muestras de lba teidas con el mtodo de papanicolaou 760 . en un nmero significativo de casos se encuentran otras alteraciones anatomopatolgicas, aadidas o solas 751 , como lesin alveolar difusa 762 , inflamacin granulomatosa (en la que los microorganismos pueden ser poco numerosos y difciles de identificar en el lquido del lba) 763 , invasin intersticial y/o vascular 764 , calcificacin parenquimatosa (habitualmente asociada a tratamiento previo) 765 y formacin de quistes 761 . todas esas manifestaciones anatomopatolgicas atpicas son ms frecuentes en los pacientes que tienen sida, sobre todo en los que han recibido tratamiento profilctico para la infeccin. la fibrosis es variable en cuanto a frecuencia y gravedad y puede tener una distribucin focal o difusa, dentro del intersticio alveolar y/o de los espacios areos 766 . puede ser evidente en el momento del diagnstico inicial, aunque en general es ms intensa en los pacientes ya tratados.los quistes se identifican la mayora de las veces mediante tincin con una tcnica argntica, con la que aparecen como estructuras tpicas redondas, ovales o semilunares (esta ltima forma corresponde a un quiste vaco que ha descargado sus esporozotos) (vase figura en color [6] [7] [8] [9] [10] [11] [12] . los esporozotos intraqusticos y los trofozotos libres se pueden identificar mediante las tinciones de giemsa y de wright. cuando estn presentes en el lquido del lba y forman grupos de 10 a 30 quistes, como sucede en los casos tpicos, permiten la identificacin fiable de p. jiroveci. sin embargo, si los quistes son poco numerosos quizs resulte difcil la diferenciacin de otros hongos, como h. capsulatum, c. neoformans y especies de candida 767, 768 .en la fase precoz de la npc se aprecia una opacidad granular o borrosa (aspecto en vidrio esmerilado), sobre todo en las zonas perihiliares (figura 6-45) 769 . en la enfermedad ms avanzada el patrn suele ser una consolidacin del espacio areo (aunque todava se puede apreciar un patrn granular o reticulogranular en la periferia de la zona consolidada) 68 . en las fases terminales los pulmones pueden experimentar consolidacin masiva hasta el punto de casi no contener aire; de hecho, en algunos pacientes el comienzo agudo y la afectacin difusa son caractersticos del sdra 770 . la neumona es en general bilateral y ms prominente en los lbulos inferiores; con menos frecuencia afecta de forma predominante o exclusiva a los lbulos superiores 771 .la manifestacin principal son a veces opacidades nodulares slidas o cavitadas, solitarias o mltiples 772, 773 . aunque se observan ms frecuentemente en pacientes con sida, se han descrito tambin en casos de linfoma 774 . los hallazgos adicionales infrecuentes incluyen derrame pleural 775 y adenopatas hiliares y mediastnicas, calcificadas o no calcificadas 776, 777 . una manifestacin radiogrfica ms frecuente, que se observa en pacientes con sida, son los quistes parenquimatosos (vase pgina 431).la manifestacin predominante de la npc en la tc son zonas bilaterales de atenuacin similar al vidrio esmerilado, que pueden ser difusas o mostrar un patrn en mosaico peculiar que se caracteriza por zonas de pulmn normal entremezcladas entre los focos con atenuacin en vidrio esmerilado (figura 6-46) 70 . el engrosamiento asociado de los tabiques interlobulillares y la consolidacin parenquimatosa se ven en aproximadamente el 20% al 50% de los casos 778 . con el paso del tiempo las zonas de atenuacin en vidrio esmerilado progresan hasta la consolidacin; finalmente se pueden ver alteraciones intersticiales, como engrosamiento de los tabiques interlobulillares y lneas irregulares de atenuacin, que pueden ser predominantes 68 . a veces hay un patrn de fibrosis difusa o de bronquiectasias o bronquiolectasias perifricas 68, 779 .la evolucin clnica de la npc presenta diferencias significativas en los pacientes con y sin sida. en los segundos la duracin de los sntomas prodrmicos tiende a ser corta y el cuadro es relativamente agudo, con fiebre e hipoxemia 780, 781 . por el contrario, los pacientes que tienen sida experimentan muchas veces un prdromo de fiebre, malestar general, tos y disnea durante varias semanas antes de que se reconozca la infeccin. la disnea es el sntoma ms frecuente; muchos pacientes presentan tambin tos seca y sensacin de tensin subesternal 781 . los signos fsicos suelen ser mnimos y pueden ser algunos estertores y sibilancias diseminados. en caso de infeccin grave se puede encontrar un perfil hemodinmico similar al de los pacientes con sepsis bacteriana 783 . en los pacientes que tienen sida el cuadro clnico se puede complicar con la presencia de otras enfermedades infecciosas o neoplsicas o, rara vez, con diseminacin generalizada. en este ltimo caso los signos y sntomas guardan relacin con los rganos o tejidos especficos que se afectan 784 . la aparicin sbita de disnea en un paciente con sida debe plantear la posibilidad de un neumotrax. tambin se puede encontrar neumomediastino 785 . en la mayora de los pacientes, el recuento leucoctico est ligera o moderadamente aumentado, con predominio de los leucocitos polimorfonucleares. sin embargo, es posible la leucopenia, que se asocia a un peor pronstico. se observa linfopenia en aproximadamente el 50% de los pacientes 786 . los pacientes inmunodeprimidos, como los receptores de trasplantes y los pacientes que tienen sida, suelen mostrar una inversin de la relacin entre los linfocitos t cooperadores y supresores.la lactato deshidrogenasa (ldh) srica suele estar elevada 787 . sin embargo, la utilidad diagnstica de ese dato es escasa puesto que la enzima aumenta tambin en los pacientes que tienen otras infecciones, en particular tuberculosis diseminada y diversas neumonas bacterianas 788 . de hecho, en el contexto de la npc es preferible considerar los cambios de la concentracin de ldh como un reflejo de la extensin de la afectacin radiogrfica y no como un indicador de infeccin por pneumocystis en s misma 789 . como corolario, se debe considerar la posibilidad de un diagnstico distinto a la npc en el paciente que tiene una concentracin normal de ldh y alteraciones radiogrficas significativas. muchos pacientes tambin tienen aumento de otras enzimas sricas, como aspartato aminotransferasa (ast), alanina aminotransferasa (alt) y fosfatasa alcalina 788 . los pacientes que tienen npc casi siempre tienen disminucin de la dlco 790 . el aumento significativo del gradiente alveoloarterial de oxgeno tambin es tpico, y la desaturacin con el ejercicio es un indicador sensible de la enfermedad 791 .las tcnicas diagnsticas para la npc se describen en el captulo 8 (vase pgina 432).en ee.uu. la tasa de supervivencia global a los 30 das de los pacientes que tienen sida y npc es de aproximadamente el 85% (vase pgina 432). hay datos de un peor pronstico en los pacientes que no tienen sida 792 ; en algunas series falleci hasta la tercera parte de esos pacientes 739 . el tratamiento profilctico en los pacientes con y sin sida ha reducido claramente la incidencia de neumona. la mayor parte de los pacientes que sobreviven a un solo episodio de npc muestra pocos signos de discapacidad clnica residual. cierto grado de obstruccin del flujo areo espiratorio y de disminucin de la capacidad de difusin del monxido de carbono son secuelas frecuentes a largo plazo 793 . en ocasiones la fibrosis residual es suficientemente intensa para manifestarse como enfermedad pulmonar restrictiva 794 .la candidiasis est causada por hongos del gnero candida, y candida albicans es el patgeno ms frecuente. sin embargo, otras especies participan con bastante frecuencia en la enfermedad de pacientes inmunodeprimidos, y parece que su incidencia est aumentando 795 . en los tejidos todas las especies aparecen como seudohifas y levaduras, estas ltimas de 2 a 4 m de dimetro.c. albicans se encuentra en el tracto digestivo y las regiones mucocutneas, y diversas especies distintas de c. albicans viven en la piel de personas sanas. su nmero es controlado de forma natural por las bacterias saprofitas. las situaciones en las que se altera la composicin de la flora normal suelen producir proliferacin de los hongos del gnero candida y aumento del riesgo de infeccin. estas situaciones se dan en los adultos que son tratados con antibiticos o con corticoides inhalados (estos ltimos tienden a causar proliferacin en las vas areas superiores). entre las dems enfermedades o situaciones que se relacionan con aumento del riesgo de colonizacin se incluyen diabetes mellitus, debilidad crnica, sondas urinarias y catteres intravenosos permanentes, inmunodeficiencias (p. ej., alteraciones congnitas del timo y sida) y estancia prolongada en el hospital 277, 796 . en estas situaciones no es raro que aparezca una candidiasis mucocutnea localizada.por fortuna, la afectacin diseminada y visceral, incluyendo la de los pulmones, es poco frecuente 731 . los procesos especficos que favorecen la aparicin de infeccin visceral incluyen neoplasias malignas (normalmente junto con quimioterapia inmunosupresora o granulocitopenia por leucemia aguda o linfoma) 797 , quemaduras extensas, ciruga abdominal mayor o ciruga a corazn abierto 798 , abuso de drogas intravenosas (con tendencia a la aparicin de endocarditis), trasplantes de rganos 799 , hiperalimentacin parenteral, catteres venosos centrales y tratamiento antibitico prolongado.la enfermedad pulmonar se puede manifestar como infeccin primaria (bronconeumona), que en muchos casos se adquiere probablemente por aspiracin de microorganismos desde la cavidad oral, o como enfermedad miliar transportada por la sangre, asociada con frecuencia a un foco primario en el tracto digestivo 800 . en ambos casos la respuesta inflamatoria celular se relaciona con la integridad de las defensas del husped, es escasa o nula en los pacientes que tienen granulocitopenia y en otros pacientes se manifiesta con un infiltrado polimorfonuclear de intensidad variable. rara vez se ven granulomas 801 .las manifestaciones radiogrficas ms frecuentes son zonas unilaterales o bilaterales de consolidacin segmentaria o no segmentaria (figura 6-47) 802 . con menos frecuencia se ve un patrn difuso, nodular o miliar 803 . el tamao de los ndulos puede oscilar entre pocos milmetros y hasta 3 cm de dimetro. se producen derrames pleurales en aproximadamente el 20% de los pacientes. los signos en la tcar incluyen un patrn bilateral predominantemente nodular y zonas bilaterales de atenuacin en vidrio esmerilado y consolidacin (vase figura 6-47) 46 .el diagnstico se debe considerar en pacientes que tienen signos radiogrficos de enfermedad pulmonar y crecimiento intenso y repetido de candida en los esputos sin que se observen otros patgenos. puesto que el microorganismo es un saprofito frecuente de la orofaringe, y en ocasiones del tracto respiratorio inferior, el diagnstico de certeza suele precisar su demostracin en los tejidos 804 .la aspergilosis es una enfermedad de distribucin mundial que est causada por hongos dimrficos del gnero aspergillus. aunque se han descrito ms de 300 especies, slo unas cuantas se relacionan con la enfermedad humana, y la ms importante es aspergillus fumigatus. otras especies de aspergillus que pueden ser patgenas para los seres humanos son a. niger, a. flavus y a. glaucus. en la fase micelial los microorganismos aparecen como hifas tabicadas bastante uniformes que se ramifican por dicotoma en un ngulo de 45(figura . suelen ser visibles en las muestras tisulares teidas con hematoxilina y eosina, pero se ven especialmente bien con las tinciones de cido perydico de schiff (pas) y de metenamina de grocott. sin embargo, la identificacin definida de un hongo particular como aspergillus suele precisar el cultivo y la confirmacin inmunohistoqumica o molecular, en particular si slo se dispone de una pequea cantidad de tejido o de lquido para el examen.los microorganismos del gnero aspergillus son ubicuos en el ambiente y se han encontrado en el suelo, el agua y diversos tipos de materia orgnica en descomposicin. se cree que la infeccin ocurre la mayora de las veces por inhalacin de conidias trasportadas con el aire desde un lugar contaminado. no es infrecuente que la colonizacin de la mucosa nasal preceda a la infeccin diseminada o pulmonar 805 . no hay datos de transmisin desde animales hasta seres humanos ni entre seres humanos. patogenia. la patogenia de los diversos tipos de infeccin por aspergillus es compleja y se conoce de modo incompleto. como era de esperar, la cantidad y la virulencia de los microorganismos inhalados y la adecuacin de la defensa del husped son los factores principales 806, 807 .aunque el gnero aspergillus produce diversas enzimas y toxinas 808 , no est claro el mecanismo preciso por el que esas sustancias participan en la produccin de enfermedad pulmonar. la inyeccin intravenosa de extractos miceliales de a. fumigatus y de a. flavus es mortal en varios animales y se puede producir hemorragia pulmonar en perros 809 . los microorganismos del gnero aspergillus producen varias proteasas 810, 811 ; aunque los resultados de estudios experimentales aportan datos de que algunas de ellas participan en la invasin tisular 812 , otras investigaciones indican que varias proteasas tienen una funcin escasa o nula 813 .la presencia de una defensa del husped intacta, que incluye la funcin de los macrfagos, los neutrfilos y los linfocitos t, tiene una clara importancia para limitar la proliferacin y la diseminacin de los microorganismos del gnero aspergillus 814, 815 . por ejemplo, los resultados de algunos experimentos indican que los macrfagos alveolares pueden prevenir la germinacin de las conidias mediante la fagocitosis y la muerte de esas formas del germen, y que la defensa contra la invasin depende de este mecanismo, por lo menos inicialmente 816 . las protenas a y d del surfactante pueden tener una funcin facilitadora importante en ese proceso de fagocitosis y muerte 817 . aspergillus produce varias sustancias, al parecer capaces de disminuir la eficacia de esas reacciones celulares. por ejemplo, hay datos de que las esporas de a. fumigatus segregan sustancias qumicas que inhiben la fagocitosis 818 , la produccin de derivados reactivos del oxgeno 819 y la aparicin de citotoxicidad por los linfocitos t 820 . gnero aspergillus. se muestra una masa en abanico de hifas tabicadas que se ramifican en un ngulo de aproximadamente 45(flecha). obsrvese que los hongos atraviesan la pared de la arteria pulmonar con una reaccin inflamatoria y necrosis mnimas. ( la enfermedad causada por el gnero aspergillus se puede manifestar de tres formas, cada una de ellas con caractersticas clnicas, radiolgicas y anatomopatolgicas distintivas: 1) infestacin saproftica, en la que el hongo coloniza vas areas, cavidades (aspergiloma) o tejido necrtico; 2) enfermedad alrgica que se caracteriza por entidades como la aspergilosis broncopulmonar alrgica y la alveolitis alrgica extrnseca, y 3) enfermedad invasora, una forma que en general tiene un comienzo agudo y es rpidamente mortal. aunque estas tres variedades no se excluyen mutuamente (p. ej., algunos casos de enfermedad saproftica o alrgica progresan a aspergilosis invasora), como regla general no se produce transformacin de unas en otras.la aspergilosis saproftica se caracteriza por el crecimiento del microorganismo sin invasin de tejido viable. dentro de los pulmones puede adoptar tres formas: 1) colonizacin del rbol traqueobronquial sin formacin de colonias macroscpicas visibles; 2) invasin de tejido necrtico, como un infarto o una neoplasia necrosada 821, 822 , y 3) aparicin de una colonia identificable a simple vista dentro de una cavidad previa o de un bronquio dilatado (aspergiloma). aunque esas tres formas no suelen tener consecuencias clnicas, la ltima de ellas se puede asociar a lesin tisular local y hemoptisis. adems, las colonias saprofticas pueden servir como fuente de enfermedad invasora si se produce compromiso de las defensas locales o sistmicas.la colonizacin de las vas areas suele ocurrir en pacientes que tienen una enfermedad pulmonar subyacente, como asma, bronquiectasias o bronquitis crnica. en esos casos el microorganismo se ha cultivado en el 2% al 3% de algunas series 823 . la colonizacin es particularmente frecuente en pacientes que tienen fibrosis qustica, en los que la positividad de los cultivos de esputo ha oscilado entre el 50% y el 55% de los casos 824 . los factores que facilitan la colonizacin de las vas areas por aspergillus no estn claros; sin embargo, hay datos experimentales de que los microorganismos producen varias sustancias que causan lesin tisular e inhibicin de la funcin ciliar 825 .se puede definir un micetoma (aspergiloma) como un conglomerado de hifas micticas mezcladas con moco y restos celulares dentro de una cavidad pulmonar o de un bronquio dilatado. los trastornos que se asocian con ms frecuencia a esta complicacin son la tuberculosis y la sarcoidosis 826, 827 . el denominador frecuente de esas y de otras enfermedades subyacentes menos frecuentes es la presencia de un espacio qustico agrandado en el que estn alterados los mecanismos de limpieza normales. aunque muchos de los hongos inhalados hasta el interior de estos espacios probablemente son destruidos por las clulas inflamatorias, el defecto de la limpieza favorece el establecimiento de colonias que ms adelante pueden aumentar de tamao y formar el conglomerado mictico macroscpico.desde el punto de vista anatomopatolgico, el aspergiloma est formado caractersticamente por una masa redonda u oval de color moreno, de material algo friable, localizada dentro de una cavidad que tiene una pared fibrosa de grosor variable (vase figura en color 6-13). en el examen histolgico la pared est formada por tejido maduro que contiene un nmero variable de clulas inflamatorias crnicas y vasos sanguneos. estos ltimos, que son principalmente ramas de las arterias y venas bronquiales, pueden ser abundantes y dar lugar a hemoptisis 828 . puede existir una reaccin inflamatoria aguda o, rara vez, granulomatosa en la zona de contacto de la pared con el aspergiloma; sin embargo, no se suele ver invasin del tejido por el microorganismo.ciertas especies de aspergillus, en particular a. niger, se asocian en ocasiones a depsito de cristales de oxalato clcico en los tejidos locales 829 . se ha propuesto que el cido oxlico procedente de esos cristales puede producir lesin tisular local y causar una hemorragia intracavitaria 830 .desde el punto de vista radiogrfico, el aspergiloma est formado por una masa slida ms o menos redonda y de densidad de tejidos blandos que est dentro de una cavidad esfrica u oval, habitualmente en un lbulo superior 831 . tpicamente, la masa est separada de la pared de la cavidad por un espacio areo de tamao y forma variables, el peculiar signo del menisco areo (figura 6-49). rada vez se observa un nivel lquido 832 . la mayora de las cavidades tiene paredes finas y est en contacto con una superficie pleural, que puede aparecer engrosada 833 . de hecho, se ha descrito que el engrosamiento de la pared de una caverna tuberculosa o de la pleura adyacente es un signo radiogrfico precoz de colonizacin que precede a la formacin del aspergiloma visible.el aspergiloma se suele mover cuando el paciente cambia de posicin 834 ; sin embargo, algunas de estas lesiones tienen forma irregular y se adaptan, por ejemplo, a una cavidad bronquiectsica alargada, en cuyo caso el cambio de postura del paciente puede no inducir ningn desplazamiento del aspergiloma.de modo similar a la radiografa, el signo ms caracterstico del aspergiloma en la tc es una masa intracavitaria oval o redonda de tejido blando que se mueve cuando el paciente pasa del decbito supino al prono (vase figura 6-49) 835 . son relativamente frecuentes las zonas de aumento de la atenuacin, que quizs representen depsitos de calcio 836 . la tc puede mostrar frondas micticas sobre la pared de la cavidad, que se cruzan entre s y forman una red similar a una esponja, antes de aparecer el aspergiloma maduro 836 .aunque la alteracin se puede descubrir de forma casual, son frecuentes la tos y la expectoracin; se ha encontrado hemoptisis en el 50% al 95% de los casos 837 . la hemoptisis vara desde algunos hilos de sangre en el esputo hasta la hemorragia potencialmente mortal. existen datos de que la hemorragia grave puede ser ms frecuente en los pacientes que tienen sida 838 . la mayora de las veces el diagnstico se establece con facilidad por las caractersticas radiolgicas tpicas. en los pocos pacientes que precisan confirmacin, la aspiracin transtorcica con aguja o el lavado bronquial del lbulo afecto suelen proporcionar material suficiente para la identificacin mediante cultivo o citologa. el diagnstico es apoyado por la positividad de la prueba de precipitinas contra el antgeno mictico 839 o por un aumento de la concentracin de igg especfica contra aspergillus 840 .el pronstico es bueno en general. las lesiones experimentan resolucin espontnea en el 5% al 10% de los casos y algunas desaparecen cuando se produce una infeccin bacteriana dentro de la cavidad 839 . a pesar de todo, como ya se ha dicho, se pueden producir hemoptisis masivas, a veces suficientes para provocar la muerte. rara vez el hongo se extiende a travs de la pared de la cavidad hacia el tejido adyacente 842 , donde puede causar neumona o derrame pleural.las reacciones de hipersensibilidad a aspergillus pueden adoptar tres formas: 1) alveolitis alrgica extrnseca, probablemente como consecuencia de la hipersensibilidad a las conidias inhaladas y que se suele encontrar en un contexto laboral 843 ; 2) sndrome similar al de lffler 844 , y 3) aspergilosis broncopulmonar alrgica (abpa). la abpa es con mucho la forma ms frecuente y a ella se dedicar el resto de esta seccin. se caracteriza por formacin de tapones mucosos y bronquiectasias de las vas areas proximales, y se suele encontrar en pacientes que tienen antecedentes de asma. tambin es frecuente en pacientes que tienen fibrosis qustica 845 .no est clara su patogenia. el hongo es capaz de proliferar en el moco de la luz de las vas areas, lo que en teora permite la produccin de un suministro continuo de antgenos que pueden ocasionar una inflamacin crnica de las paredes de las vas areas y la aparicin de anticuerpos sanguneos, hipersensibilidad cutnea y eosinofilia tisular y sangunea. sin embargo, sigue siendo un misterio la razn de que el proceso aparezca en algunos pacientes y no en otros. existen datos experimentales de que las esporas de a. fumigatus tienen una mayor capacidad de adherirse a las clulas epiteliales activadas y a los componentes de la membrana basal, una propiedad que podra guardar relacin con la colonizacin de las vas areas de los pacientes que tienen asma, en los que no son infrecuentes esas alteraciones de la mucosa 846 . en general no han tenido xito los intentos de correlacionar las crisis de abpa con la exposicin intensa a esporas 847 . a pesar de todo, en general se acepta que los episodios de abpa son ms frecuentes durante los perodos de recuentos altos de esporas de aspergillus en la atmsfera, lo que suele ocurrir durante los meses de invierno 847 .desde el punto de vista anatomopatolgico, las vas areas segmentarias y subsegmentarias proximales aparecen tpicamente dilatadas y llenas de tapones de moco espeso que contienen numerosos eosinfilos 848 . las paredes de los bronquios adyacentes a los tapones de moco muestran un infiltrado inflamatorio formado por eosinfilos, linfocitos y clulas plasmti-c a p  t u l o 6  enfermedades infecciosas de los pulmones 283aspergiloma con el signo del menisco areo y cambio de posicin. varn de 65 aos con tuberculosis previa que consulta por hemoptisis. la radiografa posteroanterior de trax (a) muestra cicatrizacin extensa en los lbulos superiores. un gran aspergiloma en el lbulo superior derecho presenta un menisco areo caracterstico que lo separa de la pared de la cavidad (flecha). la cavidad est rodeada por un engrosamiento pleural marcado. las imgenes de tcar con el paciente en decbito supino (b) y prono (c) muestran cambio de la posicin del aspergiloma (flechas) a pesar de su gran tamao. se observan tambin bronquiectasias y engrosamiento pleural marcado. se recuper aspergillus fumigatus en las muestras que se obtuvieron mediante broncoscopia. cas. se pueden identificar fragmentos de hifas micticas diseminados dentro del moco mediante tinciones especiales; rara vez se observa invasin tisular. aunque no suele haber granulomas en las paredes de las vas areas ectsicas, a veces se observa inflamacin granulomatosa necrosante centrada alrededor de los bronquiolos distales y de los bronquios pequeos (granulomatosis broncocntrica) 849 . aunque este patrn histolgico se puede encontrar en otras enfermedades (p. ej., infecciones como la tuberculosis y enfermedades inmunitarias como la enfermedad reumatoide 850, 851 ) , se asocia con ms frecuencia a la abpa.el patrn radiogrfico tpico son opacidades digitiformes homogneas, de la misma densidad, que tienen una distribucin exactamente peribronquial y que habitualmente afectan a los lbulos superiores y casi siempre son ms intensas en los bronquios segmentarios centrales que en las ramas perifricas (figura 6-50). se ha descrito que opacidades bifurcadas tienen aspecto de dedo enguantado, de y o v invertidas o de racimos de uvas. las opacidades tienden a ser transitorias, pero pueden persistir sin variacin durante semanas o incluso meses, y tambin pueden aumentar de tamao. quizs se aprecien bronquiectasias despus de la expectoracin de un tapn de moco; cuando estn muy dilatados, los bronquios afectos pueden contener un nivel de lquido o un aspergiloma 852 . como en las radiografas, los signos de abpa en la tc son principalmente impactacin mucoide y bronquiectasias que afectan de modo predominante a las vas areas segmentarias y subsegmentarias (figura 6-51) 853 . las bronquiectasias tienden a ser varicosas y a afectar a ms de dos lbulos (de modo predominante, los lbulos superiores). la tcar puede mostrar atenuacin alta en los tapones de moco, quizs relacionada con la presencia de calcio 854 . las alteraciones menos frecuentes incluyen atelectasias y zonas de consolidacin.muchos pacientes tienen diversas manifestaciones alrgicas adems de asma, como rinitis, conjuntivitis, eccema, urticaria y alergia a los alimentos 855 . los episodios agudos de abpa se asocian a veces a aumento de la tos, hemoptisis, fiebre, dolor pleurtico, sibilancias y disnea 856 ; sin embargo, con frecuencia hay poca o ninguna modificacin del estado clnico del paciente y no se reconoce el episodio a menos que se haga una radiografa de trax o se vigilen las concentraciones sricas de ige 857 .en un paciente concreto la seguridad del diagnstico depende del nmero y el tipo de alteraciones que se identifiquen, como (por orden aproximado de importancia diagnstica) manifestaciones en la radiografa o en la tc de impactacin mucosa o ectasia de los bronquios proximales, asma, eosinofilia de la sangre (>1.000/mm 3 ) y el esputo, concentracin srica elevada de ige (tanto total como especfica contra aspergillus) 858 , signos histolgicos caractersticos en las muestras obtenidas mediante broncoscopia 859 , positividad del cultivo de esputo para el gnero aspergillus y reaccin inmediata o tarda a la inyeccin intracutnea de antgenos de aspergillus.muchos pacientes en los que la enfermedad remite con el tratamiento con corticoides tienen empeoramientos ms adelante 860 . con los episodios recurrentes casi la mitad de los pacientes expectora tapones de moco 856 , y una proporcin algo menor produce esputo suficiente para indicar la aparicin de bronquiectasias 861 . a pesar de esas alteraciones el pronstico a largo plazo es bueno. se ha demostrado que la discapacidad funcional guarda relacin con la cronicidad de la enfermedad 861 . las aspergilosis invasora se caracteriza por extensin de los microorganismos hacia tejido viable, lo que en general se asocia a destruccin tisular. los principales factores de riesgo de esta complicacin incluyen neutropenia prolongada (>3 semanas) o disfuncin de los neutrfilos, tratamiento con corticoides (sobre todo a dosis altas y durante mucho tiempo), trasplante (en particular de pulmn y de mdula sea), neoplasias malignas hematolgicas (en especial leucemia), tratamiento citotxico y sida (el riesgo aumenta al disminuir el recuento de linfocitos cd4 + ) [862] [863] [864] . la enfermedad invasora tambin se encuentra a veces en pacientes que tienen epoc (incluyendo el enfisema, el asma y la fibrosis qustica) 865 o fibrosis pulmonar idioptica 865 ; el tratamiento con corticoides parece tener mucha importancia en estos casos. muchos pacientes que presentan aspergilosis invasora ya estaban hospitalizados, y se han identificado diversas fuentes nosocomiales del microorganismo, como catteres venosos centrales y el polvo que se crea durante la renovacin del hospital 866, 867 .la aspergilosis pulmonar invasora se manifiesta por cuatro formas clinicopatolgicas principales, que conviene considerar por separado: bronconeumona aguda, aspergilosis angioinvasora, traqueobronquitis aguda y aspergilosis necrosante crnica 868 . las dos primeras abarcan la mayora de los casos; otras formas infrecuentes de enfermedad invasora del trax incluyen bronquiolitis 869 , enfermedad miliar 870 , mediastinitis fibrosante 871 e infiltracin pleural con o sin derrame 872 . bronconeumona aguda. la bronconeumona aguda puede ser secundaria a la bronquitis, como veremos ms adelante, o con ms frecuencia aparece de manera anloga a la bronconeumona bacteriana (vase figura en color [6] [7] [8] [9] [10] [11] [12] [13] [14] . desde el punto de vista anatomopatolgico, la reaccin inflamatoria tiene una distribucin focal y se centra alrededor de las vas areas terminales 868 . se puede producir infiltracin vascular, aunque es un fenmeno poco frecuente. en ocasiones las lesiones se hacen confluentes (con lo que simulan una neumona aguda del espacio areo 873 ) o nodulares (con lo que recuerdan a un absceso o a la enfermedad angioinvasora 874 ).el patrn radiogrfico se caracteriza por consolidacin focal u homognea del espacio areo sin caractersticas especficas 875, 876 . los signos en la tc incluyen focos de consolidacin bilaterales, predominantemente peribronquiales (figura 6-52), u opacidades nodulares centrolobulillares mal definidas de 2 a 5 mm de dimetro 877 . desde el punto de vista clnico, el paciente tpico tiene fiebre continua que responde poco al tratamiento antibitico. los pacientes que tienen una enfermedad ms extensa tienen disnea y taquipnea. aspergilosis angioinvasora. esta forma de la enfermedad probablemente constituya la manifestacin ms frecuente de la aspergilosis pulmonar invasora. aunque se puede asociar a cualquiera de las dems formas, muchas veces constituye la nica alteracin. es tpica de los pacientes que tienen leucemia aguda.la aspergilosis angioinvasora se puede manifestar con dos patrones anatomopatolgicos 868, 878 : 1) un ndulo relativamente bien definido de centro plido o amarillento y reborde hemorrgico (vase figura en color 6-15) y 2) una zona hemorrgica peor definida con forma aproximadamente cuneiforme y base pleural que recuerda al infarto tromboemblico tpico. aunque es probable que este ltimo patrn refleje oclusin vascular y hemorragia del espacio areo, con o sin necrosis isqumica, el primero se debe posiblemente a las toxinas que se producen localmente y que difunden al parnquima pulmonar vecino 868 . el examen histolgico de la porcin central de los ndulos muestra parnquima pulmonar necrtico infiltrado por numerosas hifas micticas (vase figura en color 6-15); el parnquima adyacente presenta hemorragia intraalveolar. de modo caracterstico tambin hay infiltracin vascular extensa y oclusin aparente de las arterias pequeas y medianas por hifas micticas; puede haber o no trombos. los fragmentos de pulmn necrtico e infiltrado por el hongo (secuestros) se pueden separar del parnquima viable (vase figura en color 6-16), y el espacio entre ambos corresponde a las semi- lunas areas que se observan en el estudio radiolgico (vase ms adelante). se ha supuesto que esa separacin entre el pulmn necrtico y el parnquima viable guarda relacin con la licuacin enzimtica del tejido pulmonar en la unin entre el tejido invadido por el hongo y el tejido no invadido 879 .el patrn radiogrfico son ndulos o zonas nicas o mltiples de consolidacin homognea (figura 6-53) 803, 874 . la cavitacin es frecuente y a veces se manifiesta por una semiluna area (menisco areo) que rodea parcial o completamente una masa homognea central (vase figura 6-53) 880 . este signo del menisco areo puede aparecer entre 1 da y 3 semanas despus de detectar la alteracin radiogrfica inicial 881 . en ocasiones la consolidacin caracterstica se extiende hasta afectar a todo el lbulo, y desde el punto de vista radiogrfico simula una neumona bacteriana aguda 873 . la afectacin pleural es poco frecuente, pero puede producir derrame o neumotrax debido a una fstula broncopleural 882 .la tc puede mostrar un reborde de atenuacin en vidrio esmerilado alrededor de un ndulo de tejido blando (figura 6-54, signo del halo) 876, 883 como consecuencia de la hemorragia en el espacio areo que rodea el ndulo de tejido pulmonar necrtico 884, 885 . con el paso del tiempo esas lesiones pueden presentar meniscos areos o progresar hacia la cavitacin franca 883 . la obstruccin vascular puede producir una consolidacin homognea subsegmentaria, segmentaria o lobar como consecuencia de infarto o hemorragia 886 .los pacientes que tienen aspergilosis angioinvasora tienen habitualmente fiebre, disnea, tos seca y dolor torcico pleurtico en la evaluacin inicial; la combinacin de ese dolor con hipersensibilidad sinusal, epistaxis y exudado nasal proporciona un indicio til del diagnstico 887 . es posible que haya hemoptisis; cuando es masiva suele aparecer durante la formacin de la cavidad o el secuestro 881 , con frecuencia poco despus de la recuperacin de la neutropenia inducida por la quimioterapia. la trombosis local de una arteria pulmonar grande puede indicar una enfermedad tromboemblica aguda 888 . en ocasiones se afectan tambin los vasos mediastnicos y de la pared torcica, lo que puede producir sndrome de la vena cava superior o ausencia de pulsos perifricos por oclusin de la arteria subclavia 889 . la invasin de la pleura 882 o de la pared torcica 890 puede originar derrame, fstulas u osteomielitis, con los signos y sntomas correspondientes. se produce diseminacin extratorcica en el 25% al 50% de los pacientes; la afectacin del tracto digestivo (muchas veces asociada a hemorragia) y/o del sistema nervioso central representa con frecuencia un acontecimiento terminal 874 . traqueobronquitis aguda. la traqueobronquitis aguda es una manifestacin relativamente poco frecuente de la aspergilosis invasora en la que la infeccin se limita sobre todo a las vas areas principales, con extensin escasa o nula de los microorganismos hacia el parnquima pulmonar adyacente y hacia los vasos sanguneos 868 . aunque se puede encontrar en cualquier husped inmunodeprimido, la traqueobronquitis aguda muestra una predileccin particular por la zona de anastomosis de los trasplantes de pulmn o de corazn-pulmn 891 , lo que probablemente guarde relacin con el traumatismo y/o la interrupcin del suministro vascular bronquial a consecuencia de la ciruga.los signos anatomopatolgicos son ulceracin focal o difusa de la mucosa, muchas veces con seudomembranas o tapones oclusivos compuestos de moco, clulas epiteliales necrosadas e hifas 892 . las zonas focales de atelectasias que se relacionan con tapones de moco y micelios pueden ser el nico dato radiogrfico indicativo del diagnstico 835 . en ocasiones la tcar muestra engrosamiento de la pared traqueal o bronquial 877 .los pacientes pueden referir disnea, tos y/o hemoptisis; la expectoracin es en general escasa. puede haber sibilancias locales o generalizadas 893 . si son suficientemente extensos o si se localizan en una zona estratgica como la trquea, los tapones intraluminales de moco y micelios pueden producir insuficiencia respiratoria. en ocasiones los hongos se extienden a travs de la pared de la va area y producen fstulas 894 o hemorragia masiva brusca (como consecuencia de la infiltracin de una arteria pulmonar importante). aspergilosis necrosante crnica. esta forma, conocida a veces como aspergilosis semiinvasora, es un tipo poco frecuente y en general lentamente progresivo de aspergilosis que muchas veces afecta a pacientes que tienen una enfermedad pulmonar crnica subyacente 895 . aunque tambin puede haber procesos causantes de alteraciones de la defensa del husped (p. ej., diabetes, desnutricin, trastornos del tejido conjuntivo), tpicamente son relativamente leves en comparacin con los que se observan en las formas ms virulentas de enfermedad invasora. suele faltar el antecedente de tratamiento inmunosupresor intensivo; sin embargo, algunos pacientes han estado tomando dosis bajas de corticoides.en la mayora de los pacientes el examen histolgico muestra una combinacin de necrosis, fibrosis e inflamacin granulomatosa que recuerda a la tuberculosis fibrocaseosa crnica 896 ; de modo ocasional se observa invasin vascular por hifas micticas. una manifestacin menos frecuente es la presencia de una va area ectsica que contiene abundantes hifas micticas similares a un aspergiloma; sin embargo, en contraste con este lti-mo, la necrosis focal de la pared de las vas areas se asocia a la presencia de hifas invasoras.los hallazgos de las radiografas y la tc son zonas de consolidacin unilaterales y bilaterales, con o sin cavitacin, y ndulos nicos o mltiples 876, 897 . las zonas de consolidacin pueden tener una distribucin segmentaria o lobar 897, 898 . las alteraciones se limitan la mayora de las veces a los lbulos superiores, pero tambin pueden afectar a los inferiores de forma predominante o exclusiva 897, 898 . la cavitacin se puede asociar a un micetoma intracavitario. es frecuente el engrosamiento de la pleura adyacente, y la infeccin se puede extender hasta afectar a la pared torcica y el mediastino 835 .desde el punto de vista clnico, la enfermedad tiene una evolucin indolente, tpicamente de meses y a veces de aos 864, 896 . las manifestaciones habituales son tos, expectoracin (a veces hemoptoica), fiebre y prdida de peso. no es raro el c a p  t u l o 6  enfermedades infecciosas de los pulmones 287aspergilosis angioinvasora: progresin de las alteraciones radiogrficas. paciente de 23 aos con leucemia aguda que present fiebre y tos. la radiografa anteroposterior (ap) de trax (a) muestra una zona redondeada de consolidacin en el lbulo superior derecho que mostr una progresin considerable al cabo de una semana (b). al da siguiente la biopsia pulmonar abierta demostr hemorragia pulmonar, pero no identific ningn microorganismo. una radiografa de trax anteroposterior dos semanas ms tarde de la biopsia (c) y la tcar (d) demuestran una cavidad de bordes lisos en el lbulo superior derecho que contiene una masa de tejidos blandos. la biopsia que se repiti bajo gua de tc confirm el diagnstico de aspergilosis invasora, y la masa de tejidos blandos de la cavidad corresponda a pulmn necrtico (secuestro). aumento del recuento leucoctico. la extensin extratorcica de la infeccin es poco frecuente.el diagnstico de aspergilosis invasora se debe sospechar en cualquier paciente inmunodeprimido o que tenga una leucemia aguda o cualquier otra enfermedad linforreticular o hematolgica que se asocie a granulocitopenia en el que la fiebre no responda a los antibiticos de amplio espectro. aparte de comprobar la presencia de hifas en el tejido pulmonar mediante el examen histolgico, puede ser difcil confirmar el diagnstico. en muchos pacientes no se dispone de esputo para cultivo; incluso cuando se dispone de esputo, la sensibilidad del cultivo (que depende del nmero de muestras y de la naturaleza de la enfermedad subyacente) probablemente no sea superior al 50%-60% 899 . se han encontrado cifras similares para el cultivo de las secreciones del tracto respiratorio que se recogen mediante lba. para complicar el problema, la positividad del cultivo puede reflejar colonizacin simple. a pesar de todo, en el contexto clnico apropiado la positividad del cultivo de esputo o del lquido del lba es un mtodo diagnstico fiable 864, 899 . tambin pueden ser tiles los cultivos de seguimiento de las secreciones nasales debido a su elevado valor predictivo negativo para enfermedad pulmonar 900 . los hemocultivos rara vez son positivos 837 .la serologa no tiene utilidad para el diagnstico puesto que la infeccin puede progresar con rapidez antes de que aparezcan anticuerpos. adems, la respuesta humoral es con frecuencia deficiente en las situaciones clnicas que se asocian frecuentemente a la enfermedad invasora 864 . aunque no se encuentra disponible con facilidad, se ha descrito una prueba de anticuerpos monoclonales para detectar galactomanano (un antgeno que se relaciona con aspergillus), con una sensibilidad y especificidad superiores al 90% 901 . la utilidad de la rcp en las secreciones pulmonares se limita a un valor predictivo negativo alto; el valor predictivo positivo es relativamente bajo dada la imposibilidad de diferenciar entre enfermedad invasora y colonizacin de las vas areas 902, 903 .el pronstico de la aspergilosis invasora es generalmente desfavorable. la recuperacin guarda relacin con el diagnstico precoz, el tratamiento apropiado y el control de la inmunodepresin subyacente 904 .la cigomicosis (mucormicosis, ficomicosis) est causada por hongos de los rdenes entomophthorales y mucorales. en los tejidos los microorganismos aparecen tpicamente como hifas no tabicadas anchas (5 a 20 m) que se ramifican en un ngulo de 90. los microorganismos tienen una distribucin mundial y se encuentran con frecuencia en la materia orgnica en descomposicin. tambin son contaminantes de laboratorio frecuentes. en los cultivos y en la naturaleza las hifas producen grandes esporangios que liberan esporangiosporas; se cree que la inhalacin de las esporangiosporas es responsable de la mayora de los casos de infeccin humana. la enfermedad se puede dividir en diversas variedades clinicopatolgicas, de las que las principales son la rinocerebral, la pulmonar, la cutnea y subcutnea (que incluye la infeccin de la herida de esternotoma) y la digestiva. habitualmente en esas zonas slo se produce extensin local de la enfermedad; en ocasiones la diseminacin produce afectacin de mltiples rganos 905 . el gnero rhizopus es responsable de la forma rinocerebral de la enfermedad, mientras que diversas especies de otros gneros, aparte de rhizopus, causan enfermedad pulmonar 906 . la cigomicosis rinocerebral es una enfermedad fulminante que afecta a la nariz y a los senos paranasales y muchas veces se extiende a las rbitas y el crneo 907 ; en ocasiones afecta tambin a los pulmones, probablemente por aspiracin. la enfermedad pulmonar primaria es ms frecuente en pacientes sometidos a trasplantes o que tienen enfermedades linfoproliferativas o hematolgicas o diabetes 908, 909 . la incidencia de la enfermedad oscila entre el 1% y el 9% despus del trasplante de rganos slidos, en oposicin a slo el 1% despus del trasplante de mdula sea 731 .la reaccin inflamatoria frente al hongo es variable y vara desde una reaccin nula hasta un intenso infiltrado neutrfilo. a veces se encuentran clulas gigantes multinucleadas, pero son infrecuentes los granulomas bien formados 905 . las hifas micticas se ven con frecuencia dentro de las luces vasculares y se extienden a travs de las paredes de los vasos hacia el parnquima pulmonar adyacente; son frecuentes la necrosis y la hemorragia acompaantes.los signos radiogrficos ms frecuentes son consolidacin del espacio areo, focal o multifocal y unilateral o bilateral 910 . la consolidacin es con frecuencia segmentaria y homognea por la obstruccin vascular 911, 912 . la consolidacin puede ser de forma redonda y progresar con rapidez 913 (figura 6-55); en ocasiones se observa expansin lobar 910 . otras alteraciones frecuentes son ndulos solitarios o mltiples y pequeos o grandes 910 . se observa cavitacin de las zonas de consolidacin o de los ndulos en aproximadamente el 40% de los pacientes. como en la aspergilosis angioinvasora, la tc puede mostrar un halo de atenuacin en vidrio esmerilado alrededor del ndulo (signo del halo) 911 . seaspergilosis angioinvasora: signo del halo en la tc. la tcar del lbulo superior izquierdo demuestra un ndulo rodeado por un halo con atenuacin en vidrio esmerilado (flecha) (signo del halo). la paciente era una mujer de 72 aos con leucemia aguda. los pacientes suelen estar graves con fiebre, tos, dolor torcico, disnea y expectoracin hemoptoica 909 . se puede producir hemorragia pulmonar masiva, con frecuencia mortal, por erosin de una arteria pulmonar 914 . en la mayora de los casos esta complicacin est precedida por opacidades radiogrficas, muchas veces con cavitacin o meniscos areos. el diagnstico definitivo puede ser difcil y en general precisa la confirmacin histolgica. el pronstico es malo; en una revisin de la bibliografa publicada hasta 1999 slo sobrevivieron 38 (44%) de 87 pacientes con mucormicosis pulmonar 909 ; la mortalidad tambin es casi uniforme en la enfermedad diseminada 915 .la geotricosis es una enfermedad poco frecuente causada por g. candidum, un hongo levaduriforme ubicuo presente en el suelo, las aguas residuales, las excretas de animales y los derivados lcteos y otros productos alimentarios en fase de descomposicin. el hongo puede ser tambin un habitante normal del tracto digestivo humano y a veces se asla en el esputo de personas sanas 916 .g. candidum se encuentra la mayora de las veces como saprofito en el esputo de pacientes que tienen una enfermedad pulmonar crnica. se cree que la mayora de los casos de enfermedad con manifestaciones clnicas aparece despus de establecerse la colonizacin. se puede encontrar una forma bronquial y otra broncopulmonar. la primera se caracteriza por sntomas de bronquitis o de asma, a veces con eosinofilia 917 . el examen broncoscpico o anatomopatolgico macroscpico revela placas amarillas-blancas adheridas a la mucosa de las vas areas, similares a las placas de la candidiasis oral 916 ; no se produce invasin del parnquima subyacente. en contraste, la invasin tisular es caracterstica en la forma broncopulmonar y puede ser extensa. la mayora de los casos cursa con fiebre y hemoptisis, y se pueden detectar estertores, roncus y signos de consolidacin. tanto en la forma bronquial como en la broncopulmonar la expectoracin purulenta puede ser abundante y el esputo puede tener una consistencia gelatinosa 918 .los signos radiogrficos no son distintivos. la forma bronquial de la enfermedad se puede asociar a ausencia de alteraciones o a acentuacin de las marcas pulmonares basales 917, 919 . la forma broncopulmonar se puede manifestar con consolidacin parenquimatosa, predominantemente en los lbulos superiores y muchas veces asociada a cavidades de paredes finas 920 .puesto que la colonizacin es relativamente ms frecuente que la infeccin, el diagnstico definitivo requiere la confirmacin de la presencia del hongo en los tejidos y de una reaccin inflamatoria.la esporotricosis est causada por s. schenckii, un hongo dimrfico de distribucin mundial. se ha encontrado en el suelo, el musgo de la turba y la materia vegetal en descomposicin, las espinas y otros diversos materiales; rara vez se asla en secreciones del tracto respiratorio humano normal 921 . la enfermedad se adquiere la mayora de las veces por la inoculacin directa de microorganismos en la piel, por pinchazos con espinas, astillas y otros objetos contaminados. la enfermedad respiratoria suele ser primaria y probablemente se debe a la inhalacin de esporas transportadas por el aire; en ocasiones est causada por diseminacin desde una lesin cutnea. la mayora de los pacientes afectos no presenta datos de inmunodeficiencia, sobre todo cuando la infeccin se limita a la piel; sin embargo, los alcohlicos parecen ser susceptibles a la enfermedad tanto cutnea como pulmonar 922 , y es frecuente que la inmunidad mediada celular sea anormal en los pacientes que tienen una infeccin diseminada 923 . los signos anatomopatolgicos pulmonares suelen ser cavidades solitarias o mltiples de paredes finas. el aspecto histolgico tpico corresponde a zonas multifocales de necrosis rodeadas por un infiltrado granulomatoso inflamatorio que contiene numerosas clulas gigantes 922 ; los granulomas bien definidos tienden a ser escasos. suele existir fibrosis, que puede ser prominente. los microorganismos se pueden ver con las tinciones de pas y de grocott, pero su nmero suele ser pequeo y resulta difcil la identificacin segura; de hecho, el estudio inmunohistoqumico es mucho ms sensible que la histoqumica habitual 924 .desde el punto de vista radiogrfico, la enfermedad tambin recuerda mucho a la tuberculosis posprimaria y, en consecuencia, probablemente se diagnostique mal con frecuencia 922 . los signos incluyen masas nodulares aisladas que se pueden cavitar y dejar cavidades de paredes finas, y un patrn reticulonodular difuso 922 . en muchos casos se produce aumento del tamao de los ganglios linfticos hiliares, que pueden llegar a causar obstruccin bronquial 925 . puede haber adenopatas broncopulmonares y mediastnicas sin enfermedad parenquimatosa 926 . en algunos casos la enfermedad pulmonar se extiende a travs de la pleura hacia la pared torcica y crea un tracto sinusal 925 .la forma clnica ms frecuente de la enfermedad es la linfocutnea; la enfermedad extracutnea o diseminada es poco frecuente y la pulmonar es rara. la afectacin pulmonar puede cursar con malestar general, tos y fiebre. el diagnstico se debe considerar en cualquier paciente que tiene enfermedad cavitaria crnica en el que se sospecha tuberculosis y en el que no se encuentran grmenes acidorresistentes. esta enfermedad puede progresar con lentitud a lo largo de un perodo de varios aos 927 .el microorganismo se puede aislar con facilidad en el esputo y a veces se encuentra en las muestras de esputo que se envan para el examen citolgico 927 . sin embargo, como ya se ha dicho, puede ser un saprofito simple y su presencia en esas muestras no indica necesariamente enfermedad. la investigacin serolgica con la tcnica de anticuerpos fluorescentes directos parece ser muy especfica 928 .la adiaspiromicosis es una enfermedad de distribucin mundial que se ha descrito en muchos animales pero slo rara vez en seres humanos 929 . est causada por el hongo dimrfico chrysosporium parvum (emmonsia crescens). al parecer la infeccin se adquiere por inhalacin de esporas (aleuriosporas), que miden 3 a 4 m de dimetro y son producidas por los micelios presentes en el suelo 930 . la gravedad de esta infeccin es variable y oscila entre un granuloma solitario que se descubre como hallazgo casual en la autopsia 931 y una neumona bilateral extensa 932 .la seudoalesqueriasis (alesqueriasis, monosporidiosis, petrielidiosis) est causada por un hongo habitante ubicuo del suelo y las aguas residuales que en su forma perfecta se conoce como pseudallescheria boydii. en los tejidos aparece en forma de hifas tabicadas similares a las del gnero aspergillus, y no es posible diferenciar entre ambos tipos de hongos slo por la morfologa. muchos de los casos publicados se produjeron en granjeros y otras personas de zonas rurales 933 . en los pulmones el germen se encuentra la mayora de las veces como colonizador en pacientes que tienen enfermedades fibrosas crnicas, como tuberculosis, sarcoidosis y espondilitis anquilosante 934, 935 ; el tratamiento inmunosupresor y la administracin de corticoides tambin son factores de riesgo de colonizacin y de enfermedad clnica. se han documentado casos de enfermedad broncopulmonar alrgica y de bronconeumona similares a los que produce aspergillus 936, 937 . los pacientes pueden permanecer asintomticos o sufrir episodios repetidos de hemopti-sis; a veces los nicos sntomas y signos son los de la enfermedad subyacente. en los pacientes que tienen enfermedad alrgica se encuentran sntomas de asma asociados a eosinofilia perifrica y elevacin de la concentracin srica de ige 936 . es necesario cultivar el microorganismo para confirmar el diagnstico.la peniciliosis est causada por diversos grmenes del gnero penicillium, y el que produce con ms frecuencia casos de enfermedad humana es penicillium marneffei 938 . los microorganismos son habitantes ubicuos del suelo y de la materia orgnica en descomposicin. tambin son contaminantes frecuentes, trasportados por el aire, de los medios de cultivo, y se debe tener cuidado cuando se interpreta el resultado positivo de un cultivo como prueba definitiva de enfermedad. la mayora de los casos se ha descrito en personas que residen en el sudeste asitico 939, 940 . aunque la enfermedad se puede encontrar tambin en otros lugares, muchas veces hay antecedentes de residencia en una regin endmica o de viaje a la misma 938 . muchos pacientes afectos tienen una inmunodeficiencia subyacente; de hecho, en las zonas endmicas los microorganismos representan una causa frecuente de infeccin oportunista en los pacientes que tienen sida 939 .los signos anatomopatolgicos corresponden a una neumona necrosante, en ocasiones con clulas gigantes multinucleadas y/o formacin de granulomas verdaderos 938, 941 .las manifestaciones clnicas incluyen fiebre, prdida de peso, anemia y leucocitosis 939 . en aproximadamente las dos terceras partes de los casos aparecen lesiones cutneas (habitualmente ppulas con o sin necrosis central) 942 . se ha descrito derrame pleural sin lesiones en otros lugares 943 . la tos es la manifestacin principal de la afectacin pulmonar.la actinomicosis est causada por diversas especies, pero a. israelii es la causa ms importante de enfermedad humana. los microorganismos no forman esporas y aparecen como filamentos ramificados de 0,2 a 0,3 m de dimetro y forma pleomorfa. son anaerobios o microaerfilos y forman micelios que se fragmentan y dan lugar a formas bacilares o cocobacilares. dentro de los tejidos los micelios aparecen tpicamente en grupos (denominados a veces grnulos de azufre por su color amarillo, aunque el contenido de azufre es mnimo).estos microorganismos son habitantes normales de la orofaringe humana y se encuentran muchas veces en las criptas de amgdalas extirpadas quirrgicamente, en caries dentales y en los bordes gingivales de personas que tienen una higiene oral deficiente 944 . se cree que la enfermedad se contagia la mayora de las veces mediante diseminacin de grmenes procedentes de esas localizaciones 945 , generalmente desde la orofaringe a los pulmones por aspiracin o al tracto digestivo por deglucin. la infeccin tiene una distribucin mundial; los varones se afectan con una frecuencia algo mayor que las mujeres 946 .antes de la introduccin de los antibiticos la actinomicosis era la enfermedad mictica pulmonar que se diagnosticaba con ms frecuencia; produca un cuadro clnico muy tpico con empiema y tractos sinusales en la pared torcica. hoy da se ve con ms frecuencia en la regin cervicofacial despus de extracciones dentales, habitualmente en forma de osteomielitis del maxilar inferior o como un absceso de tejidos blandos que drena muchas veces espontneamente a travs de la piel. la enfermedad pulmonar, con o sin afectacin de la pared torcica, es poco frecuente.en el examen macroscpico los pulmones contienen tpicamente uno o ms abscesos que cuando son mltiples suelen estar conectados por tractos sinusales 944 . se pueden ver grnulos de azufre dentro de los agregados de neutrfilos en el examen histolgico (figura 6-56). los microorganismos se suelen identificar con facilidad mediante la tincin de gram y con plata. se pueden ver los grnulos caractersticos en los esputos y en muestras obtenidas mediante puncin transtorcica con aguja 947, 948 .la manifestacin radiolgica ms frecuente es una consolidacin del espacio areo unilateral, focal o confluente 949, 450 . en ocasiones el paciente presenta un ndulo o una masa, a veces cavitado. las zonas de consolidacin suelen medir entre 2 y 12 cm de dimetro y afectan con ms frecuencia a los lbulos inferiores de modo predominante o exclusivo (figura 6-57). se observa engrosamiento pleural adyacente a la consolidacin en las radiografas de aproximadamente el 50% de los pacientes y en la tc del 75% al 100% 949, 950 . la tc muestra con frecuencia zonas centrales de baja atenuacin dentro de la consolidacin con refuerzo perifrico despus de la administracin de contraste intravenoso (vase figura 6-57). en la mayora de los casos la tc revela adenopatas hiliares o mediastnicas 950 . es infrecuente la invasin de la pared torcica.las manifestaciones clnicas iniciales de la afectacin pulmonar son tos, expectoracin y hemoptisis 951 . la progresin de la infeccin se puede manifestar como uno o ms tractos sinusales que atraviesan la piel o rara vez como una fstula broncocutnea o una fstula en el mediastino, el hgado o el cuello. la diseminacin hasta rganos extrapulmonares puede simular un cncer de pulmn metastsico 952 . el pronstico es en general bueno siempre que se identifique la infeccin y se instituya el tratamiento antibitico apropiado.la especie ms importante como agente productor de la nocardiosis pulmonar humana es n. asteroides 953 , una bacteria no esporulada aerobia que en los tejidos aparece como filamentos ramificados finos. estos filamentos son grampositivos y en general acidorresistentes, aunque la acidorresistencia quizs se demuestre slo con sustancias descolorantes suaves. el germen se puede identificar en las extensiones o en los cultivos de los exudados que se toman de los pulmones y de abscesos extratorcicos; sin embargo, el xito del aislamiento puede precisar un cultivo prolongado en medios selectivos 954 .los grmenes del gnero nocardia son habitantes naturales frecuentes del suelo en todo el mundo, y la mayora de los casos de enfermedad pulmonar parece adquirirse por inhalacin de microorganismos procedentes de esa fuente. la transmisin entre seres humanos es rara pero se ha documentado 955 . el microorganismo se puede encontrar como saprofito en los esputos de pacientes con epoc u otras neumopatas crnicas 956 . la mayora de los casos se encuentra en pacientes inmunodeprimidos 957, 958 . a pesar de todo, las nocardias son una causa relativamente infrecuente de infeccin oportunista en el sida 954 . por razones que no estn claras los pacientes con proteinosis alveolar parecen ser especialmente susceptibles 959 .la enfermedad se manifiesta en el estudio anatomopatolgico como microabscesos o macroabscesos, habitualmente con tejido de granulacin y fibrosis en los casos de evolucin ms prolongada. es posible identificar microorganismos mezclados con neutrfilos en la tincin con plata.la alteracin radiogrfica ms frecuente es la consolidacin del espacio areo, en general homognea y no segmentaria, pero a veces focal y heterognea (figura 6-58) 960, 961 . la consolidacin suele ser multilobar 962 . otra alteracin frecuente es la presencia de ndulos o masas 963 . la tc demuestra con frecuencia zonas localizadas de baja atenuacin con refuerzo perifrico indicativas de formacin de abscesos dentro de las zonas de consolidacin y de los ndulos 963, 964 . se observa cavitacin en las tc de aproximadamente el 80% de los pacientes con sida y en el 20% de los que no tienen sida 963 . la infeccin se puede extender al espacio pleural para causar derrame o empiema y, con menos frecuencia, a la pared torcica 964 . los sntomas habituales son tos, expectoracin purulenta, dolor pleural y fiebre; en ocasiones se produce hemoptisis 957, 965 . la exploracin fsica puede revelar estertores y signos de consolidacin o de derrame pleural 966 . la evolucin suele ser crnica; sin embargo, puede haber una neumona fulminante aguda 967 . la infeccin se extiende en ocasiones a zonas extratorcicas, sobre todo el encfalo y el tejido subcutneo 968 . la cifra de leucocitos suele estar algo elevada, con neutrofilia 957 . el microorganismo se puede identificar en los aspirados que se obtienen con aguja fina y en las muestras de lavado bronquial, pero se pasa por alto con facilidad si no se busca de modo especfico 969 .el pronstico de la nocardiosis pulmonar no es bueno; por ejemplo, en una revisin de 35 pacientes la tasa de mortalidad fue del 40% 953 . una vez que se produce la diseminacin el pronstico es an peor 970 .muchas infecciones respiratorias causadas por virus comienzan en el tracto respiratorio superior. algunos microorganismos, como ciertos enterovirus y los virus de la varicela y el sarampin, se propagan en las vas altas y despus se diseminan por el resto del cuerpo, habitualmente sin producir sntomas del tracto respiratorio inferior. otros virus permanecen tpicamente en la mucosa respiratoria, donde pueden causar diversos cuadros clnicos como rinitis, faringitis, laringotraquetis (crup), bronquitis, bronquiolitis y neumona (neumona atpica primaria). aunque los virus respiratorios especficos tienden a provocar sndromes clnicos bien definidos, todos ellos pueden causar varias formas de enfermedad de los tractos respiratorios superior e inferior en funcin de la virulencia y la dosis de los microorganismos y de 292 c a p  t u l o 6  enfermedades infecciosas de los pulmones f i g u r a 6 -5 7 actinomicosis pleuropulmonar. la radiografa posteroanterior de trax (a) y la tc con colimacin de 10 mm (b) revelan zonas focales de consolidacin en los lbulos superior e inferior derechos, con engrosamiento pleural derecho asociado. la tcar (c) que se realiz tras la administracin de contraste intravenoso muestra zonas de baja atenuacin dentro de la consolidacin, compatibles con formacin de abscesos. el paciente era un varn alcohlico de 59 aos. la resistencia del husped 37, 971 . la enfermedad del tracto respiratorio inferior que producen estos microorganismos, en particular la neumona, es relativamente infrecuente. sin embargo, en determinados grupos de poblacin, como los lactantes o los pacientes inmunodeprimidos, la incidencia de esta enfermedad y su importancia clnica son significativas.adems de esas complicaciones agudas, la infeccin vrica puede dejar importantes secuelas a largo plazo en los pulmones. por ejemplo, datos experimentales indican que la infeccin neonatal puede alterar el desarrollo posterior del pulmn 972 , y se sabe que la bronquiolitis infantil por virus es un precursor de las bronquiectasias del adulto. est claro que la infeccin de las vas areas puede inducir sntomas de asma en los pacientes que tienen esta enfermedad, y hay datos de que la infeccin vrica durante la infancia participa en la patogenia del asma que aparece en pocas posteriores de la vida 50, 973 . por ltimo, varios virus, como el virus de epstein-barr (veb), el herpesvirus 8 y los papilomavirus, participan en el desarrollo de algunas neoplasias pleurales y pulmonares.el diagnstico de neumona vrica se establece muchas veces por exclusin y se basa en la ausencia de expectoracin, imposibilidad de obtener bacterias patgenas en el cultivo, signos clnicos relativamente benignos, cifra de leucocitos normal o slo ligeramente elevada, radiografa de trax que muestra bronconeumona o enfermedad intersticial localizada y falta de respuesta al tratamiento antibitico. la confirmacin del diagnstico y la identificacin del virus causal especfico se pueden obtener por diversos medios, como cultivo estndar (con el inconveniente de que tarda hasta varias semanas), cultivo con la tcnica de inmunofluorescencia indirecta en cultivo en monocapa celular (shell-vial) (la centrifugacin y la inmunofluorescencia con anticuerpos monoclonales permiten disminuir el tiempo necesario hasta pocos das), serologa (tambin limitada por el tiempo que tarda en producirse la seroconversin), deteccin de antgenos vricos en las secreciones del tracto respiratorio o en la sangre con anticuerpos monoclonales, deteccin de molculas procedentes del virus mediante hibridacin in situ o rcp y observacin de las alteraciones que induce el virus en los estudios citolgicos e histolgicos 974 . como era de esperar, la sensibilidad y la especificidad de esas pruebas y sus relaciones costo-efectividad son variables y dependen hasta cierto punto del microorganismo concreto y del tipo de enfermedad presente. los virus influenza se subdividen en los tipos a, b y c sobre la base de los antgenos de la membrana interna y nucleoproteicos. el grupo a se puede subdividir en varios subtipos antignicos que se relacionan con la presencia de dos glucoprotenas de superficie, la hemaglutinina (h) y la neuraminidasa (n) 975, 976 . la primera es necesaria para la unin y la penetracin del virus en la membrana de la clula husped 977, 978 ; los anticuerpos contra la hemaglutinina tienen efecto protector frente a la infeccin. la neuraminidasa participa en la liberacin y diseminacin de las partculas vricas replicadas; aunque los anticuerpos contra ella no son tan importantes para la inmunidad como los anticuerpos anti-h, pueden disminuir la gravedad de la enfermedad.los virus influenza poseen la importante propiedad de cambiar espontneamente la naturaleza estructural (y por tanto antignica) de esas glucoprotenas, y las variantes que se generan poseen una virulencia distinta a la de sus progenitoras. los tipos a, b y c pueden experimentar todos ellos cambios estructurales menores; sin embargo, slo el tipo a es capaz de producir formas inmunitariamente distintas que se designan por subndices numricos de los lugares h y n. puesto que la inmunidad frente a la infeccin es conferida por los anticuerpos dirigidos contra las glucoprotenas h y n, estos cambios antignicos tienen una importancia fundamental para explicar la patogenia de la enfermedad; los cambios pueden ser relativamente menores (deriva antignica) o mayores (cambio antignico).la gripe puede aparecer en forma de pandemia, epidemia o como casos espordicos en pacientes o en grupos pequeos de pacientes. el virus del tipo a causa casi todas las epidemias importantes y todas las pandemias. a pesar de que el tipo b tambin puede producir brotes epidmicos, son menos frecuentes, ms localizados y clnicamente menos graves, muchas veces con slo un cuadro leve similar a la rinitis. aunque el virus del tipo a se transmite en general de persona a persona por gotitas respiratorias, hay virus antignicamente similares que infectan a cerdos, caballos y aves salvajes y domsticas, y la enfermedad humana procede en ocasiones de esas fuentes. de hecho, se cree que esos animales actan como medio para la recombinacin gentica, con la aparicin de cepas nuevas y a veces ms virulentas que son capaces de provocar la enfermedad humana 979 . cualquiera que sea la fuente, parece claro que la gripe es una infeccin importante. a nivel mundial se ha estimado que produce enfermedad clnica en aproximadamente el 20% de los nios y el 5% de los adultos cada ao 975 .las epidemias de gripe tienden a ocurrir con periodicidad anual, tpicamente durante el invierno en los climas templados; en las zonas tropicales y subtropicales ocurren durante la estacin lluviosa o a lo largo de todo el ao, dependiendo de la localidad concreta 975 . las tasas de ataque son especialmente altas en los nios en edad escolar; las complicaciones y la hospitalizacin tambin son ms probables en los escolares y en los ancianos (sobre todo entre los que viven en residencias de ancianos). el perodo de incubacin de 24 a 48 horas permite una diseminacin rpida de la enfermedad. la gripe es muy contagiosa, y una gran proporcin de los pacientes se puede contagiar en ambientes cerrados, como los barcos de pasajeros y los aviones 980 . est bien documentada la transmisin nosocomial de la enfermedad 981 .la neumona es una complicacin poco frecuente pero grave de la infeccin gripal, y suele estar causada por el virus tipo a y en ocasiones por el b 982 . aunque muchas veces est localizada y tiene una gravedad entre leve y moderada, tambin puede ser hiperaguda y rpidamente mortal. la mayora de los casos se reconoce durante las epidemias y pandemias. en aproximadamente la tercera parte de los casos de neumona grave la enfermedad comienza de modo brusco en personas aparentemente sanas 983 . la mayor parte de los pacientes afectos restantes presenta alguna enfermedad predisponente, como enfermedad cardaca 982 , embarazo 984 , fibrosis qustica 985 o inmunodeficiencia. los lactantes y los ancianos tienen un riesgo particularmente elevado de enfermedad grave 986 . aunque el virus es el nico patgeno que se recupera en los pulmones de algunos pacientes en la autopsia, lo que implica su capacidad de producir una neumona mortal, en muchos casos la muerte se relaciona con la sobreinfeccin por bacterias como s. aureus, s. pneumoniae, h. influenzae y m. catarrhalis 982 .los estudios experimentales han demostrado que los virus se adhieren a los cilios y las microvellosidades de las clulas epiteliales, desde los que entran en el citoplasma celular 987 . la posterior replicacin y liberacin de nuevos viriones se acompaan de degeneracin y desprendimiento de las clulas epiteliales que tapizan los bronquios, los bronquiolos y los alvolos 988 . la defensa del husped contra el microorganismo guarda relacin con diversos factores, como produccin de protenas mx mediada por interfern, que parecen inhibir la replicacin vrica 989 ; una respuesta inmunitaria apropiada, sobre todo la produccin local de iga 976 , y la presencia de lectinas relacionadas con el surfactante capaces de mediar la agregacin de los virus 990 .el aspecto histolgico tpico de la neumona gripal mortal es una lesin alveolar difusa, y el parnquima muestra un infiltrado inflamatorio mononuclear intersticial de intensidad variable, consolidacin de los espacios areos alveolares por hemorragia, edema y fibrina, hiperplasia de las clulas de tipo ii y membranas hialinas 991, 992 . aunque no suele ser prominente excepto en casos de sobreinfeccin bacteriana, tambin se puede ver un infiltrado polimorfonuclear en la infeccin vrica aparentemente pura 993 . el virus se puede cultivar o ver mediante inmunofluorescencia, en una alta proporcin de casos 994 . la microscopia ptica no detecta inclusiones correspondientes a agregados vricos.la afectacin puede ser local o general. la primera suele adoptar la forma de consolidacin segmentaria de los lbulos inferiores, homognea o focal y unilateral o bilateral 995 . las radiografas seriadas pueden mostrar zonas parcheadas mal definidas de consolidacin de 1 a 2 cm de dimetro que hacen confluentes con rapidez (figura 6-59). el derrame pleural es comparativamente raro. como media, la resolucin tarda aproximadamente tres semanas.las manifestaciones clnicas dependen en parte de la edad y de la salud subyacente del paciente. en los adultos jvenes la manifestacin ms frecuente es un sndrome de tipo gripal sin sntomas pulmonares significativos. el sndrome comienza con rapidez e incluye tos seca, mialgias, escalofros, cefalea, conjuntivitis y temperatura de 38,5 c o superior. puede haber dolor urente subesternal y signos de otitis media y/o sinusitis. rara vez se ve rinorrea y faringitis significativas 996 . los pacientes mayores tienen tendencia a la aparicin de enfermedad del tracto respiratorio inferior adems de los sntomas de tipo gripal. la bronquitis/ bronquioli-tis se puede manifestar con slo hemoptisis leve, con o sin estertores y roncus locales o difusos. sin embargo, los pacientes que tienen neumona pueden estar muy graves con progresin rpida de la taquipnea, la disnea, la cianosis y la hipoxemia. como ya se ha dicho, muchos de esos pacientes son ancianos o tienen una enfermedad cardiopulmonar subyacente. la afectacin de las vas areas o del parnquima puede causar tambin agravamiento de la enfermedad subyacente en pacientes que tienen asma, fibrosis qustica o epoc [997] [998] [999] . otras posibles complicaciones infrecuentes incluyen convulsiones y encefalitis, miocarditis, pericarditis, miositis y sndrome de reye 982 .la sobreinfeccin bacteriana se produce dentro de las dos semanas siguientes (la mayora de las veces en pocos das) a la infeccin vrica inicial. el paciente, que quizs haya mejorado, comienza a expectorar esputos purulentos, a veces herrumbrosos o con sangre franca, y puede referir dolor pleural. las posibles complicaciones de la sobreinfeccin incluyen las que se asocian habitualmente a las infecciones bacterianas, como formacin de abscesos, sepsis y empiema.el recuento leucoctico suele ser normal en la gripe no complicada. sin embargo, en algunos casos se encuentra leucopenia y la infeccin sobreaguda puede cursar con neutrofilia de 20.000/mm 3 o ms. la sobreinfeccin bacteriana se manifiesta por expectoracin purulenta y una neutrofilia similar.los virus se pueden aislar a partir de las secreciones del tracto respiratorio en clulas de rin de mono o en embrin de pollo; sin embargo, el cultivo tarda varios das y el rendimiento dismi-nuye con rapidez despus de la infeccin inicial. los mtodos ms eficaces y rpidos para el diagnstico incluyen rcp y deteccin de antgenos vricos. ahora se dispone para su uso en la consulta de varias pruebas comerciales que miden esos antgenos 1000 ; esas pruebas se suelen realizar en muestras de lavado nasal, proporcionan resultados rpidos (muchas veces en 15 a 30 minutos) y en funcin de la prueba particular proporcionan sensibilidades y especificidades del 60% al 95% y del 50% al 100%, respectivamente 980, 1000 . la infeccin se puede confirmar tambin por la medicin de los ttulos de anticuerpos contra componentes de una cepa vrica que se sabe que es la causante de la epidemia actual en muestras de suero tomadas durante la fase aguda y la de convalecencia.la mayora de los casos de gripe no complicada se resuelve espontneamente en das o semanas, y se reproduce la recuperacin completa. la aparicin de neumona primaria o bacteriana representa una complicacin grave, sobre todo en pacientes muy jvenes o muy viejos y en los pacientes que tienen una enfermedad cardaca o pulmonar subyacente. las tasas de mortalidad en esas poblaciones pueden alcanzar el 3%-5% 975 . los pacientes que sobreviven a la infeccin pulmonar pueden presentar fibrosis residual con alteraciones funcionales 1001 .los estudios epidemiolgicos durante epidemias de gripe y en casos de infeccin espordica han revelado un aumento de la morbilidad y de la mortalidad por causas respiratorias y cardiovasculares no vricas 1002, 1003 . la causa del exceso de mortalidad guarda relacin con la edad, y muchas veces se debe a enfermedad cerebro-c a p  t u l o 6  enfermedades infecciosas de los pulmones 295neumona aguda por el virus influenza. varn de 32 aos ingresado en el hospital por historia de tres das de tos con expectoracin amarilla blanquecina, dolor pleurtico en el lado derecho del trax y fiebre. la radiografa posteroanterior de trax que se realiz el da del ingreso (a) muestra una consolidacin extensa y homognea del espacio areo del lbulo superior derecho con opacidades focales de consolidacin del espacio areo del lbulo inferior derecho; el pulmn izquierdo no tiene alteraciones. dos das ms tarde (b) la consolidacin del lbulo inferior derecho se ha hecho casi homognea y la enfermedad del espacio areo se ha extendido por todo el pulmn izquierdo. veinticuatro horas ms tarde ambos pulmones estn consolidados casi por completo y el nico aire visible se localiza dentro del rbol bronquial (broncograma areo difuso wb saunders, 1999.) vascular en los pacientes de ms de 65 aos y a infarto de miocardio en los pacientes de 40 a 64 aos 1004 . los pacientes que tienen un mayor riesgo son los ancianos ingresados en residencias de ancianos, en los que la mortalidad puede llegar al 30% 1005 .los virus parainfluenza se pueden clasificar en los tipos 1, 2, 3 y 4, y los tres primeros son responsables de la gran mayora de las enfermedades del tracto respiratorio 1006 . las infecciones causadas por los tipos 1 y 2 aparecen predominantemente durante el otoo y la primera parte del invierno 1007 . pueden alcanzar proporciones epidmicas y quizs sean responsables de una alta proporcin de casos de neumona, laringotraquetis y bronquiolitis aguda en nios pequeos. la infeccin del tracto respiratorio inferior es poco frecuente en los adultos. la infeccin por el virus parainfluenza de tipo 3 tiende a producirse durante la primavera y es una causa importante de bronquiolitis y neumona en lactantes y nios. tambin tienen mayor riesgo los pacientes inmunodeprimidos de cualquier edad, sobre todo los que han recibido trasplantes 1008, 1009 . en los adultos por lo dems sanos los virus parainfluenza son responsables de faringitis y de un pequeo porcentaje de los casos de rinitis aguda.se sabe que el vsr es sobre todo una causa de enfermedad en lactantes y nios pequeos, en los que se ha estimado que produce alrededor de 90.000 hospitalizaciones y 4.500 muertes anuales en ee.uu. 1010 . se est detectando con una frecuencia cada vez mayor en adultos, sobre todo en los que tienen una enfermedad cardiopulmonar subyacente, un tumor maligno o una inmunodeficiencia, o en las personas que estn internadas en un centro de cuidados a largo plazo 1011, 1012 , pero tambin se encuentra en pacientes por lo dems sanos 1013 . de hecho, se ha encontrado que los brotes epidmicos en los ancianos y en la poblacin general cursan con tasas de ataque similares a las que se han descrito para la gripe 980, 1013 .el virus sincitial respiratorio se puede dividir en los tipos a y b de acuerdo con diferencias antignicas de las glucoprotenas de superficie f y g, que son responsables de la adherencia y la penetracin del microorganismo en la membrana de la clula husped 1013 . la infeccin puede ser espordica o puede aparecer en forma de brotes epidmicos locales o de epidemias. la enfermedad es muy contagiosa y la tasa de infeccin en ambientes relativamente cerrados, como centros de cuidados de da, residencias de ancianos y salas peditricas de los hospitales, puede ser alta 1014 . la transmisin se produce mediante gotitas transportadas por el aire o por contacto mano-mano o mano-superficie. la inmunidad guarda relacin con respuestas humorales y celulares y suele ser incompleta (es decir, pueden producirse nuevas infecciones a lo largo de la vida) 1615 . al parecer las protenas a y d del surfactante son importantes para la defensa innata contra la infeccin.desde el punto de vista anatomopatolgico, la infeccin pulmonar por el vsr puede afectar predominantemente a las vas areas o al parenquima 1016 . en el segundo caso la enfermedad se manifiesta como una neumonitis intersticial, a veces con un patrn de neumona de clulas gigantes o con lesin alveolar difusa 1017, 1018 . cuando predomina la afectacin de las vas areas las alteraciones ms graves aparecen en los bronquiolos membranosos pequeos y en los bronquiolos respiratorios, y son degeneracin y descamacin de las clulas epiteliales con un infiltrado de clulas inflamatorias de intensidad variable. se pueden observar inclusiones citoplsmicas en algunas de las clulas epiteliales degeneradas 1016 .en los lactantes la radiografa de trax muestra zonas focales de consolidacin entremezcladas con zonas de hiperinsuflacin 1019 . los signos en la tcar se han revisado en una serie de 20 pacientes sometidos a trasplante de mdula sea algena 1019a . las alteraciones predominantes fueron ndulos centrolobulillares pequeos, consolidacin del espacio areo, opacidades en vidrio esmerilado y engrosamiento de la pared bronquial. en la mayora de los casos las alteraciones fueron bilaterales y tenan una distribucin asimtrica, tanto en las zonas centrales como en las perifricas. rara vez se observa comienzo agudo de neumona con progresin rpida al sdra 1020 .los sntomas de la infeccin por el vsr en los adultos suelen ser los de un resfriado (rinitis, faringitis y conjuntivitis, a veces acompaadas de otitis media y sinusitis). sin embargo, en un nmero apreciable de pacientes se observan manifestaciones de afectacin del tracto respiratorio inferior (la mayora de las veces tos). algunos casos recuerdan a la gripe. en contraste con la gripe y el sarampin, la infeccin por el vsr parece asociarse a un riesgo relativamente bajo de sobreinfeccin bacteriana 1021 . el microorganismo se puede propagar en cultivos de clulas, pero lentamente y con alguna dificultad; se ha demostrado que los cultivos en monocapa celular con inmunofluorescencia indirecta son ms rpidos y sensibles 1022 . la deteccin de antgenos mediante enzimoinmunoanlisis de adsorcin o inmunofluorescencia es an ms rpida e igualmente fiable 1023 .la infeccin es leve y autolimitada en la gran mayora de los pacientes. sin embargo, puede ser grave y rpidamente mortal en adultos inmunodeprimidos o que tienen una enfermedad cardiopulmonar subyacente y en los lactantes y nios pequeos. los resultados de los estudios de las secuelas a largo plazo de la bronquiolitis por vsr han sido variables; algunos investigadores encontraron indicios de hiperreactividad residual de las vas areas 1024 y otros no hallaron cambios de la funcin pulmonar 1025 .los coronavirus causan tpicamente rinitis aguda, con ms frecuencia durante el invierno y la primavera en climas templados. los estudios en voluntarios a los que se inocul el virus por va intranasal indican que la enfermedad se limita al tracto respiratorio superior en la gran mayora de los casos 1026 . a pesar de todo, el virus se ha relacionado con agudizaciones del asma y de la epoc, probablemente por infeccin de las vas areas del tracto respiratorio inferior 999 .el dato ms importante desde un punto de vista clnico fue la observacin en 2003 de que una forma de coronavirus constituye la causa del sndrome respiratorio agudo grave (srag) 1027 . al parecer esta enfermedad altamente contagiosa se origin en china durante 2002 y se extendi con rapidez hasta afectar a personas de varios pases de todo el mundo 1028, 1029 . al cabo de aproximadamente 8 meses se haban declarado casi 8.500 casos, con ms de 800 fallecimientos 1027 . se cree que el reservorio natural del virus radica en animales salvajes como hurones, tejones y civetas.se cree que la infeccin se transmite por gotitas o fmites y que est relacionada con el contacto interpersonal ntimo. los hospitales, los laboratorios en los que se practican pruebas con el virus para diagnstico o investigacin y las residencias de ancianos parecen constituir las fuentes de infeccin ms frecuentes. tambin se ha documentado la diseminacin extensa en ambientes confinados, como los aviones. las observaciones anatomopatolgicas son las de una lesin alveolar difusa, a veces con signos de bronconeumona bacteriana superpuesta 1030 .las manifestaciones radiolgicas ms frecuentes son zonas de consolidacin unilaterales focales, unilaterales multifocales o bilaterales 1031, 1032 . la consolidacin afecta predominantemente a las regiones perifricas del pulmn y a las zonas medias e inferiores. los hallazgos menos frecuentes incluyen opacidades en vidrio esmerilado focales o difusas y, rara vez, consolidacin lobar. aproximadamente el 20% al 40% de los pacientes tiene radiografas normales en la evaluacin inicial 1032, 1033 . la tcar muestra alteraciones parenquimatosas en prcticamente todos esos pacientes, y las ms frecuentes son las opacidades en vidrio esmerilado y las zonas de consolidacin focales, multifocales o difusas 1035 . muchas veces se observa engrosamiento intersticial intralobulillar o de los tabiques interlobulillares (patrn en mosaico), superpuesto a las opacidades en vidrio esmerilado. son poco frecuentes los signos en la tcar que se ven con frecuencia en otras neumonas, como las opacidades nodulares y lineales ramificadas (patrn de rbol en brote), las adenopatas hiliares y mediastnicas y el derrame pleural 1033, 1035 .el perodo de incubacin es de aproximadamente 5 a 7 das. los sntomas iniciales incluyen fiebre con o sin escalofros, tos seca, mialgias, cefalea y mareo 1029 . con menos frecuencia se observan sntomas digestivos y del tracto respiratorio superior. en algunos pacientes el cuadro inicial mejora a lo largo de varios das, pero despus aparece fiebre recurrente y progresin de las lesiones radiolgicas, con disminucin de la carga vrica en el suero. en aproximadamente el 20% de los casos la enfermedad evoluciona hacia el sdra bien desarrollado. los signos de laboratorio incluyen linfopenia, datos de cid y elevacin de la concentracin de ldh y creatina cinasa.como ya se ha dicho, la enfermedad es grave y tiene una tasa de mortalidad de aproximadamente el 10% 1027 . los factores de riesgo que tienden a empeorar el pronstico incluyen edad avanzada, concentraciones altas de ldh, aumento del recuento de neutrfilos en el anlisis inicial, infeccin crnica por el virus de la hepatitis b y presencia de enfermedades simultneas, como diabetes.el sarampin es una enfermedad vrica muy contagiosa, ms frecuente en zonas muy pobladas, en las que se producen casos espordicos y pequeas epidemias. desde la introduccin de programas de vacunacin en la dcada de los sesenta se ha observado una reduccin notable del nmero de casos declarados. a pesar de todo todava se comunican miniepidemias en pases desarrollados, y la enfermedad sigue siendo un problema significativo en los pases en vas de desarrollo que carecen de programas de vacunacin efectivos 1037 .en su forma natural el sarampin afecta principalmente a nios pequeos. sin embargo, en los pases que tienen programas de vacunacin contraen la enfermedad un nmero significativo de personas mayores 1038 , probablemente a causa de la combinacin de falta de vacunacin, fracaso de la vacuna (que ocurre en aproximadamente el 5% de las personas) y disminucin de la probabilidad de exposicin al virus durante la infancia. la infeccin es muy contagiosa y se disemina probablemente a travs de gotitas transportadas por el aire. el perodo de incubacin oscila entre 10 das y 2 semanas.aunque algunos investigadores han estimado que slo aproximadamente el 5% de los pacientes sufren complicaciones distintas del exantema tpico 1039 , otros han comunicado la aparicin de complicaciones en casi el 45% 1036 . la enfermedad pulmonar es la complicacin ms frecuente (3% a 4% de los casos) y puede manifestarse como neumona sarampionosa primaria o como neumona bacteriana secundaria. la segunda es ms frecuente y est causada la mayora de las veces por s. pneumoniae, k. pneumoniae, h. influenzae o n. meningitidis 1040, 1041 . el riesgo de neumona sarampionosa primaria parece ser ms alto en embarazadas y pacientes inmunodeprimidos 1042, 1043 .los signos anatomopatolgicos de la neumona sarampionosa mortal sin sobreinfeccin bacteriana son los de lesin alveolar difusa 1044 . de forma caracterstica, esa lesin se asocia a numerosas clulas gigantes multinucleadas que contienen inclusiones vricas eosinfilas, nucleares y citoplsmicas (lo que justifica el nombre de neumona de clulas gigantes; figura 6-60). las clulas gigantes se pueden ver en el esputo expectorado o las muestras de lba mediante examen citolgico, antes y durante el exantema 1045 .en los nios los hallazgos ms frecuentes son consolidacin focal del espacio areo, engrosamiento de la pared bronquial, infiltrados peribronquiales, lneas perihiliares, ndulos pequeos y adenopatas 1046, 1047 . en contraste con su frecuencia en los nios, los signos radiolgicos de aumento del tamao de los ganglios linfticos son poco frecuentes en los adultos 1041 . las anomalas en la tc incluyen zonas de atenuacin en vidrio esmerilado, opacidades nodulares pequeas y consolidacin 1048 .en el caso tpico, los sntomas prodrmicos de fiebre, malestar general, mialgias, cefaleas, conjuntivitis, estornudos, tos y rinorrea comienzan de 2 a 6 das antes de aparecer el caracterstico exantema eritematoso maculopapular. la neumona sarampionosa primaria se desarrolla antes del acm del exantema o coincidiendo con el mismo y se manifiesta por tos y, en los casos graves, hemoptisis, disnea y signos de sdra 1047 . la sobreinfeccin bacteriana suele ocurrir varios das despus del exantema, cuando el paciente ya ha empezado a mejorar. se debe sospechar si al principio de la convalecencia aparece tos, expectoracin purulenta, taquicardia, elevacin de la temperatura y dolor pleural.el recuento leucoctico puede ser normal en la neumona sarampionosa primaria, pero muchas veces es bajo, sobre todo en la fase temprana; en presencia de infeccin bacteriana secundaria es frecuente la leucocitosis polimorfonuclear. el diagnstico suele resultar evidente por el cuadro clnico, que incluye el exantema caracterstico. en los casos atpicos se puede aislar el virus en el cultivo tisular con muestras de lavado farngeo o de sangre, o se puede identificar por medios inmunohistoqumicos en muestras de biopsia o de citologa 1049 .la mortalidad global en los pases desarrollados es probablemente inferior al 0,1%; sin embargo, es bastante superior en los pases en vas de desarrollo, en los que fallecen cada ao muchos miles de lactantes y nios. la mayora de las muertes est causada por neumona 1037 .el grupo de los enterovirus incluye poliovirus, coxsackievirus y echovirus. son transmitidos predominantemente por la ruta fecal-oral y debido a su resistencia a los cidos son capaces de pasar por el estmago y multiplicarse en el tracto intestinal inferior. se afectan con ms frecuencia los nios y los adultos jvenes. el perodo de incubacin oscila entre 7 y 12 das.los efectos de los poliovirus sobre el trax suelen ser indirectos, por parlisis de los msculos de la respiracin que produce a veces insuficiencia respiratoria en la enfermedad aguda; en los pacientes con sndrome pospolio son frecuentes las alteraciones de la funcin pulmonar 1050 .estos virus se pueden dividir en un grupo a, que se caracteriza por su capacidad para inducir parlisis flcida en los ratones, y un grupo b, que causa parlisis espstica. los componentes del primer grupo (en particular el tipo a10) producen tpicamente lesiones vesiculares y ulcerosas en el paladar blando y, en ocasiones, un cuadro similar a la rinitis aguda. los virus del grupo b producen una gran variedad de cuadros clnicos, como faringitis y pleurodinia 1051 . esta ltima es un dolor constrictivo intenso en las regiones torcica inferior y abdominal superior, que habitualmente se acompaa por dificultad para respirar y fiebre. se pueden producir remisiones y exacerbaciones a lo largo de varias semanas. el cuadro se puede asociar a meningitis (que se manifiesta por cefalea), miocarditis, pericarditis y orquitis.los rinovirus son responsables del resfriado comn en aproximadamente el 40% al 50% de los casos. la infeccin significativa del tracto respiratorio inferior es poco frecuente, pero puede producir laringotraquetis, bronquitis aguda, bronquiolitis y bronconeumona tanto en nios como en adultos. existen pruebas de que los nios con displasia broncopulmonar y los ancianos con epoc tienen un mayor riesgo de enfermedad clnicamente significativa 1052, 1053 . los signos radiogrficos y clnicos son idnticos a los de otras neumonas vricas. algunos investigadores han encontrado una relacin entre la gravedad de la infeccin y la linfopenia, en particular de los linfocitos t4, y la leucocitosis polimorfonuclear 1034 .quizs el efecto indirecto que pueden tener los rinovirus en pacientes con asma sea ms importante que la infeccin directa. aunque algunos estudios sobre voluntarios con asma infectados experimentalmente han demostrado que una pequea propor-cin de los pacientes experimenta un agravamiento clnico con descenso slo ligero de la velocidad del flujo areo 1055 , hay pocas dudas de que el virus puede causar estenosis clnicamente significativa de las vas areas en ciertos pacientes 1056 . la infeccin por rinovirus tambin se ha asociado a agravamiento de los sntomas clnicos y a empeoramiento de la funcin pulmonar en algunos pacientes con epoc 1057 .los retrovirus se caracterizan por un modo peculiar de replicacin en el que el arn vrico se convierte en adn mediante el proceso de trascripcin inversa; ese adn se incorpora despus al adn de la clula husped y acta como plantilla para la formacin de nuevos viriones. los retrovirus humanos se pueden clasificar en dos grupos: virus de la leucemia de linfocitos t humana (vlth) y virus de la inmunodeficiencia humana (vih). los virus de ambos grupos comparten un tropismo pronunciado por las clulas que expresan receptores cd4, en particular los linfocitos, y la capacidad de persistir durante perodos prolongados como infeccin clnicamente latente. aunque cada grupo guarda una relacin ms ntima con determinadas enfermedades extratorcicas o sistmicas (leucemia y enfermedad neurolgica degenerativa el primero y sida el segundo), tambin hay datos de que pueden ejercer un efecto patognico directo en los pulmones de algunos pacientes. por ejemplo, el anlisis del lquido del lba de pacientes que tienen mielopata relacionada con el vlth-1 ha demostrado el aumento del recuento celular con elevacin de la proporcin de linfocitos 1058 . adems, el examen histolgico de los pulmones ha revelado neumonitis intersticial inespecfica o bronquiolitis 1059, 1060 .la gran mayora de las manifestaciones pulmonares que se asocian a la infeccin por vih-1 es secundaria a la inmunodeficiencia que induce el virus. sin embargo, hay datos de que el virus tambin afecta directamente a los pulmones, con toda probabili- dad a travs de monocitos o linfocitos circulantes que emigran desde la sangre hacia el intersticio alveolar y los espacios areos 1061 . la infeccin se manifiesta en el lquido del lba por un aumento del nmero de linfocitos, sobre todo cd8 + ; el aumento se asocia a disminucin de los linfocitos cd4 + ; el cociente entre ambos tipos de linfocitos aumenta cuando aparece la enfermedad clnica y al aumentar la gravedad de la enfermedad 1062 . tambin se han documentado otras diversas alteraciones del tipo y la funcin de las clulas del lquido del lba 1063, 1064 . se ha propuesto que la presencia de clulas infectadas en el parnquima pulmonar puede aumentar la probabilidad de infecciones oportunistas al interferir con los mecanismos normales de defensa celular 1061 . tambin se ha propuesto que el vih puede participar directamente en la patogenia de la neumonitis intersticial linfoctica y el enfisema pulmonar de los pacientes que tienen sida 1065, 1066 .los hantavirus son virus arn monocatenarios con envoltura lipdica que tpicamente causan un complejo sintomtico conocido como fiebre hemorrgica con sndrome renal. se ha demostrado que varios virus antignicamente diferentes de varias partes del mundo causan el sndrome, que tiene una gravedad variable y se caracteriza desde el punto de vista clnico por fiebre, hipotensin e insuficiencia renal. a principios de la dcada de los noventa se identific el virus sin nombre como patgeno responsable de una enfermedad, con frecuencia fulminante y que se caracteriza por afectacin pulmonar prominente, el llamado sndrome pulmonar por hantavirus 1067 . ms adelante se reconoci que otras variedades del virus, como los virus de bayou y de black creek canal, eran causas de una enfermedad similar 1068, 1069 .el reservorio natural de todos los hantavirus son roedores salvajes, y el llamado ratn ciervo (peromyscus maniculatus) es el animal ms importante que alberga la variante sin nombre en ee.uu. 1070 . se cree que los cambios de la poblacin local de roedores que induce el entorno u otros factores ambientales son responsables, al menos en parte, de las variaciones en la incidencia de la enfermedad y la aparicin de epidemias locales. es probable que el microorganismo se transmita mediante la inhalacin de excrementos secos de los roedores, y las actividades relacionadas con un mayor riesgo de esta exposicin, como limpieza de esta-blos, caza con cepos y arado con instrumentos manuales, se han relacionado con la aparicin de infeccin. probablemente debido a esa asociacin la mayor parte de los casos se ha identificado en zonas rurales. la mayora de los casos de infeccin por el virus sin nombre se ha comunicado en el sudoeste de ee.uu.; las infecciones por los virus black creek y bayou se han producido en texas y en los estados del sudeste, como florida. la mayor parte de los pacientes tena edades de entre 20 y 40 aos.el examen anatomopatolgico de los pulmones de pacientes fallecidos por sndrome pulmonar por hantavirus muestra edema intersticial y del espacio areo, con infiltrado intersticial entre leve y moderado formado por linfocitos citolgicamente maduros y activados 1071 . los signos de lesin tisular inducida por el virus, como necrosis epitelial, trombosis vascular o membranas hialinas, son tpicamente escasos o estn ausentes. se pueden identificar partculas similares a virus en las clulas endoteliales y los macrfagos alveolares mediante examen con el microscopio electrnico.la radiografa de trax inicial revela con frecuencia cambios indicadores de edema pulmonar intersticial, como lneas septales (lneas b de kerley), borrosidad hiliar y formacin de manguitos peribronquiales (figura 6-61) 1072 . tambin se puede apreciar consolidacin del espacio areo, que a veces se hace extensa rpidamente. los derrames pleurales son frecuentes y pueden ser grandes. el intervalo hasta la resolucin de las alteraciones radiogrficas oscila entre 1 y 3 semanas en la mayora de los casos.la enfermedad comienza tpicamente con un prdromo de 2 a 3 das que se caracteriza por fiebre, mialgias y, a veces, dolor abdominal y cefalea; suele faltar el exantema y las manifestaciones de rinitis y faringitis 1070 . despus de 3 a 6 das los prdromos se siguen de tos y disnea progresivas, taquipnea y taquicardia. pueden aparecer insuficiencia respiratoria con hipoxemia progresiva e hipotensin refractaria. en algunos casos se produce cid. los pacientes que sobreviven a esta fase aguda entran en un perodo de convalecencia que puede ser notablemente corto. la mortalidad de los casos es de aproximadamente el 50% 1070 . sin embargo, las secuelas a largo plazo de los supervivientes parecen ser leves, lo que probablemente refleja la lesin mnima del tejido pulmonar.los datos de laboratorio incluyen leucocitosis (en ocasiones hasta 25.000 clulas/mm 3 , muchas veces con desviacin izquier-c a p  t u l o 6  enfermedades infecciosas de los pulmones 299 f i g u r a 6 -6 1 neumona por hantavirus. la radiografa de trax muestra cardiomegalia leve con prominencia de las marcas vasculares pulmonares y pequeos derrames pleurales bilaterales. esas alteraciones se resolvieron con rapidez despus de la dilisis renal. da), trombocitopenia, aumento de la concentracin de ldh y ast, y hemoconcentracin. el diagnstico se puede confirmar mediante la demostracin de anticuerpos igm especficos contra el virus o un aumento de cuatro veces del ttulo de anticuerpos igg 1073 . el virus tambin se puede detectar en muestras de tejidos mediante examen inmunohistoqumico o rcp.la infeccin posnatal por el virus de la rubola se caracteriza por fiebre, exantema maculopapular y aumento del tamao de los ganglios linfticos; no se ha descrito afectacin del tracto respiratorio inferior. sin embargo, aproximadamente el 10% al 15% de los lactantes hijos de mujeres infectadas durante el primer trimestre del embarazo presentan malformaciones congnitas que no rara vez afectan al sistema respiratorio. las alteraciones ms frecuentes son la estenosis arterial pulmonar y la neumonitis intersticial 1074 . la primera puede afectar a la arteria pulmonar principal, a sus ramas principales o, con menos frecuencia, a las arterias musculares en zonas aisladas o mltiples 1075 . el efecto global puede ser leve y no asociarse a manifestaciones clnicas de estenosis pulmonar, o puede ser suficientemente grave para provocar hipertensin pulmonar. es posible la supervivencia hasta la vida adulta, a veces con la aparicin de cor pulmonale 1076 .los adenovirus causan una pequea parte de las enfermedades respiratorias vricas 1077 . las infecciones pueden aparecer de forma espordica o como epidemias en grupos especficos, como poblaciones militares que se han incorporado recientemente, personas que estn ingresadas en instituciones geritricas o psiquitricas y nios que participan en campamentos de verano 1078, 1079 . los pacientes inmunodeprimidos, en particular los que tienen trasplantes o sida, parecen tener un riesgo particularmente elevado 1080 . la mayora de los casos de enfermedad grave del tracto respiratorio inferior se debe a los tipos 3, 7 y 35 [1080] [1081] [1082] . la enfermedad se puede manifestar con faringitis, faringoconjuntivitis, laringotraqueobronquitis, bronquiolitis, neumona o sndrome respiratorio agudo inespecfico.en los casos graves los hallazgos anatomopatolgicos incluyen bronquitis y bronquiolitis necrosantes y/o lesin alveolar difusa; en los casos ms leves se puede encontrar inflamacin intersticial con pocos signos de necrosis tisular. es posible ver el virus como una inclusin basfila homognea que ocupa la mayor parte del ncleo de las clulas epiteliales de las vas areas y los alvolos.las manifestaciones radiogrficas de las neumonas por adenovirus en los lactantes y los nios pequeos suelen ser una consolidacin bilateral, segmentaria o no segmentaria 1083 . en la mayora de los casos se observa hiperinsuflacin. tambin son frecuentes la atelectasia lobar y el derrame pleural 1083 .los adenovirus son una de las causas ms frecuentes de un sndrome respiratorio agudo que se caracteriza por fiebre, faringitis, tos, ronquera, dolor torcico y conjuntivitis. puede haber escalofros y mialgias, con lo que el cuadro simula una infeccin gripal. la traqueobronquitis es prominente en algunos casos, y puede recordar desde el punto de vista clnico a la tos ferina. la neumona es en general leve y cursa con sntomas de las vas respiratorias altas 1084 . los pacientes suelen presentar fiebre y tos seca antes de que aparezca la disnea 1079 . se puede observar una disminucin transitoria del recuento leucoctico y elevacin de las transaminasas, la ldh y la creatina fosfocinasa. los pacientes con afecta-cin ms grave pueden presentar un cuadro similar al shock sptico, que en ocasiones se asocia a sdra 1079 .las complicaciones de la infeccin primaria son relativamente poco frecuentes. en ocasiones se produce sobreinfeccin bacteriana. como era de esperar, la infeccin diseminada es ms frecuente en los pacientes inmunodeprimidos. la neumona rara vez es mortal en pacientes adultos por lo dems sanos. las secuelas a largo plazo incluyen bronquiectasias, bronquiolitis obliterante y sndrome de pulmn hipertransparente 1085, 1086 . tambin se ha propuesto que la infeccin crnica subclnica de las vas areas puede participar en la patogenia de la epoc 1087 .los herpesvirus son virus de adn bicatenario que estn rodeados por una envoltura lipdica procedente de la membrana nuclear del husped. los microorganismos (los genomas) son capaces de permanecer latentes dentro de las clulas infectadas sin causar una enfermedad reconocible, muchas veces durante toda la vida del individuo. en determinadas circunstancias, con frecuencia cuando se produce alguna alteracin de la funcin inmunitaria, pero a veces sin ninguna causa clnica evidente, se produce la reactivacin y aparece la enfermedad clnica. esta enfermedad suele ser local y bien tolerada en personas por lo dems sanas. sin embargo, en pacientes inmunodeprimidos es con frecuencia diseminada y grave.desde el punto de vista antignico, los herpesvirus se pueden dividir en ms de 70 subtipos, pero slo una pequea parte de ellos se ha relacionado con enfermedad pleuropulmonar en seres humanos adultos, sobre todo el virus del herpes simple de tipo 1 (vhs-1, herpesvirus humano), el herpesvirus 6, el 8, el virus de la varicela (virus varicela-zster), el cmv y el veb.el vhs-1 se transmite en situaciones de contacto personal ntimo a travs de la saliva o del lquido de las vesculas y produce la mayora de las veces enfermedades orales como gingivoestomatitis aguda en los nios y herpes labial recurrente en personas mayores. es posible que la infeccin del tracto respiratorio inferior sea ms frecuente de lo que generalmente se piensa. en un estudio de 308 pacientes consecutivos que tenan una infeccin grave del tracto respiratorio inferior, el vhs-1 fue el patgeno que se identific con ms frecuencia 1088 . esta infeccin afecta con frecuencia slo a la mucosa traqueobronquial. muchos casos se deben a extensin desde un foco de la orofaringe o del esfago por aspiracin o por extensin mucosa directa; en algunos pacientes la infeccin parece deberse a la intubacin traqueal 1089 . muchos pacientes presentan alteraciones predisponentes subyacentes como quemaduras graves, sida, neoplasias malignas o trasplantes de rganos [1088] [1089] [1090] .la enfermedad traqueobronquial se manifiesta en el estudio anatomopatolgico por lceras epiteliales focales o difusas (figura 6-62) 1090, 1091 . las clulas infectadas de los bordes de la lcera contienen inclusiones intranucleares eosinfilas caractersticas o aparecen como clulas nicas o multinucleadas con ncleos con aspecto de vidrio esmerilado. estas clulas se pueden detectar en el esputo expectorado o en los lavados o cepillados bronquiales y son un dato convincente de infeccin del tracto respiratorio inferior por el vhs cuando no hay enfermedad herptica orofarngea (que puede causar contaminacin de la muestra) 1092 . la neumona se suele caracterizar por necrosis alveolar y un exudado proteico con respuesta inflamatoria polimorfonuclear variable.las manifestaciones radiolgicas de neumona son la mayora de las veces zonas bilaterales de consolidacin del espacio areo 1091 . en ocasiones hay opacidades nodulares mal definidas que en la tcar corresponden a pequeos ndulos de densidad de tejidos blandos (de 3 a 20 mm de dimetro) que se asocian a zonas de atenuacin de vidrio esmerilado 886 .la infeccin traqueobronquial se manifiesta clnicamente por fiebre, tos productiva y, en algunos pacientes, signos de broncospasmo 1088, 1093 ; en ocasiones se produce hemoptisis. las seudomembranas relacionadas con las lceras traqueales pueden ser suficientemente grandes para producir obstruccin de las vas areas superiores 1088 . los sntomas de neumona son inespecficos y dependen de la extensin de la enfermedad. algunos pacientes presentan sdra 1094, 1095 .el diagnstico de traqueobronquitis o neumona por vhs se suele basar en los datos citolgicos e histolgicos en las muestras que se obtienen mediante biopsia o cepillado traqueobronquial; la confirmacin se puede conseguir mediante el cultivo del virus o con tcnicas de inmunofluorescencia o inmunohistoqumica. la broncoscopia es til para identificar las ulceraciones de la trquea y los bronquios proximales y mejora la sensibilidad y la especificidad del diagnstico citolgico 1091 . la presencia de lesiones de herpes mucocutneo debe plantear la sospecha de la enfermedad; sin embargo, las lesiones mucocutneas faltan con frecuencia y se pueden ver en relacin con otras enfermedades.el herpesvirus 6 se ha identificado en el lquido del lba y en el tejido pulmonar de una alta proporcin de pacientes trasplantados 1096 . aunque esos pacientes no suelen mostrar signos de enfer-medad clnicamente significativa causada por el virus, su presencia se ha relacionado con el aumento de la mortalidad, y se ha especulado que la infeccin puede potenciar la capacidad patgena de otros microorganismos oportunistas 1096, 1097 . tambin es posible que el virus produzca neumona intersticial en algunos pacientes 1098 .se ha implicado al herpesvirus 8 en la patogenia de diversos trastornos pleuropulmonares, como hipertensin pulmonar, fibrosis pulmonar idioptica, linfoma seroso (pleural) primario y sarcoma de kaposi [1099] [1100] [1101] . de hecho, algunos autores han encontrado que la determinacin de secuencias del microorganismo en el lquido del lba mediante rcp es una tcnica sensible y especfica para el diagnstico del sarcoma de kaposi pulmonar 1102 .la infeccin por el virus de la varicela (virus varicela-zster) se presenta en dos formas clnicas: 1) varicela, que es una enfermedad primaria y habitualmente diseminada en personas no infectadas previamente, y 2) herpes zster, que est causado por la reactivacin del virus latente y que tpicamente se manifiesta como una erupcin en un dermatoma cutneo de un lado del cuerpo. aunque cualquiera de las dos formas se puede asociar a neumona, la mayora de los casos se produce despus de la varicela. adems, el herpes zster se puede complicar con parlisis diafragmtica unilateral, probablemente por extensin de la infeccin desde la raz dorsal hasta las porciones posterior y lateral de la mdula espinal adyacente y las clulas del asta anterior 1103 .la varicela es una enfermedad predominantemente mucocutnea muy contagiosa que suele aparecer durante los meses fros del ao en climas templados 1104 . se piensa que la transmisin se produce mediante gotitas respiratorias. en los pases desarrollados la mayor parte de los casos corresponde a nios; en los pases subdesarrollados la enfermedad es ms frecuente en adolescentes y adultos jvenes. la incidencia global de neumona oscila entre el 10% y el 15%; sin embargo, en los adultos ingresados en un hospital la incidencia lleg en algunas revisiones antiguas hasta el 50% 1105 . la neumona es ms frecuente en los adultos que tienen una afectacin cutnea grave. la enfermedad neoplsica preexistente, en particular la leucemia y el linfoma, y la inmunodeficiencia son factores predisponentes 1106, 1107 . tanto la incidencia como la gravedad de la neumona tambin son significativamente mayores en las mujeres embarazadas 1108 .en los casos ms graves de neumona los hallazgos histolgicos son una lesin alveolar difusa. se pueden ver inclusiones intranucleares eosinfilas angulares rodeadas por un halo en las clulas epiteliales alveolares. es posible observar vesculas similares a las de la piel y las membranas mucosas en la trquea y en los bronquios de mayor tamao, as como en las superficies pleurales y peritoneales 1109 . las manifestaciones anatomopatolgicas de infeccin curada (vase ms adelante) son focos de colgeno hialinizado o de tejido necrtico rodeados por una cpsula fibrosa 1110 .el patrn radiogrfico caracterstico de la neumona aguda est formado por mltiples opacidades nodulares de 5 a 10 mm de dimetro (figura 6-63). tambin se pueden ver opacidades nodulares ms pequeas y ndulos de aspecto miliar, aunque son infrecuentes 1111 . las opacidades suelen estar bien definidas en la periferia pulmonar, mientras que tienden a confluir cerca de los hilios y en las bases de los pulmones 1112 . es frecuente la progresin rpida hacia la consolidacin extensa del espacio areo. se produce aumento del tamao de los ganglios linfticos hiliares, aunque quizs sea difcil apreciarlo a causa de la proximidad de la consolidacin en el parnquima pulmonar vecino 1109, [1111] [1112] [1113] . el derrame pleural es infrecuente y prcticamente nunca es grande 1114 .la normalizacin radiogrfica suele tardar entre 10 das y varios meses 1111 . sin embargo, pueden quedar ndulos residuales, calcificados o no, durante muchos aos despus de la resolucin clnica de la neumona 1112, 1115 . los focos de calcificacin varan en nmero y en tamao, pero rara vez superan los 2 a 3 mm de dimetro; predominan en la mitad inferior de los pulmones. las adenopatas hiliares no se calcifican.el comienzo de la varicela est marcado muchas veces por fiebre alta, que puede preceder al exantema en 2 o 3 das. el exantema puede ser escarlatiniforme en sus etapas tempranas, pero rpidamente se hace maculopapular, vesiculoso y pustuloso. muchas veces est precedido por dolor y, al menos inicialmente, tiene una clara distribucin dermatmica. los dermatomas dorsales se afectan en aproximadamente la mitad de los casos. la mayora de los pacientes tiene antecedentes de contacto con un nio afecto entre 3 y 21 das antes del comienzo de la enfermedad aguda. los sntomas y signos de la neumona suelen aparecer 2 a 3 das despus de comenzar la erupcin cutnea e incluyen tos, disnea, taquipnea, dolor pleurtico y, en los casos graves, hemoptisis y cianosis. la temperatura puede ser alta. la expectoracin no es purulenta, a menos que exista una infeccin bacteriana secundaria (una complicacin relativamente infrecuente, en comparacin con la infeccin por el virus influenza).en aproximadamente la tercera parte de los casos el recuento leucoctico supera los 10.000/mm 3 , junto con leucocitosis polimorfonuclear. el virus se puede cultivar a partir del lquido que se obtiene de las vesculas tempranas. el examen citolgico de los raspados de las vesculas para detectar la presencia de inclusiones vricas es una tcnica ms rpida y con frecuencia diagnstica.el cmv es un patgeno humano frecuente que se ha relacionado con una amplia variedad de enfermedades y cuyas manifestaciones dependen en gran parte del estado inmunitario del husped. en los nios y los pacientes mayores se cree que el virus se transmite principalmente por contacto directo con secreciones corporales (p. ej., saliva, lgrimas, orina y semen) de una persona infectada 1116 . esta infeccin es frecuente, y las tasas de seropositividad varan entre el 40% y el 100% en diferentes poblaciones de adultos de todo el mundo 1117 . las tasas ms altas se suelen encontrar en grupos de nivel socioeconmico ms bajo. la mayora de las infecciones es asintomtica, y el nico efecto significativo es la presencia de virus latentes que pueden ser la fuente de una reinfeccin. en consecuencia, el cmv es una causa infrecuente de neumona adquirida en la comunidad 1118 . por el contrario, la neumona y otras manifestaciones clnicas de infeccin activa son mucho ms frecuentes en las personas que tienen alguna enfermedad subyacente, en particular la inmunodeficiencia que se relaciona con los trasplantes de rganos (vase pgina 536) 1119 . los estudios serolgicos indican que muchos pacientes con enfermedad clnica han estado expuestos previamente a cmv (es decir, el trastorno se debe a reactivacin del virus latente) 1120 . como en la enfermedad primaria, esta forma de infeccin secundaria puede provocar una respuesta mediada por anticuerpos y el paciente puede permanecer asintomtico; en ese caso la manifestacin principal de la infeccin es la siembra asintomtica de virus en diversas secreciones corporales 1120 . tambin parece claro que los pacientes seropositivos se pueden reinfectar desde una fuente exgena, y que es posible la infeccin por dos cepas al mismo tiempo 1121 . desde un punto de vista prctico, la enfermedad con manifestaciones clnicas tiende a ser ms frecuente y ms grave en pacientes inmunodeprimidos con infeccin primaria (p. ej., receptores seronegativos de un trasplante de rgano que se ha extrado de un donante seropositivo) 1117 .las caractersticas anatomopatolgicas de la infeccin pulmonar por cmv son variables y reflejan la compleja interaccin entre la reproduccin vrica y el control inmunitario del husped. el microorganismo se puede cultivar a partir de muestras de pulmn o de lquido de lba procedentes de personas que no tienen sntomas clnicos, signos histolgicos de enfermedad ni las inclusiones citolgicas que se asocian tpicamente a la presencia del virus 1119 . en otros pacientes (sobre todo en los que tienen sida) se pueden identificar esas inclusiones focalmente en algunas clulas o se pueden distribuir de manera difusa por el parnquima sin signos de lesin pulmonar ni de inflamacin 1122, 1123 .la patogenia de la enfermedad pulmonar inducida por cmv es compleja y no se conoce totalmente. a juzgar por observaciones experimentales y anatomopatolgicas parece claro que el virus produce una tisular directa en muchos casos 1124 . los estudios clnicos y en animales de experimentacin han aportado datos de que un mecanismo inmunitario puede participar tambin en la patogenia de algunos casos de enfermedad 1124 . la neumona se puede manifestar desde el punto de vista anatomopatolgico por mltiples ndulos hemorrgicos relativamente bien definidos de 0,1 a 1,5 cm de dimetro, diseminados aleatoriamente por el parnquima, o como enfermedad ms difusa (lesin alveolar difusa o neumonitis intersticial) 1125 . las clulas infectadas estn muy aumentadas de tamao y contienen inclusiones basfilas homogneas, redondas u ovales, que ocupan la mayor parte del ncleo y estn separadas de la membrana nuclear por un halo bien definido (ncleo en ojo de lechuza) (figura 6-64). tambin se pueden ver inclusiones intracitoplsmicas, que aparecen cuando ya estn bien desarrolladas las inclusiones nucleares.los signos radiogrficos ms frecuentes son las opacidades lineales bilaterales (patrn reticular), las opacidades en vidrio esmerilado y la consolidacin parenquimatosa (figura 6-65) 1126 . las manifestaciones menos frecuentes incluyen opacidades nodulares pequeas, un patrn reticulonodular y consolidacin lobar 46, 1127 los hallazgos de la tcar habitualmente son una combinacin de zonas de atenuacin en vidrio esmerilado, consolidacin parenquimatosa y opacidades nodulares o reticulonodulares (figura 6-66) 1128, 1129 . las alteraciones son bilaterales y simtricas y tienden a afectar a todas las zonas pulmonares. se observa derrame pleural en aproximadamente el 50% de los casos.en los nios mayores y en los adultos que no tienen inmunodeficiencia el nico sntoma de infeccin por el cmv puede ser la fiebre prolongada 1130 . algunos pacientes presentan un cuadro que recuerda a la mononucleosis infecciosa 1131 ; la neumona es una complicacin infrecuente 1132 . el cmv es una causa poco frecuente de neumona adquirida en la comunidad sin sntomas asociados de mononucleosis 1118 . los sntomas y signos de afecta- cin pulmonar en pacientes inmunodeprimidos son inespecficos e incluyen tos seca, disnea progresiva y cianosis.como en el caso de otros microorganismos, se dispone de varias tcnicas para la deteccin de cmv, cada una de ellas con sus ventajas y limitaciones 1133 . el virus se puede aislar a partir de varias secreciones corporales, sangre o tejidos, y el mayor rendimiento lo tiene la tcnica de cultivo en monocapa celular con inmunofluorescencia indirecta. otras pruebas incluyen inmunotincin con anticuerpos monoclonales, hibridacin in situ y rcp, y todas ellas se han evaluado en el lquido del lba, en sangre y en muestras tisulares 1119, 1134 . una limitacin importante de estas tcnicas es que la identificacin del cmv en muestras distintas a los tejidos no indica necesariamente enfermedad. en consecuencia, a veces es necesario documentar la lesin tisular en muestras de biopsia para confirmar la capacidad patgena del virus. las tcnicas de fijacin del complemento, aglutinacin, elisa y radioinmunoanlisis se usan tambin para el diagnstico serolgico de la infeccin por cmv; como en otras infecciones vricas, se considera que un aumento del ttulo de cuatro veces es un resultado positivo. sin embargo, el retraso cronolgico limita el empleo de la tcnica en la prctica clnica.el veb infecta a los linfocitos b y a las clulas epiteliales farngeas, dentro de los cuales puede permanecer latente durante perodos prolongados; las manifestaciones clnicas de la enfermedad guardan relacin en gran parte con los rganos y los tejidos que albergan esas clulas. la infeccin se suele contagiar por contacto directo entre personas.el veb quizs sea ms conocido como causa de la mononucleosis infecciosa, un sndrome que afecta de modo predominante a los adultos jvenes y se caracteriza por faringitis, fiebre, adenopatas ms o menos generalizadas, esplenomegalia y aumento de la cifra de linfocitos, muchos de ellos citolgicamente atpicos, en sangre perifrica. la enfermedad intratorcica es infrecuente, y se manifiesta con ms frecuencia por aumento del tamao de los ganglios linfticos (figura 6-67) y/o neumonitis intersti-cial 1135 . tpicamente el paciente refiere un cuadro que comienza de forma insidiosa con debilidad, malestar general, fiebre y molestias farngeas. la tos espasmdica que produce pequeas cantidades de esputo y la disnea son manifestaciones de la afectacin del tracto respiratorio inferior.se ha implicado al veb en la aparicin de varios trastornos linfoproliferativos, en particular el linfoma de grado alto relacionado con el sida o con trasplantes de rganos (trastornos linfoproliferativos postrasplante), algunos casos de linfoma pleural primario relacionado con piotrax crnico y la granulomatosis linfomatoidea 1136, 1137 . tambin hay datos de la participacin del virus en la patogenia de la neumonitis intersticial linfoctica 1138 , la fibrosis pulmonar idioptica 1100 y algunos casos poco frecuentes de cncer de pulmn 1139 .los papilomavirus causan papilomas epidermoides en la laringe y, con menos frecuencia, en el tracto respiratorio inferior (vase pgina 374). hay datos de que esos virus son responsables de la aparicin de carcinoma de pulmn en algunos pacientes que tienen papilomas y posiblemente de algunos casos de carcinoma bronquial epidermoide sin antecedentes de papilomas 1140, 1141 . como se menciona en otro captulo (vase pgina 836), tambin hay datos de que la infeccin yatrgena por el virus 40 de los simios (un papovavirus que no infecta habitualmente a los seres humanos) puede participar en la patogenia del mesotelioma.los micoplasmas son los microorganismos de vida libre ms pequeos que se pueden cultivar en medios artificiales. aunque comparten diversos atributos bacterianos, su tamao diminuto, la ausencia de pared celular y las caractersticas genticas los separan de la mayora de las bacterias, y se suele considerar que son un grupo aparte. aunque los micoplasmas son pleomorfos, tienden a presentarse como filamentos o bacilos en los tejidos. en un extremo tienen una estructura terminal especializada que se considera necesaria para la adherencia del microorganismo a las superficies epiteliales.entre las varias especies de micoplasmas que se aslan en el tracto respiratorio, m. pneumoniae es la causa ms frecuente con mucho de enfermedad humana. de hecho, es una de las causas ms frecuentes de neumona adquirida en la comunidad: se ha estimado que es responsable del 10% al 15% de los casos en el conjunto de la poblacin 1142, 1143 y de hasta el 30% al 50% en grupos especficos, como los reclutas militares 1144 . las infecciones se producen a lo largo de todo el ao, con un mximo en el otoo y la primera parte del invierno en regiones templadas. la enfermedad afecta con ms frecuencia a individuos de entre 5 y 20 aos de edad. el microorganismo suele transmitirse de persona a persona mediante la inhalacin de las gotitas que se expulsan con la tos.a pesar de la alta incidencia de neumona en la poblacin general, el microorganismo no parece ser especialmente contagioso y la enfermedad se suele transmitir despus del contacto prolongado dentro de familias o comunidades cerradas. sin embargo, en esos contextos la tasa de infeccin es alta; el interrogatorio cuidadoso de los familiares suele revelar sntomas de afectacin de los tractos respiratorios superior e inferior en la mayora de los pacientes 1145 . pueden producirse brotes epidmicos locales de infeccin relativamente grave, tambin habitualmente en grupos familiares o comunitarios 1146 .en la infeccin humana, tanto experimental como natural, el microorganismo se localiza inicialmente en el epitelio traqueobronquial, donde se encuentra en contacto ntimo con la superficie de las clulas ciliadas 1147 , al parecer por la adherencia de su unidad terminal. la patogenia de la lesin tisular subsiguiente puede guardar relacin con varios mecanismos: 1) efecto citotxico directo del microorganismo; 2) reaccin inmunitaria del husped, y 3) cambios citotxicos e inflamatorios originados por contacto de los macrfagos con el microorganismo.los signos anatomopatolgicos son sobre todo un infiltrado inflamatorio mononuclear, peribronquial y peribronquiolar (figura 6-68); en los casos ms graves se observa ulceracin epitelial y un infiltrado neutrfilo 1148 . se produce un grado variable de inflamacin e hiperplasia de las clulas de tipo ii en el parnquima adyacente. otros patrones histolgicos que se han descrito ocasionalmente incluyen lesin alveolar difusa, neumona organizada, hemorragia alveolar y un cuadro similar a la proteinosis alveolar 1148, 1149 . no est claro hasta qu punto esos signos representan un efecto directo de los micoplasmas o son secundarios a otros mecanismos. es posible la aparicin de fibrosis intersticial como complicacin a largo plazo 1150 .el patrn radiogrfico tpico es indistinguible del de muchas neumonas vricas y son opacidades intersticiales y/o del espacio areo (figura 6-69) 1151 . en las fases tempranas la inflamacin intersticial causa un patrn reticular fino 1152 , seguido por signos de consolidacin del espacio areo que tiende a ser segmentaria, en contraste con la distribucin no segmentaria de la neumona bacteriana aguda del espacio areo (p. ej., la causada por s. pneumoniae) 1153 . la enfermedad se manifiesta de forma predominante en los lbulos inferiores 1154 . el aumento del tamao de los ganglios linfticos hiliares es poco frecuente en adultos 1155 , pero ocurre en aproximadamente el 30% de los nios 1156 . los derrames pleurales suelen ser pequeos y unilaterales 1157 .los principales signos en la tcar son opacidades nodulares centrolobulillares y lineales ramificadas con una distribucin focal, engrosamiento de los fascculos broncovasculares y zonas de atenuacin en vidrio esmerilado y consolidacin lobulillar o segmentaria (figura 6-70) 1158 . en muchos pacientes las zonas de consolidacin tienen una distribucin lobulillar.el caso tpico de infeccin por micoplasma comienza de modo insidioso con fiebre, tos seca, cefalea, malestar general y, rara vez, escalofros 1159, 1160 . las mialgias, las artralgias y los snto-c a p  t u l o 6  enfermedades infecciosas de los pulmones 305mononucleosis infecciosa. paciente de 17 aos con anamnesis y datos de laboratorio compatibles con mononucleosis infecciosa. las imgenes de las radiografas posteroanterior (a) y lateral (b) demuestran un aumento marcado del tamao de ambos hilios con un contorno lobulado tpico de adenopatas. no existen datos de adenopatas mediastnicas ni de enfermedad pulmonar o pleural. un mes ms tarde la radiografa de trax era normal. ( mas digestivos suelen ser leves o nulos. la afectacin del tracto respiratorio superior, que se caracteriza sobre todo por faringitis y sntomas de rinitis, se encuentra en aproximadamente el 50% de los casos. en ocasiones se observa miringitis ampollosa 1161 .el sntoma principal de la afectacin del tracto respiratorio inferior es la tos, que puede ser molesta y paroxstica. aunque inicialmente es seca, se puede acompaar de expectoracin mucosa o francamente purulenta si se prolonga la infeccin. la hemoptisis y el dolor pleurtico son infrecuentes. en ocasiones se produce sdra 1162 . se ha descrito un cuadro particularmente grave, que se caracteriza por afectacin de mltiples lbulos, fiebre prolongada, dificultad respiratoria y derrame pleural, en algunos pacientes que tienen anemia drepanoctica 1163 .las complicaciones y manifestaciones extrapulmonares de la infeccin por m. pneumoniae no son infrecuentes y muchas veces son ms graves que la enfermedad del tracto respiratorio 1159 . pueden incluir meningoencefalitis, meningitis, mielitis transversa y parlisis de pares craneales 1164 ; hemaglutinacin, hemlisis (relacionada con la presencia de aglutininas fras), prpura trombocitopnica y trombosis venosa perifrica; pericarditis y miocarditis 1165 , y exantema asociado a fiebre alta, estomatitis y oftalma (sndrome de stevens-johnson) 1166 .el recuento leucoctico suele ser normal en la neumona por micoplasma; sin embargo, se han encontrado cifras por encima de 10.000/mm 3 en la cuarta o la tercera parte de los pacientes, en algunas series 1167 . la mayora de los pacientes muestra ttulos de aglutininas fras por encima de 1:32. a pesar de todo, su presencia tiene poco valor diagnstico, puesto que aproximadamente la cuarta parte de las neumonas con crioaglutininas positivas est causada por microorganismos distintos de m. pneumoniae (habitualmente virus).puesto que el aislamiento tarda 1 semana o ms, y al cabo de ese tiempo la mayora de los pacientes ya est mejorando, el cultivo slo suele tener utilidad para confirmar el diagnstico. de modo similar, un aumento cudruple del ttulo de anticuerpos igg especficos o de las crioaglutininas tiene un valor diagnstico escaso durante la fase aguda de la enfermedad. se ha propuesto la demostracin de la presencia de anticuerpos iga o igm especficos contra los micoplasmas como prueba ms rpida y fiable para el diagnstico precoz 1168 . como en otras infecciones pulmonares, las tcnicas de diagnstico molecular pueden tener una utilidad particular. por ejemplo, mediante el uso de una sonda para el arn micoplsmico se han comunicado sensibilidades y especificidades entre el 75% y el 100% y entre el f i g u r a 6 -6 8mycoplasma pneumoniae: bronquiolitis y neumonitis. el corte de una muestra de biopsia pulmonar abierta de un varn de 23 aos con insuficiencia respiratoria rpidamente progresiva (a) muestra neumonitis intersticial focal entre leve y moderada e inflamacin intensa centrada alrededor de un bronquiolo membranoso y un bronquiolo respiratorio (b). tambin se aprecia un grado ligero de inflamacin intersticial alveolar. otro campo de la misma biopsia (b) muestra la misma reaccin en un bronquiolo respiratorio terminal. ( aunque casi todas las infecciones que produce m. pneumoniae son leves, la neumona suele ser ms prolongada y grave que la que producen los virus. rara vez la enfermedad es fulminante y mortal. en algunos pacientes la enfermedad pulmonar difusa produce disfuncin residual, restrictiva u obstructiva 1171, 1172 .las clamidias son diminutos microorganismos intracelulares obligados que se deben clasificar como bacterias. difieren de las bacterias habituales (incluyendo las formas intracelulares, como las rickettsias) sobre todo por su modo exclusivo de reproduccin y por su incapacidad de sintetizar sustancias de alta energa, como el trifosfato de adenosina (atp) y el trifosfato de guanosina (gtp). las clamidias existen en una forma extracelular como cuerpos elementales, que miden 0,2 a 0,3 m de dimetro 1173 . esos cuerpos elementales se adhieren a las clulas susceptibles y entran en ellas, en cuyo interior se convierten en cuerpos reticulares grandes, de 0,5 a 1 m, que experimentan divisin para formar colonias intracelulares. los cuerpos reticulares no son infecciosos en s mismos, y acaban por convertirse en numerosos cuerpos elementales; en ese momento se rompe la membrana del fagosoma, muere la clula y se liberan los cuerpos elementales. se cree que la liberacin de enzimas fagolisosmicas al romperse la membrana es responsable de la lisis celular.tres especies, chlamydia trachomatis, chlamydia pneumoniae y chlamydia psittaci, pueden causar enfermedad pulmonar humana.este microorganismo es ms conocido como causa de infecciones genitourinarias en adultos y de conjuntivitis y neumona en lactantes hijos de mujeres infectadas. sin embargo, se ha demostrado que en ocasiones tambin causa neumona en adultos tanto inmunodeprimidos como inmunocompetentes 1174 . las manifestaciones clnicas son inespecficas y oscilan desde las que se relacionan con una bronquitis aguda a las que se deben a una neumona intersticial difusa grave 1175 .a mediados de la dcada de los ochenta se aisl una nueva cepa de chlamydia en pacientes con neumona, y se la llam twar debido a su semejanza con los aislados designados previamente tw-183 y ar-39. ms adelante el anlisis gentico demostr que el microorganismo era distinto de c. trachomatis y de c. psittaci, y se le dio el nombre de c. pneumoniae. desde entonces los estudios epidemiolgicos han demostrado que es una de las causas ms frecuentes de neumona adquirida en la comunidad. de hecho, la enfermedad clnica parece representar aproximadamente el 5% al 10% de todos los casos de infeccin del tracto respiratorio inferior 1176, 1177 . aunque suele aparecer de forma espordica, se han descrito brotes epidmicos en familias y comunidades locales 1178 . los pacientes con sida, epoc o fibrosis qustica parecen tener un mayor riesgo de infeccin [1179] [1180] [1181] . las manifestaciones anatomopatolgicas de la infeccin no estn bien documentadas porque la enfermedad rara vez causa la muerte. las manifestaciones radiolgicas ms frecuentes son consolidacin del espacio areo y opacidades intersticiales 1182 . la consolidacin puede ser unilateral o bilateral, focal, multifocal o, con menos frecuencia, lobar. los signos menos frecuentes incluyen zonas de atelectasia y ndulos pequeos. las alteraciones radiogrficas tienden a progresar hasta la formacin de opacidades bilaterales mixtas, intersticiales y del espacio areo durante la evolucin de la infeccin. se ven derrames pleurales, tpicamente pequeos o medianos, en aproximadamente el 25% de los pacientes.las manifestaciones clnicas ms frecuentes son faringitis, tos seca y fiebre 1183 ; algunos pacientes presentan ronquera. el microorganismo se puede aislar en cultivos tisulares y se identifica con anticuerpos especficos 1184 . la prueba de inmunofluorescencia directa es sensible y especfica, y se ha empleado mucho para el diagnstico 1185 . es probable que la rcp llegue a ser un instrumento an ms importante en el futuro 1186 . la enfermedad suele ser leve, autolimitada y sin secuelas. sin embargo, se han descrito casos mortales en algunos pacientes que tenan enfermedades subyacentes.este microorganismo es un patgeno frecuente de muchas aves y mamferos, y slo infecta a los seres humanos de modo ocasional. puesto que la enfermedad humana se relacion inicialmente con los loros y con otros miembros de orden psittaciformes, se ha conocido generalmente como psitacosis, aunque la presencia de la infeccin en otras muchas aves indica que el trmino ornitosis es ms apropiado. la mayora de los casos humanos en los que se puede obtener una historia de exposicin guarda relacin con periquitos, palomas o aves de corral 1187, 1188 . los grmenes se excretan con las heces y la orina de las aves y permanecen viables durante al menos un mes a temperatura ambiente; en la mayora de los casos la infeccin humana se debe a la inhalacin de restos de excrementos secos. la enfermedad puede aparecer de forma espordica o como epidemias, y estas ltimas suelen afectar a trabajadores que manipulan aves de corral 1188 .las caractersticas anatomopatolgicas de la enfermedad humana mortal son las de la lesin alveolar difusa 1189 . se pueden identificar inclusiones intracitoplsmicas con forma bacilar, pero en general es difcil verlas.se ha descrito que el patrn en la radiografa de trax es una opacidad en vidrio esmerilado homognea que a veces contiene algunas zonas de radiotransparencia 1190 , un patrn reticular focal que se irradia desde las zonas hiliares o afecta a las bases pulmonares 1191 , y una consolidacin segmentaria o no segmentaria con o sin atelectasia. se puede encontrar aumento del tamao de los ganglios linfticos hiliares 1191 . la resolucin radiogrfica se retrasa con frecuencia hasta muchas semanas despus de la curacin clnica.la ornitosis vara de intensidad entre un episodio febril leve y una neumona grave indistinguible de la infeccin bacteriana aguda 1192 ; tambin se puede manifestar como una enfermedad recurrente crnica. el comienzo puede ser insidioso o brusco. en los casos ms graves la enfermedad tiende a simular la fiebre tifoidea, con bradicardia e incluso manchas rosadas 1193 . la cefalea, la fiebre y los escalofros son casi constantes. el sntoma respiratorio ms prominente es la tos, en general seca pero a veces con expectoracin mucoide no purulenta; en ocasiones se produce hemoptisis. en caso de infeccin sobreaguda puede aparecer dolor pleurtico y disnea. los sntomas y signos sistmicos incluyen malestar general, anorexia, nuseas, vmitos, faringitis, poliartritis, mialgias y dolor abdominal. se puede encontrar hepatoesplenomegalia y aumento del tamao de los ganglios linfticos superficiales.al considerar el riesgo potencial de exposicin a las aves en la anamnesis conviene recordar varios puntos. aunque el ave o las aves responsables quizs hayan presentado enfermedad evidente o hayan muerto por la infeccin, no siempre sucede as 1194 . adems, la infeccin se puede contagiar por un ave adquirida recientemente que est sana por tener ya inmunidad. por ltimo, no siempre hay antecedentes de exposicin identificable a aves 1195 .la cifra de leucocitos oscila desde normal hasta algo aumentada, con o sin eosinofilia. el germen se puede aislar mediante cultivo de tejido esplnico o heptico en la cavidad intraperitoneal del ratn, en embriones de pollo y en tejidos; el crecimiento se aprecia al cabo de 5 a 30 das.las rickettsias son pequeos microorganismos intracelulares obligados que se clasifican correctamente como bacterias. el hbitat natural se encuentra en diversos artrpodos, y las rickettsias se transmiten a los animales superiores y los seres humanos mediante las picaduras de los artrpodos. se conocen cuatro grupos causantes de enfermedad humana, pero el principal productor de infeccin respiratoria es coxiella burnetii. aunque el componente respiratorio no suele ser prominente desde el punto de vista clnico, algunos pacientes con fiebre maculosa de las montaas rocosas tambin presentan afectacin pulmonar. c. burnetti produce la fiebre q. su reservorio natural parecen ser las garrapatas, cuyas picaduras transmiten los microorganismos a diversos mamferos, insectos y aves. el germen es excepcionalmente resistente a la desecacin y puede sobrevivir durante muchos meses en un entorno extracelular hostil. esta resistencia favorece la transmisin por inhalacin, y la mayora de las infecciones ha procedido de cultivos de laboratorio 1196 o de animales infectados que se utilizan para la investigacin o que se sacrifican en mataderos 1197, 1198 . los animales son especialmente contagiosos despus del parto (el microorganismo crece bien en el tracto reproductor de las vacas y se puede aislar en la placenta).la fiebre q tiene una distribucin mundial; se describi originalmente en australia (fiebre de queensland) y ms adelante en ee.uu., europa y otros lugares. se ha estimado que produce neumona en aproximadamente el 5% de los casos australianos de infeccin, en contraste con una incidencia de aproximadamente el 50% en los pacientes de ee.uu. y del reino unido 1198 ; esta observacin quizs refleje una diferencia de virulencia entre las distintas cepas del microorganismo. existe una marcada relacin laboral y el riesgo es particularmente alto en agricultores, operarios de mataderos y establos y el personal de los laboratorios veterinarios y mdicos.la anatoma patolgica de la neumona de la fiebre q se caracteriza por inflamacin intersticial leve y ocupacin del espacio areo alveolar por una combinacin de sangre, lquido de edema y clulas inflamatorias mononucleares 1199 . puede haber necrosis. las vas areas superiores contienen un exudado similar y sus paredes pueden mostrar zonas focales de ulceracin epitelial y un infiltrado inflamatorio mononuclear.los signos radiogrficos son tpicamente mltiples zonas de consolidacin redondeadas de 5 a 20 cm de dimetro, o numerosas zonas de consolidacin segmentaria 1200, 1201 . algunos pacientes presentan consolidacin lobar o sublobar asociada a prdida de volumen 1202 . las zonas de consolidacin suelen afectar a los lbulos inferiores. hay un derrame pleural pequeo en aproximadamente el 10% de los pacientes 1202 . la resolucin tiende a ser lenta, con una media de 30 das, y a veces tarda varios meses.la enfermedad suele comenzar de modo insidioso con malestar general durante varios das, seguido por cefaleas, a veces intensas, escalofros, mialgias y artralgias; en una pequea parte de los casos hay nuseas, vmitos y diarrea 1197 . la afectacin pulmonar se caracteriza por tos seca y, en los casos graves, disnea y dolor torcico. la fiebre suele ser intermitente y puede durar varias semanas. la enfermedad extrapulmonar es frecuente e incluye hepatitis, endocarditis, miocarditis, meningoencefalitis y flebitis. la evolucin puede ser progresiva crnica o recurrente y recidivante 1203 ; en la mayora de estos casos el corazn es la principal localizacin de la enfermedad.los microorganismos se pueden aislar en orina, sangre, esputos o lquido pleural. la enfermedad suele tener un carcter autolimitado y pocos pacientes presentan secuelas a largo plazo.este microorganismo es la causa de la fiebre maculosa de las montaas rocosas. se encuentra exclusivamente en amrica del norte y del sur y a pesar de su nombre la enfermedad es ms frecuente en el este de ee.uu.. las personas son infectadas por las picaduras de varias especies de garrapatas, por lo que la mayora de los casos se produce durante los meses clidos. des-de el punto de la inoculacin inicial los grmenes se diseminan a travs del torrente sanguneo e invaden las clulas endoteliales de los capilares, donde se multiplican y pueden causar necrosis endotelial, vasculitis y trombosis. la consecuencia es necrosis tisular y hemorragias diseminadas. la afectacin ms intensa se encuentra en la piel, los tejidos subcutneos y el sistema nervioso central.aunque la afectacin respiratoria no suele ser una manifestacin clnica prominente, se observaron signos de afectacin del tracto respiratorio inferior en aproximadamente el 40% de los pacientes de una serie en algn momento de la evolucin de la enfermedad 1204 . las manifestaciones radiolgicas son variables. en un estudio se encontraron alteraciones focales o consolidacin difusa del espacio areo, enfermedad intersticial difusa y derrame pleural 1205 .desde el punto de vista clnico, los pacientes presentan fiebre, exantema, cefalea y mialgia. la afectacin del tracto respiratorio se manifiesta clnicamente por tos 1204 . los pacientes que tienen signos radiolgicos de enfermedad difusa intersticial y del espacio areo tienen una tasa de mortalidad de aproximadamente el 50%, mientras que los que tienen enfermedad local se suelen recuperar 1205 .aunque la infestacin humana es causada a veces por otras amebas, el trmino amebiasis se reserva para la que produce e. histolytica, una especie que se relaciona habitualmente con enfermedad del colon (disentera amebiana). la disentera amebiana tiene una distribucin mundial, con zonas de elevada endemicidad en regiones donde la higiene y las medidas teraputicas son deficientes. los pacientes afectos, que frecuentemente estn asintomticos, eliminan quistes con las heces, y los quistes se suelen ingerir con el agua o los alimentos contaminados. en ee.uu. la mayora de los casos aparece en inmigrantes procedentes de regiones endmicas y que llevan en el pas menos de dos aos 1206 ; tambin tienen mayor riesgo las personas que estn en instituciones cerradas, como los presidiarios y los enfermos mentales 1206a .aunque la disentera amebiana no muestra predileccin por ninguna edad ni ningn sexo, la enfermedad pleuropulmonar es ms frecuente entre los 20 y los 40 aos de edad y es 10 a 15 veces ms frecuente en los varones que en las mujeres 1207 . se ha estimado que esta afectacin se produce en aproximadamente 1 de cada 1.000 pacientes con disentera amebiana 1208 ; sin embargo, cuando est afectado el hgado la incidencia alcanza cifras de hasta entre el 6% y el 40% 1206a .los quistes de e. histolytica son acidorresistentes y pueden pasar por el estmago para llegar al intestino delgado, donde se exquistan los trofozotos. los trofozotos emigran al colon, se multiplican y atraviesan el epitelio hasta la submucosa. la penetracin de la mucosa se asocia a necrosis y ulceracin y a los sntomas caractersticos de la disentera amebiana. los microorganismos se pueden diseminar ms adelante hasta el hgado y dar lugar a la formacin de microabscesos y, posteriormente, macroabscesos.la enfermedad pulmonar puede producirse por varios mecanismos, el ms frecuente de los cuales es la extensin desde un absceso heptico, que habitualmente se localiza en el lbulo derecho. estos abscesos se pueden extender hacia el espacio sub-frnico y formar un absceso subdiafragmtico separado, en cuyo caso puede aparecer un derrame pleural estril. otros pacientes presentan empiema o absceso pulmonar basal por extensin transdiafragmtica de la infeccin, asociada a un absceso heptico slo o a un absceso heptico y otro subfrnico. las zonas del pulmn infectadas por e. histolytica muestran zonas mal definidas de necrosis, muchas veces de consistencia blanda o semilquida, y un aspecto hemorrgico mucinoso caracterstico que se ha comparado con la pasta de anchoas o la salsa de chocolate. desde el punto de vista histolgico hay grados variables de necrosis, fibrosis e infiltrado inflamatorio mononuclear. se pueden identificar trofozotos en los bordes de zonas necrticas contiguas al pulmn normal.las manifestaciones radiogrficas ms frecuentes en el trax son elevacin del hemidiafragma derecho, derrame pleural y atelectasia o consolidacin del lbulo inferior derecho (figura 6-71) 1206a . la consolidacin puede progresar hasta la formacin de abscesos. la presencia de un absceso heptico y su extensin a travs del hemidiafragma se pueden evaluar mediante tc o ecografa 1209 .la posibilidad de amebiasis pleuropulmonar se debe considerar en un paciente que reside o ha residido en una zona endmica y presenta dolor en hipocondrio derecho y tos seca, en particular si tiene antecedentes de diarrea (aunque falta con frecuencia). la tos seca caracteriza la fase precoz de la enfermedad; ms adelante se puede acompaar de expectoracin caracterstica en salsa de chocolate. la hemoptisis es frecuente en caso de afectacin pulmonar. tambin se puede producir expectoracin de bilis (bilioptisis), la mayora de las veces como consecuencia de una fstula broncoheptica o, con menos frecuencia, una fstula broncobiliar 1210 . la exploracin fsica puede revelar hepatomegalia dolorosa, hipersensibilidad intercostal inferior o ambas.la leucocitosis suele ser moderada y se puede asociar a eosinofilia y anemia. se encontraron anticuerpos contra el citoplasma de los neutrfilos (c-anca) en una gran proporcin de los pacientes de un estudio 1211 . se puede establecer un diagnstico positivo mediante la demostracin de los microorganismos en esputo, lquido pleural o material obtenido mediante aspiracin con aguja; sin embargo, el nmero de microorganismos suele ser 310 c a p  t u l o 6  enfermedades infecciosas de los pulmones f i g u r a 6 -7 1 amebiasis. la radiografa posteroanterior de trax (a) muestra elevacin del hemidiafragma derecho. la tc despus de la administracin de contraste intravenoso (b) presenta un derrame pleural derecho pequeo y zonas de atelectasia en el lbulo inferior derecho. el corte a travs del hgado (c) muestra una lesin qustica grande en el lbulo derecho heptico. el examen ecogrfico (d) demuestra material ecgeno dentro de la lesin compatible con un absceso. el diagnstico de amebiasis se demostr mediante aspiracin con aguja fina bajo gua ecogrfica. el paciente era un varn de 42 aos de corea del sur con historia de fiebre y escalofros desde una semana antes. (por cortesa del dr. soon ju cha, inje university hospital, seoul, south korea.) pequeo y parecen ser frecuentes los diagnsticos falsamente positivos y negativos 1206a . se estn perfeccionando pruebas con anticuerpos monoclonales y con rcp. se puede establecer un diagnstico de presuncin si se identifican en las heces trofozotos o quistes. se ha estimado que la mortalidad global de la amebiasis torcica est entre el 10% y el 15% 1207 .la toxoplasmosis est causada por toxoplasma gondii, un protozoo intracelular que provoca una infestacin generalizada, rara vez con manifestaciones clnicas. el microorganismo se encuentra en muchos animales domsticos y salvajes de todo el mundo. los seres humanos suelen adquirir la infeccin al ingerir material contaminado por heces con ovoquistes o carne con quistes poco cocinada.tras la ingestin los ooquistes son rotos por las enzimas digestivas y liberan trofozotos que entran en la mucosa intestinal y se diseminan a travs del torrente sanguneo. en la persona inmunocompetente la enfermedad suele ser limitada, con infestacin intracelular y muerte celular mnima, predominantemente en los msculos cardaco y esqueltico y en el encfalo. los microorganismos se enquistan en esos rganos y a veces en otras localizaciones, donde permanecen viables y pueden actuar como una fuente de enfermedad si la persona pierde ms adelante la competencia inmunitaria.la enfermedad puede adoptar varias formas clinopatolgicas 1212 . las adenopatas, con o sin sntomas similares a los de la mononucleosis infecciosa, son la forma clnica ms frecuente de la enfermedad en los adultos; se pueden afectar diversos grupos de ganglios linfticos, entre ellos los del mediastino. en los adultos la enfermedad generalizada se encuentra en huspedes inmunodeprimidos. desde el punto de vista histolgico, los pulmones muestran neumonitis intersticial, con o sin un exudado en el espacio areo adyacente; en los casos graves se observa necrosis parenquimatosa. es posible identificar los microorganismos libres en el tejido necrtico o en las clulas epiteliales alveolares y endoteliales capilares.en los pacientes inmunocompetentes la toxoplasmosis pulmonar suele originar un patrn reticular focal que recuerda a la neumona vrica aguda; en algunos casos se produce consolidacin del espacio areo. en ocasiones se pueden ver zonas mal definidas de opacidad en vidrio esmerilado, ms fciles de apreciar en la tcar que en las radiografas (figura 6-72). es frecuente el aumento del tamao de los ganglios linfticos hiliares 1213 . en los pacientes que tienen sida las manifestaciones radiogrficas son un patrn nodular bilateral, predominantemente grueso, o con menos frecuencia un patrn reticulonodular fino difuso indistinguible del que se observa en la npc 1214 .las manifestaciones clnicas de la toxoplasmosis de los adultos suelen recordar a la mononucleosis infecciosa 1212 . los pacientes pueden permanecer asintomticos o pueden manifestar febrcula y adenopatas, con o sin exantema, a lo largo de varias semanas o meses. son frecuentes la anemia y la linfocitosis. la enfermedad diseminada se caracteriza por fiebre, desorientacin, confusin, cefalea y manifestaciones de miocarditis. la neumona cursa con tos seca, taquipnea, disnea y cianosis. un ttulo de igm de 1:160 o superior proporciona el mejor indicador de infestacin adquirida durante los 2 a 4 meses anteriores 1215 .la enfermedad pulmonar con manifestaciones clnicas no es rara en los pacientes que tienen paludismo, sobre todo en los que estn infestados por p. falciparum 1216 . los signos varan desde tos leve, a veces con datos de obstruccin al flujo areo, hasta insuficiencia respiratoria fulminante, habitualmente asociada a sdra 1217, 1218 . en esos cuadros graves los hallazgos histolgicos son los de una lesin alveolar difusa. en la gran mayora de los casos la ascariasis humana est causada por a. lumbricoides. la hembra adulta del parsito vive en el intestino delgado del husped, donde produce hasta 250.000 huevos diarios. los huevos son emitidos con las heces hacia el medio externo, donde son resistentes a la desecacin y la congelacin y pueden permanecer viables durante muchos aos. una vez ingeridos, los huevos hacen eclosin en el intestino delgado y las larvas entran en las venas del sistema porta o en los linfticos intestinales. desde all llegan hasta el lado derecho del corazn y hasta los pulmones, donde quedan atrapadas en los capilares alveolares y entran en los espacios areos. en ese momento experimentan una muda y se transforman en larvas de tercera fase. esas larvas emigran en direccin ascendente por las vas areas hasta la laringe para ser deglutidas, con lo que completan su odisea al transformarse en helmintos maduros en el intestino delgado.los signos radiolgicos son zonas focales de consolidacin homognea; en muchos casos la consolidacin es transitoria y no muestra una distribucin segmentaria clara. las zonas de consolidacin pueden medir varios centmetros de dimetro y, en los casos de gravedad moderada, tienden a ser discretas y a concentrarse en las regiones perihiliares; cuando la afectacin es ms grave tienden a confluir y asumir un patrn lobulillar 1219 .los sntomas pulmonares son tos seca, dolor retroesternal y, en los casos ms graves, hemoptisis y disnea. puede aparecer una erupcin cutnea transitoria y muy pruriginosa 4 o 5 das despus del comienzo de los sntomas respiratorios 1219 . puede haber febrcula. resulta frecuente la leucocitosis de 20.000 a 25.000 clulas/mm 3 , con eosinofilia del 30% al 70%. el diagnstico se puede confirmar mediante la identificacin de larvas en esputo o en el aspirado gstrico; la identificacin de helmintos adultos o de sus huevos en las heces proporciona un soporte convincente.la gran mayora de los casos de estrongiloidiasis est causada por el nematodo s. stercoralis, un parsito frecuente en las regiones tropicales y templadas del todo el mundo. el ciclo del organismo es complejo. las larvas filariformes de vida libre penetran a travs de la piel intacta y pasan a los pulmones a travs del torrente sanguneo. una vez en los pulmones emigran desde los capilares hasta los alvolos, y ascienden por las vas areas hasta la laringe para ser deglutidas y alcanzar el intestino. dentro del intestino delgado se transforman en hembras adultas, que se establecen y ponen huevos en las criptas de la mucosa. en el paso posterior a travs del intestino los huevos se transforman en larvas rabditiformes no infecciosas; esas larvas, a su vez, pueden salir directamente con las heces y convertirse en larvas filariformes en el suelo o transformarse en larvas filariformes dentro del intestino y originar as una autoinfeccin por penetracin directa en la mucosa intestinal o en la piel perianal. la capacidad del organismo para emigrar a travs de los pulmones sin necesitar un ciclo en el suelo le permite persistir en forma de infestacin crnica y recurrente durante aos, mucho despus de que el individuo afecto abandone la zona endmica.la enfermedad es endmica en zonas tropicales rurales de clima clido y suelo hmedo (como el sur de ee.uu.); en esas regiones se ha estimado que la infestacin afecta a hasta el 35% de la poblacin 1220 . puesto que las larvas parasitan a los seres humanos mediante la penetracin en la piel, la enfermedad se ve con ms frecuencia en zonas donde las personas caminan con los pies des-nudos por el suelo contaminado. en la mayora de los casos la infestacin se acompaa de sntomas clnicos ligeros o nulos. sin embargo, puede producir un cuadro grave (la llamada hiperinfeccin), sobre todo en huspedes inmunodeprimidos 1221 y en pacientes tratados con corticoides por asma o epoc 1222 .las manifestaciones radiolgicas son zonas focales no segmentarias de consolidacin, probablemente causadas por una reaccin alrgica frente a la emigracin de las larvas filariformes a travs de los pulmones. la hiperinfeccin puede cursar con consolidacin del espacio areo 1223 , opacidades focales 1224 o un patrn nodular o reticulonodular difuso 1225, 1226 . los ndulos pueden tener bordes bien o mal definidos y las lesiones miden de 2 a 5 mm de dimetro, por lo que pueden simular a la tuberculosis miliar 1227 . es posible observar derrames pleurales, en general con alteraciones parenquimatosas, pero a veces como nica manifestacin radiogrfica 1228 .en la mayora de los casos los sntomas pulmonares son leves o nulos; en la enfermedad ms grave puede haber disnea, hemoptisis o broncospasmo. son frecuentes el dolor abdominal y la diarrea o la diarrea alternando con estreimiento 1229 . suele haber aumento de la concentracin de ige y del nmero total de eosinfilos en sangre. el diagnstico se puede establecer por el hallazgo de larvas en el esputo, el lavado gstrico o el lquido del lba 1230 ; el diagnstico de presuncin se puede basar en la presencia de parsitos en las heces. se ha encontrado que la prueba de elisa con antgeno extrado de larvas filariformes tiene una sensibilidad del 85% al 90% y un especificidad de casi el 100% 1231 .la triquinosis se produce por la ingestin de larvas del nematodo t. spiralis 1232 . el parsito se distribuye por todo el mundo y se encuentra en todas las zonas donde se consume carne contaminada, en especial de cerdo, cruda o poco cocinada. las larvas enquistadas vivas de la carne alcanzan el intestino delgado, donde maduran, copulan y ponen huevos. cuando los huevos hacen eclosin, las larvas penetran en la pared duodenal y son transportadas a los pulmones, desde donde pasan a travs de la circulacin pulmonar hasta la sistmica y llegan a los msculos de todo el cuerpo. aunque la parasitacin puede afectar a cualquier msculo, el diafragma quizs sea el que se afecta con ms frecuencia. dentro del msculo las larvas espirales de trichinella se enquistan y se rodean por una capa hialina bastante gruesa, que muchas veces se calcifica entre 6 y 18 meses despus de la infestacin.desde el punto de vista radiogrfico no hay alteraciones pulmonares, puesto que las larvas producen una reaccin mnima durante su paso a travs de la circulacin pulmonar. se pueden ver paredes calcificadas de quistes larvarios dentro de los msculos respiratorios en forma de opacidades ovales de 1 cm de dimetro mayor.desde el punto de vista clnico, el paso de los parsitos a travs de los pulmones no causa sntomas. aparece diarrea de 2 a 4 das despus de la ingestin de carne contaminada; hacia el sptimo da puede haber fiebre, dolor muscular, edema facial y sntomas del sistema nervioso central. el depsito de las larvas en los msculos esquelticos ocurre hacia el dcimo da y puede producir disnea y taquipnea. es frecuente la leucocitosis con cierto grado de eosinofilia.como indica su nombre, la enfermedad se limita en gran parte a los trpicos y cursa con leucocitosis entre moderada e intensa y eosinofilia. se cree que el cuadro est causado por microfilarias parsitas de las especies wuchereria bancrofti, brugia malayi y brugia timori. se ha especulado que los gusanos adultos alojados en algn lugar del cuerpo liberan microfilarias en el torrente sanguneo, que quedan atrapadas sobre todo en los pulmones, donde causan una reaccin inflamatoria local 1233 ; este mecanismo podra explicar la prominencia de los sntomas respiratorios y la ausencia relativa de microfilarias en la circulacin sistmica (en contraste con las formas tpicas de filariasis). la enfermedad se limita a las regiones donde habitan mosquitos vectores apropiados: subcontinente indio, malasia, sur de asia, norte de frica y ciertas zonas de sudamrica. en la mayora de los casos los pacientes son varones adultos de entre 20 y 40 aos de edad.los signos anatomopatolgicos son un infiltrado leucoctico eosinfilo prominente localizado dentro del intersticio alveolar y los espacios areos y alrededor de las estructuras broncovasculares 1234 .desde el punto de vista radiogrfico, la afectacin pulmonar es difusa y simtrica y se caracteriza por un patrn reticulonodular, acompaado a veces de ndulos de 2 a 5 mm de dimetro (figura 6-73); se afectan predominantemente las zonas pulmonares media e inferior. en algunos casos se produce aumento del tamao de los ganglios linfticos hiliares, y el derrame pleural es poco frecuente 1235, 1236 .el sntoma principal es la tos, habitualmente productiva de pequeas cantidades de esputos mucoides o mucopurulentos. tiende a ser especialmente molesta por la noche, cuando aparece en paroxismos, a veces con produccin de esputos manchados de sangre. las crisis de tos y disnea pueden ser tan intensas como para indicar un estado asmtico. son frecuentes la prdida de peso, la astenia, la febrcula y el aumento ligero del tamao del hgado y del bazo.la leucocitosis suele ser marcada (no son infrecuentes cifras de 60.000 leucocitos/mm 3 ) con eosinofilia, a veces de hasta el 60%. en la enfermedad aguda tambin hay concentraciones muy altas de ige y de anticuerpos especficos contra las filarias en suero y en lquido del lba 1237 . las microfilarias se pueden identificar en muestras de secreciones pulmonares enviadas para examen citolgico 1238 y en el lquido pleural 1239 . el diagnstico se puede confirmar por la fijacin del complemento y con la prueba cutnea usando antgeno de dirofilaria immitis. las pruebas de funcin pulmonar muestran un patrn restrictivo o mixto obstructivo y restrictivo. en algunos pacientes las alteraciones se hacen irreversibles 1240 .la dirofilariasis pulmonar est causada la mayora de las veces por d. immitis, un parsito natural de los perros y, con menos frecuencia, los gatos y diversos carnvoros salvajes. en esos animales el parsito aparece inicialmente en el tejido subcutneo; desde all emigra a las cavidades derechas del corazn y la arteria pulmonar principal, donde se alojan uno o varios helmintos y se liberan microfilarias hacia la sangre. los mosquitos transmiten posteriormente las filarias tanto al husped definitivo como a los seres humanos. puesto que los humanos no son el husped natural, los organismos no completan su ciclo vital y mueren antes de alcanzar la madurez sexual; son transportados hasta la circulacin pulmonar, donde se alojan en vasos perifricos y causan necrosis del tejido adyacente.la mayora de las comunicaciones de casos humanos proceden de las regiones costeras del este y del sur de ee.uu. 1241 . aunque la enfermedad es poco frecuente, los estudios serolgicos que se han realizado en zonas con infestacin endmica por dirofilaria immitis indican que la incidencia de la enfermedad humana es mucho mayor de lo que indica el nmero de casos declarados de dirofilariasis 1242 . parece probable que una gran proporcin de los casos no detectados clnicamente se deban a la muerte de las microfilarias en el punto de inoculacin inicial. la gran mayora de los pacientes son adultos, un grupo de edad en el que es mayor la probabilidad de hacer una radiografa de trax y en el que se sospecha una lesin maligna cuando se encuentra un ndulo solitario.la enfermedad pulmonar se caracteriza desde el punto de vista anatomopatolgico por uno o ms ndulos esfricos o lobulados bien circunscritos y que habitualmente se localizan en el parnquima subpleural 1243 . desde el punto de vista histolgico hay una regin central de necrosis por coagulacin o similar a la c a p  t u l o 6  enfermedades infecciosas de los pulmones 313 f i g u r a 6 -7 3 eosinofilia tropical. la radiografa posteroanterior de trax (a) y una imagen ampliada del lbulo superior derecho (b) revelan mltiples opacidades nodulares discretas y confluentes distribuidas por ambos pulmones y de un dimetro variable entre 3 y 5 mm. no existen signos de aumento del tamao de los ganglios linfticos hiliares o mediastnicos. el paciente era un varn joven del este de la india que tena un cuadro de inicio gradual de tos nocturna, fiebre y eosinofilia. la recuperacin fue completa con el tratamiento apropiado. ( wb saunders, 1999.) caseosa rodeada por una cantidad variable de tejido fibroso e infiltrado inflamatorio. se pueden identificar uno o ms helmintos, habitualmente degenerados, dentro de una arteria pulmonar de la porcin central del ndulo. este aspecto anatomopatolgico se debe probablemente a una reaccin inflamatoria frente al antgeno que libera el parsito en la fase de generacin, y no a la oclusin vascular e isquemia.desde el punto de vista radiogrfico, la manifestacin tpica es un ndulo solitario de 1 a 2 cm de dimetro, bien circunscrito y esfrico o con forma de cua 1244 . en ocasiones se observan mltiples ndulos 1245 . la mayora de los pacientes est asintomtica y el diagnstico se establece tras la reseccin pulmonar por sospecha de cncer de pulmn. no es rara la eosinofilia sistmica, pero suele ser leve (aproximadamente el 5% en la mayora de los casos) 1246 . las pruebas inmunitarias, entre ellas la hemaglutinacin indirecta y la prueba de elisa 1247 , pueden ser tiles, pero todava no se ha demostrado que distingan con confianza entre dirofilariasis y carcinoma.la equinococosis (enfermedad hidatdica) est causada por larvas de la clase cestoda, de las que e. granulosus es responsable de la gran mayora de las infestaciones pulmonares humanas 1248, 1249 . el gusano adulto tiene cuatro segmentos: cabeza (esclex), formada por cuatro ventosas y un rostrelo que contiene dos hileras de ganchos para la unin a la mucosa intestinal, y tres progltides, la ltima de las cuales es el rgano de puesta de huevos.la enfermedad se produce en dos formas. la variedad pastoral es la ms frecuente, y como implica su nombre, se encuentra en zonas rurales, donde actan como huspedes intermedios las ovejas, las vacas o los cerdos, y, los perros suelen ser los huspedes definitivos habituales. los seres humanos adquieren la enfermedad mediante el contacto directo con perros infestados o por la ingestin de agua, alimentos o tierra contaminados con huevos; de ese modo los seres humanos se convierten en huspedes intermedios accidentales. la enfermedad es particularmente frecuente en las regiones mediterrneas donde se cran ovejas y en rusia, argentina, chile, uruguay, australasia y partes de frica. la variedad selvtica est causada muy probablemente por una cepa diferente de la tenia, y los huspedes definitivos son miembros de la familia canidae, como perros, lobos, zorros y coyotes. diversos herbvoros, como alces, ciervos, gamos, renos, caribes y bisontes, actan como huspedes intermedios. la enfermedad se encuentra sobre todo en alaska y el norte de canad. se adquiere por el mismo mecanismo que la variedad pastoral.los helmintos adultos maduros viven en el intestino delgado del husped definitivo. los huevos son expulsados con las heces hacia los pastos o el agua, donde son ingeridos por los huspedes intermedios. en ellos las larvas se desarrollan en el duodeno, penetran a travs de la pared intestinal y recorren la circulacin portal hasta el hgado, donde la mayora queda atrapada en los sinusoides. de las que escapan, la mayor parte queda atrapada en los capilares alveolares. casi todas las larvas atrapadas mueren, pero las pocas que sobreviven se transforman en quistes, que producen cpsulas germinativas que contienen helmintos inmaduros. el ciclo vital del parsito se completa cuando el husped definitivo se alimenta con los restos de un husped intermedio que alberga quistes, lo que permite el desarrollo de gusanos adultos en el intestino del primero.la capacidad de filtro de los capilares hepticos y pulmonares para retener las larvas es responsable en buena parte del predominio de la enfermedad en el hgado y los pulmones. en la variedad pastoral aproximadamente el 65%-70% de los quistes se localiza en el hgado y el 15%-30% en los pulmones. sin embargo, por razones que no estn claras los quistes pulmonares parecen predominar sobre los hepticos en la variedad selvtica 1250 . aunque se considera tpico el aumento del tamao de los quistes de 0,5 a 1 cm/ao, se han descrito tasas de crecimiento de hasta 5 cm/ao 1249 . se ha propuesto que los helmintos son capaces de producir una sustancia homloga a la ciclofilina humana (una molcula que interacta con la ciclosporina para inducir supresin de los linfocitos t) y provocar as la depresin local de la defensa del husped 1249 .dentro de los pulmones los quistes hidatdicos son tpicamente esfricos u ovales (vase figura en color 6-17) y estn rodeados por una capa de tejido fibroso que contiene un infiltrado inflamatorio crnico inespecfico (el periquiste). el propio quiste est formado por dos capas: 1) una membrana quitinosa externa laminar (exoquiste) que protege a los organismos en desarrollo frente a las clulas inflamatorias del husped y 2) una capa interna fina formada por un sincitio de clulas (endoquiste) que constituye la capa germinativa. esta ltima produce el lquido intraqustico y sirve de origen a las numerosas cpsulas germinativas (quistes hijos) dentro de las cuales se desarrollan esclices larvarios.aunque los quistes hidatdicos intrapulmonares pueden causar sntomas por compresin directa de las estructuras adyacentes, la enfermedad provoca manifestaciones clnicas a consecuencia de la rotura hacia los bronquios contiguos. la rotura se puede producir de dos formas: 1) a travs del periquiste, el exoquiste y el endoquiste con expulsin del contenido en la va area y sustitucin del contenido por aire; esta forma se sigue con frecuencia de infeccin bacteriana secundaria; 2) a travs slo del periquiste, con lo que se establece una comunicacin entre el rbol bronquial y el espacio virtual que delimitan el exoquiste y el periquiste. con poca frecuencia un quiste se rompe directamente hacia el parnquima pulmonar y provoca neumonitis, o hacia la cavidad pleural y causa pioneumotrax. tambin es posible la equinococosis pulmonar o pleural secundaria a enfermedad heptica como consecuencia de la extensin de un quiste intraheptico a travs del diafragma, lo que da lugar a la formacin de una fstula hepatobronquial, un absceso parenquimatoso o un empiema 1251 .los quistes se ven caractersticamente en las radiografas como masas solitarias bien delimitadas, esfricas u ovales, rodeadas por pulmn normal (figura 6-74) 1252 . son mltiples en el 20%-30% de los pacientes. su tamao vara entre 1 y ms de 20 cm de dimetro 1253 ; los quistes ms grandes se suelen ver en la enfermedad de tipo pastoral, mientras que los de la variedad selvtica superan rara vez los 10 cm 1249 . la mayor parte de los quistes se localiza en los lbulos inferiores, con ms frecuencia en la regin posterior que en la anterior y con algo ms de frecuencia en el lado derecho que en el izquierdo 1254 . aunque muchas veces son esfricos u ovales, tambin pueden tener una forma irregular, que algunos autores atribuyen al hecho de que cuando contactan con estructuras relativamente rgidas, como los fascculos broncovasculares, al crecer presentan melladuras y lobulaciones 1252 .cuando se establece una comunicacin entre el quiste y el rbol bronquial puede entrar aire en el espacio que hay entre el periquiste y el exoquiste y producir una semiluna fina alrededor de la periferia del quiste, el llamado signo del menisco o de la semiluna 1255 . una vez que el quiste se ha roto en la va area, su membrana puede quedar flotando en el lquido residual dentro de la cavidad qustica y dar lugar al clsico signo del nenfar o del camalote (figura 6-75) 1256 . este aspecto se encuentra rara vez en la forma selvtica de la enfermedad 1250 .la tc puede ser til para identificar las membranas endoqusticas desprendidas o colapsadas, las membranas colapsadas de los quistes hijos y los quistes hijos intactos 1257 . el lquido del quiste tiene un valor de atenuacin prximo a 0 uh (vase figura 6-74) 1258 . la rm tambin permite la diferenciacin fiable entre quistes llenos de lquido y tumores slidos 1259, 1260 , ya que los quistes tienen una intensidad de seal baja en las imgenes potenciadas en t1 y una intensidad de seal alta y homognea en las imgenes potenciadas en t2.la mayora de los quistes hidatdicos pulmonares intactos, sobre todo los de la forma selvtica, no causa sntomas. en ocasiones un quiste intacto produce tos seca y hemoptisis mnima 1261 . cuando se rompe un quiste muchas veces aparece un cuadro brusco de tos, expectoracin y fiebre; puede aparecer una reaccin de hipersensibilidad aguda con urticaria, prurito y, en algunos casos, hipotensin. puede haber dolor torcico y expectoracin purulenta.las pruebas de laboratorio para el diagnstico incluyen hemaglutinacin indirecta, aglutinacin del ltex, fijacin del complemento y elisa; estas pruebas tienen una sensibilidad variable entre el 80% y el 100% y una especificidad del 88% al 98% para los quistes hepticos 1249 ; sin embargo, su sensibilidad para la deteccin de quistes pulmonares es de slo el 50% al 55%. adems, la especificidad est limitada por reacciones cruzadas con antgenos de otros parsitos. la eosinofilia sangunea suele ser leve y aparece en el 25% al 50% de los casos 1262 ; puede ser intensa en los casos de anafilaxia tras la rotura del quiste. las muestras de lquido pleural o de esputo pueden revelar esclices, ganchos o fragmentos de exoquiste, lo que confirma el diagnstico.la paragonimiasis est causada por trematodos del gnero paragonimus, entre las que p. westermani es la ms frecuente; p. mexicanus se puede encontrar en mxico y amrica central, y p. kellicotti en ee.uu. 1263, 1264 . la enfermedad es ms frecuente en el sudeste asitico, y la inmigracin de refugiados procedentes de esa zona ha producido un aumento de la incidencia de la enfermedad en el mundo occidental 1265 . los seres humanos adquieren la enfermedad por ingestin de cangrejos o langostinos de ro crudos o poco cocinados o al beber agua contaminada por esos crustceos. por tanto, la enfermedad suele ocurrir en grupos familiares por exposicin diettica comn.el ciclo vital de p. westermani es uno de los ms fascinantes de todos los parsitos. dentro de los pulmones de los seres humanos o de los animales superiores la forma larvaria se transforma en parsito adulto, que posee ventosas orales y ventrales para adherirse al tejido adyacente. los huevos son depositados en surcos en el parnquima pulmonar y se expulsan con la tos o son deglutidos y excretados con las heces. en condiciones de humedad adecuada se transforman en miracidios ciliados, que infestan los caracoles de aguja dulce. dentro del caracol se desarrollan nuevas formas larvarias, y al cabo de unos dos meses se liberan las cercarias. las cercarias tienen movilidad activa y son capaces de penetrar en los tejidos blandos periarticulares de ciertas especies de cangrejos y langostinos de ro. cuando son ingeridas por el husped definitivo las metacercarias se liberan en el yeyuno, desde el que penetran a travs de la pared del intestino delgado hasta la cavidad peritoneal, se abren camino a travs del diafragma hasta el espacio pleural y finalmente invaden el pulmn. el parsito maduro vive durante muchos aos en el pulmn y produce huevos continuamente.el examen anatomopatolgico de los pulmones muestra espacios qusticos nicos o mltiples de 1 a 3 cm que contienen un lquido mucinoso pardo rojizo y habitualmente un solo parsito adulto 1264 . los quistes se suelen localizar cerca de los bronquiolos ms grandes o de los bronquios. desde el punto de vista microscpico, los parsitos aparecen rodeados de un infiltrado celular formado en gran parte por eosinfilos. acaba por producirse fibrosis. cuando se produce la erosin de una va area de drenaje, el contenido del quiste se puede extender a otras partes del pulmn y causar bronconeumona.la radiografa de trax es normal en aproximadamente el 20% de los pacientes en los que se identifican huevos de paragonimus en el esputo 1266 . las alteraciones ms frecuentes son opacidades parenquimatosas y lesiones qusticas, que se ven en aproximadamente el 50% de los pacientes 1267 . las opacidades parenquimatosas pueden estar mal definidas o pueden ser homogneas, nicas o mltiples, y nodulares, subsegmentarias o segmentarias (figura 6-76). las lesiones qusticas pueden medir entre 0,5 y 5 cm de dimetro y tienen paredes finas. se pueden observar en zonas de consolidacin o como sombras anulares aisladas. las lesiones tienen con frecuencias una opacidad en semiluna u oval a lo largo de una cara del revestimiento interno; esa opacidad presenta atenuacin de tejidos blandos en la tc y probablemente representa el parsito 1267 . la comunicacin entre los quistes y un bronquio se puede demostrar en la tc, y puede imitar una bronquiectasia 1267 . se han identificado tractos o surcos irregulares que miden hasta 5 mm de dimetro y conectan quistes adyacentes tanto en las radiografas como en la tc de un pequeo nmero de pacientes. los estudios en inmigrantes de ee.uu. que han residido en zonas endmicas muestran un patrn algo distinto en la radiografa de trax, en el que las opacidades imitan a la tuberculosis posprimaria 1265 . las alteraciones pleurales incluyen derrame unilateral o bilateral, hidroneumotrax y engrosamiento pleural 1267 .no se producen sntomas durante un ao o ms despus de la supuesta infestacin. aunque se ha considerado que la hemopti-sis es un sntoma casi constante, slo se encontr en el 64% de una serie de 25 pacientes 1265 . tiende a aparecer de forma espordica durante meses e incluso aos, sin otros signos de enfermedad. puede haber disnea, anorexia, febrcula y prdida de peso; si aparece un derrame pleural o un neumotrax, el paciente puede referir dolor pleural.en alrededor de las dos terceras partes de los casos se encuentra eosinofilia (recuento absoluto de eosinfilos superior a 500/mm 3 ) 1268 . tambin se ha descrito eosinofilia en el lquido pleural, junto a una concentracin baja de glucosa y un ph bajo, y concentraciones altas de protenas y de ldh 1269 . algunos pacientes presentan anemia. el diagnstico se puede establecer en la mayora de los casos mediante la identificacin de los huevos del parsito en el esputo o en las heces 1270 . la sensibilidad de un solo examen de esputo es de aproximadamente el 30%-40% 1268 ; la cifra aumenta hasta entre el 50% y el 90% si se repiten los exmenes. un grupo de investigadores ha encontrado que una tcnica de elisa indirecto es muy sensible y especfica para la deteccin de anticuerpos circulantes contra el parsito 1271 . otros investigadores han publicado resultados similares con una prueba de elisa en la que usaron cistena proteinasas del parsito como antgenos 1272 .la esquistosomiasis est causada por helmintos de la clase trematoda, de los que tres (s. mansoni, s. japonicum y s. haematobium) son los ms importantes como causas de infestacin humana. s. mekongi y s. intercalatum se encuentran tambin en parte del sudeste asitico y en frica, respectivamente 1273 . la 316 c a p  t u l o 6  enfermedades infecciosas de los pulmones f i g u r a 6 -7 5quiste hidatdico roto. la masa homognea bien circunscrita (a) de la porcin media del pulmn izquierdo tiene un contorno liso pero algo lobulado. cuatro aos ms tarde (b) el quiste contiene aire; la masa irregular presente en el fondo del quiste (flechas) corresponde a membranas colapsadas. el broncograma (c) muestra material de contraste dentro del quiste, que delinea las membranas. (por cortesa de alfred hospital, melbourne, australia.) enfermedad se limita a zonas habitadas por el husped intermedio, un caracol. la distribucin geogrfica de los caracoles, y por tanto de la esquistosomiasis, vara de forma considerable. la infestacin por s. mansoni y por s. haematobium es endmica en oriente medio (sobre todo en egipto y parte de arabia saudita) y en grandes zonas de frica central y frica del sur; s. mansoni se encuentra tambin en las islas del caribe y en sudamrica, sobre todo en brasil. s. japonicum predomina en china, japn y filipinas.aunque la enfermedad se identifica con ms frecuencia en esas regiones, el aumento de la emigracin desde ellas significa que probablemente se har ms frecuente en otros lugares; por ejemplo, se ha estimado que en ee.uu. residen alrededor de 400.000 inmigrantes infestados 1274 . la esquistosomiasis aguda (fiebre de katayama) que puede aparecer durante la emigracin de las larvas a travs de los pulmones tambin se est diagnosticando con ms frecuencia en viajeros a regiones en las que la enfermedad es endmica 1275, 1276 . los seres humanos adquieren la infestacin al beber, nadar o trabajar en agua dulce que contiene cercarias infecciosas. las larvas penetran en la piel o, con menos frecuencia, la mucosa oral, y viajan como esquistosmulas a travs de la circulacin venosa hasta los capilares pulmonares. recorren esos vasos hasta la circulacin sistmica y los vasos mesentricos en la porcin intraheptica del sistema portal. all se transforman en parsitos adolescentes, que emigran a contracorriente del flujo sanguneo portal hasta las venas mesentricas superiores (s. japonicum y s. mekongi), mesentricas inferiores (s. mansoni) o vesicales (s. haematobium). los machos y las hembras adultos copulan en esos vasos y las hembras emigran despus hasta conductos venosos de menor tamao de la submucosa y la mucosa del intestino o de la vejiga, donde depositan sus huevos. muchos huevos son expulsados a la luz del intestino o de la vejiga urinaria y excretados con las heces o con la orina; los que caen en agua dulce se transforman en larvas, que penetran en caracoles. dentro del caracol la larva experimenta varias transformaciones, y acaban emergiendo cercarias infecciosas. la penetracin en la piel de una persona que est en contacto con agua contaminada completa la odisea.la lesin tisular se produce como consecuencia de una reaccin frente a los antgenos procedentes de los huevos 1277 . esta lesin se puede localizar en la mucosa digestiva o vesical. sin embargo, algunos huevos se liberan directamente en la sangre venosa. en el caso de d. marginatus, s. japonicum y s. mekongi, la liberacin suele producirse en el sistema portal, con depsito en el hgado; en el caso de s. haematobium la liberacin se produce en la vena cava inferior, con embolizacin directa en los pulmones. los huevos de las tres primeras especies pueden alcanzar tambin los pulmones a travs de anastomosis venosas portosistmicas una vez que el hgado se ha hecho cirrtico por la fibrosis inducida por los esquistosomas. cuando llegan a los pulmones, la mayora de los huevos queda impactada en arterias pulmonares pequeas y arteriolas, despus de lo cual son expulsadas hacia el tejido perivascular adyacente. como en el intestino y en la vejiga, los huevos provocan una reaccin inflamatoria y fibrosa, que si tiene carcter generalizado produce arteritis obliterativa e hipertensin pulmonar.los signos histolgicos que se observan en muestras de biopsia transbronquial de pacientes que tienen fiebre de katayama han sido compatibles con neumona eosinfila 1273 .el aspecto radiolgico vara considerablemente dependiendo del nmero de huevos que alcanzan el pulmn y del intervalo desde la formacin de granulomas perivasculares despus de la extrusin de los huevos. algunos casos, quizs la mayora, muestran un patrn difuso miliar o reticulonodular, probablemente por la migracin de los huevos a travs de las paredes de los vasos y la posterior reaccin frente a esos cuerpos extraos 1278 . se pueden formar focos de consolidacin neumnica alrededor de los parsitos muertos embolizados. no se observa derrame pleural, aunque es posible encontrar engrosamiento focal de la pleura. la hipertensin arterial pulmonar es indistinguible de la que originan otras causas, con dilatacin marcada de la arteria pulmonar principal y de sus ramas, que muestran afilamiento rpido hacia la periferia.las manifestaciones clnicas aparecen en tres momentos distintos despus de la infestacin. la enfermedad que aparece durante la emigracin de las esquistosmulas desde la piel a travs de la circulacin pulmonar se manifiesta por fiebre, tos, diarrea, artralgias, anorexia, malestar general y urticaria; la leucocitosis y la eosinofilia son casi invariables. en esta fase se pueden encontrar opacidades transitorias en las radiografas de trax. esta forma de esquistosomiasis se ve rara vez en los habitantes de zonas endmicas, mientras que representa una reaccin caracterstica en los visitantes.algo ms tarde, despus del depsito de los huevos en las vnulas intestinales y vesicales, puede aparecer de forma aguda tos, disnea, hipoxemia y edema pulmonar, que se atribuye a una reaccin alrgica frente a la movilizacin sbita de muchos huevos hasta los pulmones. se puede observar un sndrome similar cuando se inicia la quimioterapia en los pacientes que tienen esquistosomiasis documentada 1279 .en el tercer grupo, que es el ms importante, las manifestaciones clnicas corresponden a la hipertensin pulmonar, habitualmente despus de aos de enfermedad persistente. puede haber signos de cirrosis (en casos de infestacin por s. mansoni y s. japonicum) o disuria y hematuria (s. haematobium). es habitual ver leucocitosis moderada y eosinofilia, a veces de hasta el 33%.en los pacientes en los que se sospecha esquistosomiasis se deben examinar repetidamente muestras concentradas de heces y de orina en busca de huevos. la infestacin se puede demostrar tambin en muchos casos por el hallazgo de huevos en biopsias de la mucosa rectal o vesical. el examen del esputo rara vez revela huevos. sin embargo, se han identificado huevos en el lquido del lba 1280 . durante la fase aguda, pero no en las fases crnicas, se encuentran ttulos altos de ige especfica contra el antgeno soluble de los huevos. las concentraciones de anticuerpos igm e igg contra el antgeno de cercaria estn aumentadas en la enfermedad aguda, y las concentraciones de igg contra el parsito adulto se elevan en la enfermedad crnica 1281 . se dispone de pruebas especficas cutneas y de precipitinas para las especies individuales 1282 .transmission of infectious diseases and food-and waterborne diseases, and changes in the prevalence of adverse health outcomes associated with air pollutants and aeroallergens.ecosystem changes can facilitate the emergence and re-emergence of disease, even under current climatic conditions (national research council 2001) . climate change can further alter or disrupt natural systems, making it possible for diseases to spread or emerge in areas where they had been limited or had not existed, or for diseases to disappear by making areas less hospitable to the vector or the pathogen. the cause-and-effect chain from climate change to changing patterns of health determinants and outcomes is often extremely complex and includes factors such as wealth, distribution of income, status of the public health infrastructure, provision of medical care, and access to adequate nutrition, safe water, and sanitation. therefore, the severity of future impacts will be determined by changes in climate as well as by concurrent changes in nonclimatic factors and by the adaptation measures implemented to reduce negative impacts.health models that can explore the range of potential impacts of a changing climate in the context of other drivers of population health are critical to better understand where, when, in what population group(s), and with what intensity climate variability and change could have negative health consequences. identification of vulnerable populations and locations can be used by risk managers to facilitate the development and implementation of effective and efficient adaptation policies and measures to reduce projected negative impacts, and can be used by policymakers to identify mitigation targets and the possible health consequences of approaches to meet those targets. policymakers also can use model results to "climate-proof" decisions, to better ensure that the interventions implemented will be resilient to changing weather patterns and trends.throughout this paper the term 'model' refers to parameterizations of exposure-response relationships, including key drivers of the outcome, to project how the burdens of climatesensitive health determinants and outcomes could change under different assumptions of changes in climate, socioeconomic conditions, technology development, policy options, and other factors. population health refers to the health of a population, measured by health status indicators; it is influenced by physical, biological, social, and economic factors in the environment, by personal health behavior, health care services, etc. (last 2001) . risk is a term in everyday use that has different meanings in different contexts. risk will be used to describe the combination of likelihood and consequences associated with an exposure or event.health researchers are typically reluctant to develop models because of the limited specification and quantification of relevant micro-to macro-level exposures and processes that influence disease occurrence, and because variables unique to a particular population or location could interact with these factors to affect model accuracy (ebi and gamble 2005) . however, models facilitate understanding of what is known and what still needs to be understood of how systems actually function. in the context of climate change, models are critical for planning appropriate adaptation options to reduce the likelihood that climaterelated changes will increase the burden of health determinants and outcomes. continuing business as usual, ignoring the possible threats of climate change, could result in significant morbidity and mortality that could have been prevented with appropriate planning. health is far behind other sectors in model development.this special issue highlights some of the approaches that have been taken in model development. campbell-lendrum et al. use a comparative risk assessment approach to link exposure-response relationships for several climate-sensitive health determinants and outcomes with different climate scenarios to estimate future burdens, and to compare these with the burdens of air pollution-related health outcomes. tol incorporates data on the current and projected future burden of malaria into an existing integrated assessment model to address the question of whether climate change-attributed malaria could have negative consequences for economic growth. pitcher et al. report on the first phase of development of a model to predict life expectancy under different climate and socioeconomic scenarios. kara et al. incorporate air pollution exposure-response relationships into an integrated assessment model to explore the health-related economic benefits of regulations.this paper first discusses some issues relevant to model development, including quantification of the climate-health associations and the factors that affect those associations; specification of model(s) appropriate to incorporate climate change, adaptation, and mitigation policies, including consideration of scale issues; incorporation of thresholds; accounting for pathways of public health development; incorporation of adaptation, and discussion of uncertainties. the paper then finishes with ways forward in model development and concluding remarks.2 model specification and developmentthe increasing need to estimate the geographic range and magnitude of the health impacts of climate change has encouraged the quantification of associations between weather variables and health outcomes both to explain current relationships and to identify and project regions and population subgroups that may be more vulnerable to climate variability and change. this expanding literature base presents an opportunity for more, and more detailed, models of climate/health relationships.a number of factors make quantification of weather-health exposure-response relationships challenging. although public health has considerable experience dealing with exposures to hazardous agents where a defined exposure causes a specific adverse health outcome in identifiable exposed populations, weather has only recently been considered a potentially hazardous exposure that needs to be evaluated in its own right (bernard and ebi 2001) . isolating the role of weather in disease patterns is difficult because most climatesensitive health determinants and outcomes have many causal factors, with the causal chains neither linear nor direct, sometimes with a lag between the exposure and response, and with a number of factors influencing whether an adverse health outcome occurs. although the entire population is exposed to weather, climate variability, and climate change, the risk associated with a particular exposure varies within the population due to intrinsic and extrinsic vulnerabilities. for example, poverty, under-nutrition, water storage practices, substandard housing, lack of access to safe water and sanitation, certain land use practices, and other factors can combine with climatic conditions to favor vector-breeding and promote the spread of some infectious diseases. further, exposures are changing over time with changing weather patterns.most exposure-response relationships have been based on exposure defined in terms of mean weather variables. however, projections of increased climate variability (folland et al. 2001) suggest that health models need to extrapolate beyond the current exposureresponse relationships to weather conditions and extreme events to which populations are not currently accustomed (beniston 2004; meehl and tebaldi 2004) . there is extensive literature discussing approaches to low-dose extrapolation to predict possible health impacts of exposures to occupational and environmental hazards. whereas low dose extrapolation is bounded at no exposure and no response, increasing climate variability suggests the need for high-dose extrapolation. different statistical approaches may be needed to estimate the shape of exposure-response relationships outside the upper range of current exposure data. such approaches will further understanding of the limits of current models, as well as spatial and temporal analogs.model development requires more than quantification of exposure-response relationships. assuming the model will be used to project possible future health impacts, the exposure-response relationship needs to be quantified in ways that allow linkage with, at a minimum, climate and socioeconomic models. the critical factors associated with the outcome need to be understood sufficiently for incorporation into the model; this includes considering the extent to which other factors (or alternative explanations) could explain an association between weather/climate and a health outcome, and whether the factors to be included in the model are consistent with what is known about the health outcome. in many cases, model development will be constrained by our incomplete understanding of disease mechanisms. for many climate-sensitive health outcomes, there is limited knowledge of the relationships among weather, other drivers of the health outcome, and the health outcome. for example, chan et al. (1999) developed an integrated assessment framework for climate change and infectious diseases, and conducted a literature review to determine data availability. of the 16 linkages in this simple model, data were available for only three, primarily because the other linkages were multi-disciplinary questions that had received insufficient research attention.the issues of which factors need to be understood and in what detail are sources of the controversy for modeling malaria. using biological and statistical approaches, several groups have modeled the current distribution of malaria, with the greatest focus on plasmodium falciparum malaria (e.g. martens et al. 1999 , rogers and randolph 2000 , tanser et al. 2003 , world health organization 2002 . one limitation of current malaria models is that they rarely include key drivers besides climatic factors, such as land use change, drug resistance, and economic and technological development, and no model includes all these factors. appropriate consideration of these factors and how they interact is important when trying to project plausible possible future changes in the geographic range and incidence of malaria. projecting likely locations where malaria may retract or spread with changing weather conditions within the next few decades (in order to decide where surveillance programs may best be placed, for example) may require a different model than projecting likely burdens of endemic and epidemic malaria under specific climatic changes.models are attempts to reduce complex situations to key parameters that can be used to describe the current range and incidence of health determinants and outcomes, and to project how health burdens might change when one or more of the parameters is changed. some of the challenges in specifying climate/health models include considering scale issues, aggregating different outcomes with different exposure-response relationships (including appropriate approaches for extrapolation of relationships from one population to another), and incorporating increasing climate variability.it is a challenge to effectively incorporate interactions across scales, including geographic and temporal, into models. population health is affected by a number of modifying and/or interacting factors with feedback mechanisms that operate at different scales, from community (e.g. whether or not there is an effective early warning system for heat waves) to individual levels (e.g. whether or not an individual spends adequate time in cooled environments during a heat wave) (ebi and gamble 2005) . because climate change will be experienced at local scales, local actions, such as land use changes that contribute to heating or cooling of the environment (e.g. urban heat islands), can amplify or ameliorate larger scale climate forces. in addition, although by definition measurements of the impact of climate change entails identifying effects relative to "exposures" above a baseline, the baseline itself has been changing. further, the baseline burden of climate-sensitive health determinants and outcomes is changing due to factors unrelated to climate, such as the increasing number of older adults at risk for heat-related morbidity and mortality.another concern in model development is that few studies of the associations between weather and climate-sensitive health outcomes have been conducted across a wide range of geographic regions (campbell-lendrum et al. 2003) . for example, the global burden of disease study analyzed the potential impact of climate change on diarrheal disease; exposure-response relationships were available only from studies in peru and fiji (mcmichael et al. 2004; checkley et al. 2000; singh et al. 2001 ). these locations include only a limited range of climate and climate variation; different relationships may exist at higher or lower temperatures. regional and global models based on the extrapolation of relationships from a limited number of areas raises questions of the validity and applicability of model projections for other regions.until recently, most models developed for climate-sensitive health determinants and outcomes provided global or large regional estimates of changes in risk associated with climate change. increased resolution and downscaling of climate models have resulted in the development of finer scale models that can be linked with health exposure-response relationships to project increases in disease risk at scales appropriate for decision-makers. for example, models of the potential air pollution-related health effects of climate change for several regions in the united states were recently published patz et al. 2004 ). these models linked city or region-specific ozone exposure-response relationships with changes in ozone concentrations projected under the special report on emission scenarios (sres) a2 scenario. all models projected increases in ozone-related hospital admissions and/or mortality by mid-century.in the most comprehensive analysis, mcmichael et al. (2004) used a comparative risk assessment approach as part of the global burden of disease study to project the total health burden attributed to climate change between 2000 and 2030 and how much of this burden could be avoided by stabilizing greenhouse gas emissions. health outcomes were analyzed by region to better understand where current and projected future burdens are highest and the outcomes that contribute to the largest share of the total burden. the global burden of disease study assessed more than two-dozen other risk factors, allowing the comparison of the climate-related health burden with the burden associated with other important risk factors for population health, such as outdoor air pollution and cigarette smoking. limitations of this approach include the limited number of quantitative models to estimate the likely impacts of climate change on health, the limited geographic range of many of the models, the fact that not all of the models directly estimate the incidence or prevalence of the outcomes, the limited number of demographic, socioeconomic, and climatic scenarios analyzed, and the crude and indirect adjustments for the effects of other factors, such as poverty, that can influence vulnerability.the health outcomes included in the analysis were chosen based on sensitivity to climate variation, predicted future importance, and availability of quantitative global models (or feasibility of constructing them) (mcmichael et al. 2004) . specific health outcomes included were episodes of diarrheal disease, cases of plasmodium falciparum malaria, fatal unintentional injuries in coastal floods and inland floods/landslides, and non-availability of recommended daily calorie intake (as an indicator for the prevalence of malnutrition). in the year 2000, climate change was estimated to have caused the loss of over 150,000 lives (0.3% of worldwide deaths) and 5,500,000 disability adjusted life years lost (dalys) (0.4%), with malnutrition accounting for approximately 50% of deaths and dalys (ezzati et al. 2002; mcmichael et al. 2004 ). these estimates relate to a period when exposures to climate change were very limited, suggesting that future studies may find larger health burdens due to climate change.the projected relative risks attributable to climate change in 2030 vary by health outcome and region, and are largely negative, with the majority of the projected health burden due to increases in diarrheal disease and malnutrition, primarily in low-income populations already experiencing a large burden of disease (mcmichael et al. 2004) . absolute health burdens depend on assumptions of population growth, future baseline disease incidence, and the extent of adaptation. warmer winter temperatures are projected to result in a small proportional decrease in cardiovascular and respiratory disease mortality attributable to climate extremes in tropical regions, with a slightly larger benefit in temperate regions. the relative risk for diarrhea in 2030 in low-income countries is projected to be between 1.0 and 1.1 under unmitigated emissions, compared with baseline climate. countries with an annual gdp of $6,000 or more are assumed to have no additional risk of diarrhea. the projected impacts of malnutrition vary from a large increase (relative risk=1. . developed countries are assumed to suffer no climate change-related malnutrition impacts. coastal flooding is projected to result in a large proportional increase in risk under unmitigated emissions; however, this is applied to a very low burden of adverse health outcomes. the projected increase in relative risk of coastal flooding is equally high in high-and low-income countries. large changes are projected in the risk of falciparum malaria in countries at the edge of the current distribution, with relative changes much smaller in areas that are currently highly endemic for malaria.a single approach or model will be inadequate to address the questions that decisionmakers will ask concerning the issues of vulnerability, adaptation, and mitigation. the existence of a diversity of models and scenarios ensures that appropriate tools will be available to address the questions that will arise. recent developments in synthesizing scientific knowledge of the drivers of climate-sensitive health outcomes into models that aid visualization of the potential impacts of climate variability and change include models that project the potential future health impacts of climate change, for example (van lieshout et al. 2004; campbell-lendrum et al. 2003) ; project the implications for economic activity of changes in the intensity and range of diseases (for example, tol, this volume); and models that describe how population health may evolve (for example, pitcher et al., this volume).thresholds are defined to identify accepted or tolerable levels of health outcomes associated with an exposure. thresholds can be viewed as the exposure concentration at which the health burden associated with exposure becomes unacceptable. knowledge of the factors that determine the health burden in a population, and how those factors interact, facilitates the identification of thresholds, and, thus, the assessment of risk. the choice of a threshold is often based on social acceptance of a particular risk (jones et al. 2004) . identification of thresholds is relatively easy for non-continuous events such as floods and tropical storms. in high-income countries, the population expects that these events will result in no or at most a handful of deaths. setting thresholds for continuous distributions is more difficult; it requires deciding how much disease is acceptable. a threshold above zero means that it is acceptable that a specified percentage of a population will contract a particular disease and perhaps die. different populations may accept different thresholds of risk, as in the case of some occupational and environmental exposure limits.establishing thresholds for climate-sensitive health outcomes can be approached from the perspective of the exposure or response (jones et al. 2004 ). these approaches are not mutually exclusive, but there are situations where one perspective will dominate.an example of an exposure threshold is the influence of temperature and precipitation on malaria transmission. climate is a primary determinant of whether the conditions in a particular location are suitable for stable plasmodium falciparum malaria transmission (craig et al. 1999; mara/arma 1998) . changes in precipitation or temperature may result in conditions during the season of transmission that are conducive to increased or decreased parasite and vector populations, or may lengthen or shorten the period of time that mosquitoes or parasites can survive. small changes in precipitation or temperature may cause previously inhospitable altitudes or ecosystems to become conducive to transmission by rendering hospitable higher altitudes that were formerly too cold or desert fringes that previously were too dry for mosquito populations to develop. based on experience, the degree of change in weather variables that has been associated with increased disease transmission can be used to establish an exposure threshold. this threshold can be used to model future malaria risk, assuming limited change in land use, vector control, parasite drug resistance, access to medical care, and other factors.there are several types of response thresholds. there are exposures that have linear associations with population health outcomes, where any amount of exposure may convey some risk, such as certain foodborne diseases ). there are exposures that exhibit j-shaped relationships with health outcomes, where either too little or too much exposure is detrimental to health, such as atmospheric concentrations of oxygen. there also are exposures that have threshold relationships with health outcomes, such as the number of organisms (the dose) required to develop a case of diarrheal disease, where low levels of exposure are not associated with increased morbidity and mortality. thresholds also depend on other factors, such as the presence of malnutrition in the case of some diarrheal diseases (scrimshaw 2003) .identifying response thresholds can be complex when exposure-response relationships have a continuous distribution (yohe and ebi 2005) . for example, ambient temperature is associated with all-cause mortality, with most regions showing a j-shaped pattern. there usually is a narrow range of temperatures at which mortality is lowest, with increasing rates on either side of the minimum. it is not clear from these distributions what should be the point that separates acceptable from unacceptable mortality. historically, meteorological organizations or national weather services set a temperature above which they declared a heat event (kalkstein et al. 1996) . because humidity and others factors also determine which weather patterns are associated with increased morbidity and mortality in a community, some heat event early warning systems are based on the association between daily mortality and synoptic air masses; a threshold is set based on the number of daily deaths that can be discernable above the background rate (kalkstein et al. 1996) .another example of a threshold is the summer 2003 heatwave in europe. the temperatures were much higher than the population had experienced in at least 50 years (beniston 2004) . prior to the heatwave, only lisbon, portugal had implemented a heat health early warning system. because the system was based on known relationships between mortality and weather patterns that did not include the extremes experienced during the 2003 heatwave, the extent of the resulting mortality would have been difficult to predict (kalkstein, personal communication, 2004) . models should consider the health consequences of climate variability increasing beyond historic ranges.few models address changes in climate variance, the increasing rate of climate change, or surprises that could result from large non-linear changes. by definition, surprises are not known in advance. however, models need to incorporate the possibility of increasing variance and non-linear changes occurring at random points in time, in part to estimate whether such changes could cross thresholds for the geographic range and incidence of climate-sensitive health outcomes.population health and adaptive capacity vary dramatically over time and space, with recent examples of both improvements (e.g. china) and deterioration (e.g. the former soviet union) in public health. approaches to understanding how public health might evolve include developing models that extrapolate current trends into the future and using scenarios to describe possible social, economic, demographic, and ecological dynamics for future health pathways. health-specific scenarios have not been developed that describe the health transitions that occurred since the mid-nineteenth century and that model pathways for future health transitions. the concept of the health transition incorporates both the demographic transition that describes the change from high fertility and mortality rates in low-income countries to low fertility and mortality rates in higher-income countries, and the epidemiologic transition that describes the changes in morbidity and mortality patterns (from infectious to chronic diseases) as the demographic and socioeconomic structures change within a population (omran 1998; martens 2002) . incorporating health transitions into scenarios could lead to more plausible visions of future population health.traditionally, three stages have been identified in the health transition: the age of pestilence and famine, the age of receding pandemics, and the age of chronic diseases (omran 1998) . high levels of fertility and low life expectancy are characteristics of the age of pestilence and famine. infectious diseases are the primary causes of death, food and safe water supplies are inadequate, there is limited access to health care and education, and there is insufficient social and economic capital to develop infrastructure and gain access to technology (such as vaccines). many low-income countries are in this stage.the age of receding pandemics is characterized by somewhat lower mortality rates and increased life expectancy, primarily from increased access to safe water and adequate nutrition, leading to a reduction in the prevalence of infectious diseases (omran 1998) . high-income countries entered this stage in the middle of the nineteenth century. countries with economies in transition are currently in this stage.the age of chronic diseases is characterized by improvements in the medical care and social determinants that influence health (martens 2002) . chronic diseases are the dominant causes of death due to continued improvements in social circumstances and economic growth; this is accompanied with further increases in life expectancy. literary rates are high and fertility rates low.although descriptive of historic patterns, health transitions in developing countries are not following these three distinct stages in a predominantly linear sequence because the socio-economic-political conditions that prevailed when developed countries were developing were different than what currently developing countries experience. in fact, many currently developing countries could be described as being simultaneously in an age of pestilence and an age of chronic disease (martens 2002) . public health infrastructures and medical care communities are struggling to deal with the double burden of infectious and chronic diseases, trying to reduce epidemics at the same time as trying to reduce the health effects of high levels of air pollution and other environmental exposures. poor health is one factor hampering economic growth (sachs 2001 ). in addition, population health and economic growth are increasingly affected by conditions that transcend national borders and political jurisdictions, such as macroeconomic policies associated with international financial institutions, global trade agreements, water shortage, pollution that crosses borders, etc. (labonte and spiegel 2003) . these global issues could affect the health transition in complex and non-linear ways.several visions have been proposed for the next stages in the health transition, including an age of emerging infectious diseases, an age of medical technology, and an age of sustained health (olsansky and ault 1986; olsansky et al. 1998; martens 2002 ). an age of emerging infectious diseases could result from the re-emergence of infectious diseases that are currently controlled through public health efforts along with the simultaneous emergence of new infectious diseases. the likely consequences could include increasing rates of infectious diseases in both high-and low-income countries, with falling life expectancies and economic productivity. travel and trade, microbiological resistance, human behavior, breakdowns in health systems, and increased pressure on the environment would facilitate this health transition (barrett et al. 1998) . a number of worldwide events and trends support this possibility, such as malaria parasites becoming increasing drug resistant, hiv/aids lowering life expectancy in several african countries, the mosquitoborne disease west nile virus crossing the atlantic, severe acute respiratory syndrome (sars) quickly moving worldwide via travelers, etc.an age of medical technology could result from increased economic growth and improvements in technology, offsetting health risks caused by changes in lifestyle and the environment (martens 2002 ). an age of sustained health could result from investments in social and medical services leading to a reduction in lifestyle-related health outcomes, with the elimination of most environmentally related infectious diseases. either of these health transitions could lead to increasing life expectancy, which would have consequences not only for medical care and other services, but also for sectors from water to energy consumption.another possible pathway for future population health is a decrease in life expectancy and economic productivity due to an increased burden of lifestyle-related health outcomes in both high-and low-income countries. a number of current trends suggest that this health transition may be underway, including projections for the burden of hiv/aids in many low-income countries and the burden of obesity (mokdad et al. 1999 (mokdad et al. , 2001 and other lifestyle-related health outcomes in most countries. for example, the united nations population division's 2002 revision projected a more serious and prolonged impact of the hiv/aids epidemic in the most affected countries than previous revisions (united nations population division 2002) . under the medium population growth variant, the 2002 revision projected a lower population in 2050 than did the 2000 revision: 8.9 billion instead of 9.3 billion. about half of the 0.4 billion difference resulted from an increase in the number of projected deaths, the majority from the higher projected levels of hiv/aids and the remainder from a reduction in the number of projected births, mostly due to lower expected future fertility levels. over the current decade, the number of excess deaths because of aids among the 53 most affected countries is estimated at 46 million, with that figure projected to increase to 278 million by 2050.one issue with modeling possible future pathways based on past health transitions is that some of the key drivers for development, such as access to safe water and sanitation, sufficient agricultural production, or an adequate public health infrastructure, may take more effort to solve in low-income countries than they did for high-income countries because the factors constraining development may not be of the same relative magnitude. most high-income countries are not constrained by the amount of available water; however, solving the problem of access to safe water in some low-income countries will be more difficult, requiring more and different investment. further, high-income countries experienced fairly clear transitions; however, this paradigm does not appear to apply to low-income countries, (world health organization 2004) .health models have yet to incorporate mixed trends of increasing and decreasing health burdens. as shown in pitcher et al. (in this volume), a relatively simple model including literacy, access to simple medical care, and access to safe water and sanitation (along with an indicator for sub-saharan africa) explains national-level life expectancy. plausible assumptions for trends in each of these factors could be used to develop a model of country-level health transitions. for access to safe water, these assumptions should consider how other factors, such as climate and land use change, could affect future availability.adaptation is a critical factor determining the actual health impacts experienced by a population. the determinants of adaptive capacity include the range of available options, the availability of the human, social, institutional, and financial capital needed to implement the options, the capacity of decision-makers to manage information, and the political will to implement the options (smit et al. 2001) . individuals, communities, and regional and national agencies and organizations will need to adapt, with the measures implemented influenced by factors such as who is expected to take action; the current burden of climatesensitive health determinants and outcomes; the effectiveness of current interventions to protect the population from weather-and climate-related hazards; projections of where, when, how, and with what intensity the burden of outcome could change as the climate changes (including changes in climate variability); the feasibility of implementing additional cost-effective interventions; other stressors that could increase or decrease resilience to impacts; and the social, economic, and political context within which interventions are implemented (yohe and ebi 2005) .increasing recognition of the importance of adaptation by policymakers stresses the need to develop adaptation models. modeling adaptation will be at least as complex as developing systems-based models of the key drivers of climate-sensitive health determinants and outcomes. wealth, distribution of income, status of the public health infrastructure, provision of medical care, access to safe water and sanitation, and other factors influence both the range and incidence of health outcomes and the capacity to adapt. in order to better project the magnitude and distribution of climate change-related health impacts, it is important to develop realistic assumptions about how adaptation and mitigation will change over time.one categorization of adaptation options is into interventions designed to increase the ability to cope with present-day climate risks, and interventions that are needed to cope with projected climate change-related health impacts, while maintaining or improving current public health standards. this is an artificial categorization based not on differences in the measures actually implemented, but on the motivations behind the changes in strategies, policies, and measures. because the climate-sensitive health determinants and outcomes projected to increase with climate change are problems today, national and communitylevel public health efforts to control these health outcomes will need to be revised, reoriented, and/or expanded just to maintain current levels of disease control. coping with projected climate change impacts may require implementation of interventions from other countries/regions to address changes in the geographic range of diseases, development of new interventions to address health threats, and other actions.limited attempts have been made to model adaptation. adaptation could be modeled as decreasing health burdens based on actual trends or realistic assumptions; sensitivity analyses should be conducted for a range of decreasing disease burdens, such as 10%, 20%, etc. this was the approach taken by the global burden of disease study (mcmichael et al. 2004) . another modeling approach has been to use expert judgment to estimate how much adaptation could reduce health burdens (e.g. van lieshout et al. 2004) .appropriately modeling adaptation includes modeling the measures currently in place that affect vulnerability (e.g. the adaptation baseline); modeling the policies and measures that could be implemented (along with an estimate of effectiveness); modeling adaptive capacity; and modeling the consequences, including co-benefits, of mitigation policies at appropriate scales. further, models need to take into account that many possible measures for adapting to climate change are outside the health sector in areas such as sanitation and safe water supply, education, agriculture, trade, tourism, transport, development, and housing.developing models of future risks involves combining epidemiologic knowledge about the climatic and non-climatic risk factors for the health outcomes with projections for these risk factors, including a description of key uncertainties (mcmichael et al. 2001) . uncertainties in projections of the magnitude, timing, and nature of future changes in the climate system, socioeconomic development, and future potential health consequences of climate change lead to a need to estimate the impacts of a range of possible climate scenarios on health. there are multiple sources of uncertainty in developing models, including whether the appropriate model structure was chosen, whether the key processes incorporated into the models are well understood and described, how underlying variables will change over time (i.e. the rate, speed, and regional extent of climate change; changes in economic development, technology, etc.), how populations in different regions will respond to climate change, and the effectiveness of mitigation and adaptation strategies, policies, and measures (mccarthy et al. 2001; kovats et al. 2003) .the basic question is how well is it known that climate change is likely to affect the range or incidence of a particular health outcome. there is extensive literature on uncertainty in climate models. because impacts are specific to a time, place, and disease context, and because much remains to be learned about exposure-response relationships, there will be varying degrees of confidence in statements about impacts on local and regional scales, and these statements will depend on assumptions about development, specific adaptations, and adaptive capacity. for example, models could project with high confidence that in some regions malaria has the potential to extend its range along the edges of its current distribution, but there will be less confidence in other regions. there will be higher confidence about the potential impacts of flooding in regions where climate models suggest that extreme precipitation events are projected to increase, yet other regions may experience rare flooding events with severe consequences. trying to make one overarching statement about a particular health outcome across regions will result in a weaker statement than if statements are more specific to regions or vulnerable groups.significant challenges are posed by the fact that the health impacts of climate variability and change can be direct, indirect, multiple, and simultaneous. although the complex causal structure and the uncertainties associated with future projections of relevant climatic and non-climatic factors pose severe constraints on the accuracy with which future health impacts can be assessed, policymakers, decision-makers, resource managers, negotiators, and other stakeholders need to understand the boundaries of where, when, and how extensively climate change could affect future health burdens at the spatial and temporal scales of interest. for example, signatories to the united nations framework convention on climate change regularly submit national communications that summarize their vulnerability to climate change and the options available to reduce projected future impacts. non-annex 1 countries (primarily low-income countries) are beginning their second national communications and many would like to include health among the sectors they consider. agriculture, water, and coastal zones have well-developed (and multiple) models that project country-level impacts based on input from general circulation models and socioeconomic and demographic scenarios (such as the sres, nakicenovic et al. 2000) . the health sector has no current models to aid countries better understand how climate change could affect population health. much can be achieved using qualitative approaches, but models would enhance standardization and comparisons of results over a range of geographic and temporal scales. models also could be used in national assessments and other assessment processes.there are a number of limitations to model development. one is that the limited reliable epidemiologic data on the current relationships between climatic factors and health outcomes, especially in low-income countries, hampers the projection of future health risks. hitz and smith (2004) summarized the general shape of the damage function that describes the presumed benefits or avoided damages of reducing atmospheric concentrations of greenhouse gases and concluded that the literature is insufficient to form other than the most rudimentary conclusions about potential health impacts. the published studies were not consistent along critical dimensions, including how endpoints were categorized, or in demographic and socioeconomic assumptions, scenarios, and time slices analyzed. in addition, limited validation of published exposure-response relationships decreases confidence in projections of health impacts.the level of interacting and confounding factors associated with health outcomes makes developing health models challenging. one lesson learned from the controversy over modeling the relationship between climatic factors and malaria is that models need to incorporate the critical drivers of the health outcome. climate is one factor that affects the geographic range and incidence of climate-sensitive health outcomes. social vulnerability, access to health care, land-use, drug resistance, and other factors affect the current burden of malaria. models should incorporate, at least, relationships based on expert judgment to begin development of systems-based models (chan et al. 1999 ). in addition, research is needed to model climate change impacts through to health burdens rather than to intermediate indicators, such as populations at risk.underlying these limitations is the lack of sufficient funding, which is partially due to the limited interdisciplinary approaches of many funding agencies and institutions (chan et al. 1999 ). health-focused funding sources support studies to define and further understand exposure-response relationships, but there has been limited interest in integrating other factors, such as land use change, that can affect disease transmission dynamics. besides limiting understanding of the complex system that affects health outcomes, another consequence has been that there are insufficient numbers of students trained in multidisciplinary approaches to carry this research forward.despite these and other challenges to developing models to project the potential health impacts of climate change, there is cause for optimism. scientific interest is increasing in model development, as evidenced by the papers in this volume and other recent publications. there are a number of opportunities for rapid advancement in health models. the who global burden of disease study (mcmichael et al. 2004 ) could provide a starting point for model development, augmented by exposure-response relationships (for both climate and contextual determinants) described in recent research. attention should be paid to demographic changes and to disease trends that can influence population vulnerability, such as the increasing obesity trends in the united states that may increase vulnerability to heat waves. in addition, national and international health models could incorporate a range of climatic and socioeconomic simulations, allowing the users to choose future scenarios consistent with current climatic trends and plausible development expectations.model development should consider not only what scientists know about the climatehealth relationship, but also what stakeholders need to know for effective decision-making . ideally, model development should be an iterative process involving scientists and policymakers to ensure that modeling results will address the needs of decision-makers and contribute to the body of scientific knowledge. one example of how scientists and decision-makers have worked together is the development of heat event early warning systems that use information on physiological responses to high ambient temperature and on populations at increased risk during a heat event to create systems designed to reduce morbidity and mortality (kalkstein et al. 1996) .multiple climate-health models are needed to address the questions of interest to current and future stakeholders. although there are constraints to model development, failing to invest in such development violates one of the goals of public healthto minimize current and future burdens of climate-sensitive health determinants and outcomes.worldwide, annual epidemics of viral respiratory tract infections (rti) constitute a major health burden. especially influenza is associated with considerable morbidity and mortality [1, [2] [3] [4] [5] . in the temperate climate zone, the seasonal appearance of influenza and other respiratory viruses is well described [6] [7] [8] , yet the driving force behind this seasonal variation remains enigmatic to a large extent. several factors that might explain the seasonality have been suggested, including antigenic drift and shift in influenza viruses, host immune response, social behaviour including indoor-crowding during poor weather as well natural occurring fluctuations of climate factors and solar-radiation [9] [10] [11] [12] . of particular interest is the role of meteorological factors as key players behind the marked seasonality in the temperate regions, where the influenza peak is associated with a cold and dry climate, whereas humid and rainy conditions seem to favour influenza activity in tropical regions [13] .previous studies have shown that ambient temperature is associated with the annual influenza peak [14] [15] [16] , possibly by influencing transmission and stability of the virus [17] [18] [19] . however, during the past decade, focus has shifted towards the role of humidity. low relative humidity (rh; which describes the water content in a gas, relative to the maximum capacity of water vapor that a gas can hold, at a given temperature) has been shown to contribute to the transmission and survival of influenza virus [18] [19] [20] [21] . the plausible explanation for this is that low rh leads to evaporation of aerosolized virus particles, allowing them to remain airborne for an extended period of time [17] . however, in the temperate climate zone, outdoor rh reaches maximum levels during wintertime, suggesting that the variation regarding this parameter may not fully explain seasonality.more recent reports have investigated the role of absolute humidity (ah; the amount of water per volume unit of air (g/m 3 ), irrespective of temperature) and found a stronger correlation between low ah and influenza activity in temperate regions than compared to rh [22] [23] [24] . other climate factors such as precipitation have in some studies been associated with activity of ifa and other respiratory viruses, especially in the tropics [25] [26] [27] [28] but there is a big discrepancy in the literature concerning the role of rain on transmission of respiratory viruses [29] . furthermore, a link between climate and the epidemiological pattern of other viruses causing rti such as respiratory syncytial virus (rsv), human metapneumovirus (hmpv) and human coronavirus (hcov) [30] [31] [32] [33] [34] [35] [36] has been suggested.the aim of the present study was to investigate the impact of outdoor weather conditions on the seasonal epidemiology of viruses causing rti, using a multiplex polymerase chain reaction (pcr) panel for 16 viral pathogens during three consecutive seasons. in particular, we wanted to explore the relative influence of climate factors on the onset of the annual ifa epidemics as well as the seasonal incidence of other respiratory viruses.this retrospective study included all clinical naso-pharyngeal swab samples collected between october 2010 and july 2013 (n = 20062), which were sent to the department of virology at sahlgrenska university hospital (a 2000 bed teaching hospital), in gothenburg, sweden (populated by approximately 600,000 inhabitants), for detection of respiratory pathogens by routine multiplex real-time pcr. the study population covered all age groups, including children. samples were predominantly referred from hospital inpatients but also from primary health care facilities as well as hospital outpatient clinics. no clinical or demographic information regarding the patients were available.the real-time pcr assay on nasopharyngeal aspirates (npa) used during the study period targeted sixteen viruses and two bacteria in separate pcr systems; influenza virus a (ifa) and b (ifb), rsv, human rhinovirus (hrv), human enterovirus (hev), human coronavirus (hcov nl63, oc43, 229e and hku1), human metapneumovirus (hmpv), human adenovirus (hadv), parainfluenza virus (piv) type 1-4 and human bocavirus (hbov), and the bacteria chlamydophila pneumoniae and mycoplasma pneumoniae.all samples were analysed using the same technique. nucleic acid from 100 l specimen was extracted into an elution volume of 100 l by a magnapure lc robot (roche molecular systems, mannheim, germany) using the total nucleic acid protocol, and was amplified in an abi 7900 real-time pcr system (applied biosystems, foster city, ca) in 25 l reaction volumes. after a reverse transcription step, 45 cycles of two-step pcr were performed. each sample was amplified in 8 parallel reactions, each containing primers and probes specific for 2-3 targets. the method has previously been described in detail [37, 38] . in cases with a positive signal for both hrv and hev with a cycle difference of <5 cycles, indistinguishable hev/hrv was reported. the pcr panel continuously underwent external quality assessment through qcmd (quality control for molecular diagnostics), including all agents except bocavirus and coronavirus hku1. boca virus was included into the panel in november 2011, otherwise no major changes of the assay were made.data on average weekly outdoor temperature (degrees celsius), vapor pressure (vp; hpa), relative humidity (rh, %), wind speed (m/s) and precipitation (mm) for the study period were obtained from the swedish meteorological and hydrological institute (smhi) obtained at the local weather station in gothenburg (5 m above the sea level, situated at latitude: 57.7157n, longitude: 11.9925e). as previously mentioned, ah describes the actual vapor pressure in a volume of air irrespective of temperature. different measures in meteorology of ah include vapor pressure, specific humidity and mixing ratio. the data on humidity provided by smhi, and used in this study, were expressed in vp (hpa).the weekly incidence of each pathogen included in the routine pcr panel during the study period was analysed for seasonality and association with climate factors, using average weekly means of included meteorological parameters. for each of the three seasonal influenza outbreaks during the study period, we choose to further study the period from two weeks prior to the first week with average weekly temperature below zero degrees celsius to the week with maximum ifa incidence, when analysing the onset of each epidemic.we used simple linear regression analysis for univariate comparison of the weekly incidence for each virus and several meteorological parameters across all seasons. multiple linear regression analysis, using the enter strategy, was performed with each agent as dependant variable and the climate factors as independent variables. analysis of variance was utilized to assess the significance of each multiple regression model and a p-value of <0.05 indicated a qualified model. data on the seasonal ifa outbreaks were also analysed with multiple linear regression to further explore the relation between the drop in temperature during the three preceding weeks and the weekly incidence. p values below 0.05 were considered statistically significant (2-sided). the statistical analysis was made using the spss software package version 22.0.0.0 (ibm, armonk, ny).altogether, 20062 samples were examined during the study period, of which 10579 (52.3%) were positive for one or more respiratory agent. detection frequencies are displayed in fig. 1 . ifa, ifb, rsv, hcov and hmpv all displayed a strong seasonal pattern peaking during the cold winter months whereas hrv was prevalent across all seasons (fig. 2) .in the univariate comparisons, between meteorological factors (weekly averages for outdoor temperature, outdoor vapor pressure, relative humidity, wind speed and precipitation) and the weekly incidence of respiratory viruses included in the panel, the weekly incidence of ifa, ifb, rsv, hcov, hmpv, hbov and hadv correlated significantly with low outdoor temperature as well as vapor pressure (except for piv which was associated with vapor pressure only). relative humidity correlated with the incidence of ifb, hcov, piv and hev. no association between rh and ifa, rsv, hmpv, hbov and hadv was found. no meteorological factor was associated with hrv infections apart from a positive correlation with wind speed. thus, the non-enveloped picornaviruses (hrv and hev) differed from most of the enveloped viruses in being independent of outdoor temperature and vapor pressure.multiple regression analyses were performed for each agent to explore which of the weather factors were independently associated with a high incidence. temperature correlated strongly with vapor pressure (r 2 = 0.91; p < 0.0001), and therefore it would be inappropriate to fit both of them into the regression models. thus, temperature was chosen for further modelling and vapor pressure was left out. temperature, relative humidity, wind speed and precipitation were included as independent variables and the weekly incidence for each agent respectively as the dependent variable. the results of the multiple linear regression analyses for all agents are displayed in table 1 .during all investigated seasons, the start of the ifa epidemics coincided sharply with the point of time when average weekly temperature for the first time each season fell below the freezing point (0  celsius) and average weekly vapor pressure subsided 4 hpa (fig. 3) . data on each outbreak is depicted in fig. 4 . to closer analyse the relation between the change in temperature and the onset of the seasonal epidemic, we used multivariate regression to investigate the relation between the magnitude of the weekly change in temperature (temp drop) during the three preceding weeks, and the weekly ifa incidence, during the three seasonal epidemics. data are summarized in table 2 . there was a significant association between ifa incidence and the change in temperature recorded the week before.in our study, we investigated the epidemiological patterns of viral rtis across three consecutive years by comparing meteorological data with molecular diagnostic test results of samples collected from more than 20,000 patients, in a temperate climate. the main finding was a strong association between a drop in temperature and the start the influenza season and that low outdoor temperature was associated with the weekly incidence of several respiratory viruses, except for hrv or hev. we propose that reduced size of aerosol droplets due to evaporation by reduced temperature (and vapor pressure) during cold outdoor conditions may extend the duration of time when such infectious droplets remain airborne and thus increases the chance of infecting new hosts [17] . low temperature has been shown to increase ifa activity previously [14] [15] [16] 24] and several authors have reported that cold weather precedes ifa epidemics in a temperate climate [14, 15, [22] [23] [24] . multivariate analysis revealed an association between weekly incidence of influenza and outdoor temperature, independent of other weather factors and the curves displaying the weekly incidence revealed that a quick drop below zero preceded the start of the annual epidemic each of the examined seasons in our setting. jaakkola et al. recently found that a drop in temperature during the three preceding days increased the risk for influenza virus transmission, however this study had a limited positive sample size and used daily averages. in order to further analyse the relationship between the start of ifa epidemics and climate factors we also investigated the weekly changes of meteorological parameters during outbreak and we found that alterations in temperature (and hence, vapor pressure) precedes the increase of ifa infections by one week in a similar geographical setting. this suggests that declines in outdoor temperature may be an important predictor for the ifa outbreaks, which may serve to kick-start the annual epidemic. it is important to notice that there is a relatively strong covariance between outdoor temperature and ah (expressed as vp in our study) and that they are strongly connected. we believe that both are critical for shaping conditions favourable for aerosol spread, but whether they should be considered as separate factors or as one connected entity in epidemiological models are up for further studies.some experimental studies have reported that low rh may affect transmission and survival of influenza virus [19] [20] [21] . our observations suggest that ah is more strongly associated with ifa onset and activity than rh. in fact, we observed slightly higher rh during winter compared to the rest of the year, arguing against that rh would explain the marked seasonality, and this has also been questioned by reports by others [23, 24] . even though table 2 multiple regression analysis showing the relation between the weekly incidence of influenza a virus and the change in average weekly outdoor temperature (temp drop) compared with the previous week at week 0 (current week), 1 (1 week ago) and 2 (2 weeks ago), during three consecutive seasonal outbreaks. outdoor rh is higher during the winter months in temperate climate, the amount of water vapor that a unit of air can hold is significantly smaller when the temperature is low, meaning that the air is very dry in terms of ah. indoor heating wintertime causes rh to drop heavily and creates an even dryer indoor environment that might further favour transmission of influenza viruses by reducing the size of aerosol particles through evaporation. therefore, maintaining a higher level of humidity indoors might help reducing transmission [39] . in our series, rsv peaked during late wintertime (february to march) all seasons while ifb appeared biennially. an association between climate and rsv as well as ifb has been reported previously [30] [31] [32] [40] [41] [42] [43] . since our observation period was limited we can only conclude that ifb appears irregularly in our geographical area, which is consistent with the finding from a 10 year-surveillance conducted by weigl et al. [6] . our findings suggest that temperature and vapor pressure may influence activity of rsv, but also ifb once the prerequisites for an annual epidemic are fulfilled. we believe that the observed negative correlation between ifb and rh may be a coincidence. a study by gaunt et al. found marked winter seasonality of hcov in a similar geographic setting [35] and in the temperate climate zone hmpv also peaks during wintertime or early spring [33, 36, 44, 45] whereas an inverse pattern has been observed closer to the equator [46] . in agreement with these reports both hcov and hmpv activity was strongly associated with low temperature and vp in our study. piv appeared irregularly with a single episode of high incidence in the spring of 2013. a previous study in the same geographical area also found piv to peak during springtime [8] . we found a weaker correlation between piv and vp compared to ifa, and we believe that piv may be less dependent of meteorological factors. hrv and hev appear frequently across seasons in our study. hrv have a tendency to accelerate during autumn in the temperate zone [43, 47] . we speculate that infections caused by hrv and hev, which are non-enveloped viruses and therefore more robust than most of the respiratory viruses, may be transmitted via large droplets or close contact rather than via small-aerosolized particles and therefore be less dependent on climate factors for spread. the association between hrv incidence and weekly average wind speed should be interpreted with caution since weekly average may be a suboptimal way to quantify the impact of wind. it could however reflect increased transmission due to indoor crowding during longer periods of windy climate.our study has several limitations. although the relatively large sample size have been analysed at the same laboratory, a few specimens were collected as far as 100 km from the laboratory. any differences in temperature and humidity are likely to be small within this geographical area and we believe that this factor would not change our findings in any substantial way. we choose to study weekly averages in temperature and humidity, in order to exclude the risk of the turbulence given by the swift alterations that may occur on a daily basis. the number of seasons included in this study was too few to justify the use of monthly averages.in conclusion, our results suggest that a sudden drop in outdoor temperature might activate the annual influenza epidemic in a temperate climate by facilitating aerosol spread in dry air. moreover, low temperature and dry air seem to affect the incidence of several other important respiratory pathogens but not hrv or hev, suggesting that routes of infection other than aerosol may be relevant for these agents.none declared.region vstra gtaland research funds funded this research. project number: 162681.no personal data were analysed in the study and no ethical approval was required according to swedish regulations.the severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2) pneumonia-also known as coronavirus disease 19 (covid-19)-allegedly broke out in a wet market of the city of wuhan, the capital city of the hubei province, in central china (30.60  n-114.05  e), where also the wuhan institute of virology is located. the first case of hospital admission was reported on 12 december 2019 [1] . since january 2020 the pandemic rapidly spread throughout the whole province of hubei, in other regions of china and, further, began to spread all over the world. the covid-19 pandemic is being monitored by the world health organization (who). (web page: https://www.who.int/emergencies/diseases/novel-coronavirus-2019, accessed on 15 april 2020. coronavirus disease (covid-19) pandemic).the high lethality rate of this virus requires the development of epidemic control strategies such as lock-down of the infected region and others [2] , which, however, in time can negatively affect the economy of a society. thus, it is a priority to forecast how the covid-19 pandemic could geographically propagate and affect society for optimizing these strategies.data regarding the evolution covid-19 coronavirus pandemic of confirmed cases and deaths by country, territory or conveyance are collected by numerous web-sites. figure 1 shows the geographic distribution of the current covid-19 global situation prepared by the center for system science and engineering at john hopkins university (as of 15 april 2020). (source: https://gisanddata. maps.arcgis.com/apps/opsdashboard/index.html#/bda7594740fd40299423467b48e9ecf6, accessed on 15 april 2020.) table 1 reports the first fifty-six countries affected by the covid-19 pandemic ranked by total cases, total cases per million, total deaths and total deaths per million. (web page: https://www.worldometers.info/coronavirus/, accessed on 15 april 2020.) figure 2 shows global geographical distributions of the three indices referring to the coronavirus pandemic by country and territory: [a] confirmed cases per million inhabitants; [b] total confirmed cases by country and territory;[c] total confirmed deaths per million of covid-19 by country and territory. (source: https://en. wikipedia.org/wiki/2019%e2%80%9320_coronavirus_pandemic_by_country_and_territory, accessed on 15 april 2020).as although the propagation of a pandemic and its health severity may have several causes including people's network contacts, greater mobility, more concentrated demography, population age and air pollution as it usually happens in large and economically developed zones, figure 2 suggests that the spread of the covid-19 pandemic could also have a main geographical climatic preference. in fact, the pandemic appears to have spread quite fast in moderately cold places where the daily average temperature may have been roughly between 0  c and 16  c. on the other hand, up to 15 april, countries with warm climates (e.g., india, central america, south america, southern asia, africa and oceania), as well as very cold countries (e.g., canada, russia, north-eastern europe) appear to have been less affected. it is also noticeable that even when the number of cases is relatively large relative to the population, the number of deaths is usually lower in warm countries, as shown in figure 2c . thus, it is reasonable to ask whether geographical regions within a specific climatic/weather zone could be more vulnerable to this epidemic. indeed, several studies have established that influenza virus transmission and virulence depend also on meteorological conditions such as temperature, relative humidity and wind speed; besides, in the northern hemisphere, influenza is more widely spread during the winter seasons [3] [4] [5] .influenza rates are normally seasonal [6] and, usually, these infections nearly disappear when the weather gets warm. similar behavior has been observed for other sars coronaviruses [7] [8] [9] [10] that belong to the same coronaviridae family of sars-cov-2 [11] . the finding has always been that these viruses spread mostly within given ranges of meteorological conditions. for example, yuan et al. [12] determined that the sars virus identified in november 2002 in guangdong province, china, presents a peak spread at a mean temperature of 16.9  c (95% ci, 10.7  c to 23.1  c), with a mean relative humidity of 52.2% (95% ci, 33.0% to 71.4%) and wind speed of 2.8 m/s (95% ci, 2.0 to 3.6 m/s). gaunt et al. [13] found that three coronaviruses showed "marked winter seasonality" and that they seemed to cause infections mainly between december and april. in a preliminary analysis, bukhari and jameel [14] noted that the novel covid-19 pandemic has affected more seriously countries within a temperature range of 3  c to 17  c with absolute humidity between 3 g/m 3 and 9 g/m 3 . thus, also for the covid-19 it has been proposed that a dry, moderate cold environment could be the most favorable state for the spreading of this virus [15] .the seasonal influence on the spread or slowdown of a pandemic induced by aerially transmitted viruses can have several biological, physical, solar-light mechanisms that involve both the virus survival and transmission in the air and the susceptibility of the host immune system [16] . some of these results came from laboratory-experimental studies on how viral etiology and host susceptibility vary under different environmental conditions, while other findings are from epidemiological studies relating large-scale patterns to various climate signals and atmospheric conditions. in any case, even if viruses could survive at relatively high temperatures in lab experiments (indeed, they live in a human body at 37c or more) their ability to propagate from person to person and to overcome their immune system may strongly depend on seasonal weather conditions. in this paper, geographical data describing the covid-19 diffusion and lethality are correlated against weather-climatic conditions of various countries, their median population age and air pollution levels to determine the main possible factors affecting the pandemic. the study starts with a detailed comparison of the weather conditions from january to march 2020 between wuhan and the italian provinces of milan, brescia and bergamo that were the first most affected regions. the striking similarity between the weather conditions of these two regions leads us to reason that there could be an optimal weather condition (dry and moderate cold weather) that could favor the spreading of the covid-19 epidemic. this hypothesis is also supported by physical considerations related to the transmission in the air of viruses through respiratory droplets, as explained in the discussion section. the testing is then completed by analyzing the situation in the united states of america and finally of the entire world. finally, the median population age of the countries and their air pollution levels are analyzed to evaluate their possible contribution to the pandemic. based on this reasoning and the analysis results, it is suggested that weather-climatic conditions are the main factor regulating the development of the pandemic. consequently, a set of optimized monthly isotherm world maps from january to december 2020 are proposed to forecast its course and timeline evolution by identifying the geographical regions that are likely to experience similar weather conditions as in wuhan and milan during the high peak of the covid-19 infection. for each country and region, weather predictions could later be further convoluted with the median population age of the specific place since the covid-19 affects mostly the elderly. the online supplementary files provide the same maps as google-earth-pro interactive files and the full data files. (appendix a).herein, the geographical diffusion and lethality of covid-19 are analyzed against weather and climatic conditions. the covid-19 epidemic curve in hubei and the rest of china until the 3 march is shown in figure 4 and its patterns are extensively commented in macintyre [17] . it is observed that the epidemic peaked in the first week of february and the number of new infections rapidly decreased in march. figure 5 shows the recorded mean daily temperature of wuhan from 1 january 2020 to 14 april 2020 (black curve). (source: https://www.accuweather.com/en/cn/wuhan/103847/current-weather/ 103847, accessed on 15 april 2020.) the figure also shows the mean seasonal max-min temperature range curve from wuhan airport, which is 23 km from wuhan (yellow area). (source: https:// www.timeanddate.com/weather/china/wuhan/climate, accessed on 15 april 2020.) the temperature data show that in wuhan the daily temperature roughly ranges between 1  c and 8  c in january, between 3  c and 11  c in february and 7  c and 15  c in march. during the period most affected by the covid-19 infection (january and february), the temperature in the region roughly varied between 0  c and 12  c. the seasonal average relative humidity in wuhan was on average around 70% and the average wind speed was around 10 km/h, which are the typical humidity and high-pressure conditions that characterize continental china during winter when only the weak monsoon winds blow. (source: https://www.ilmeteo.it/portale/archivio-meteo/milano, https://www.ilmeteo.it/portale/ archivio-meteo/brescia, and https://www.ilmeteo.it/portale/archivio-meteo/bergamo, accessed on 15 april 2020.) it shows an excellent correlation between the temperature records. this temperature correlation occurred mostly for january and february when wuhan experienced a mean temperature equal to 4.1  3  c and 8.4  3.6  c, respectively. the italian cities experienced a mean temperature equal to 3.8  2.0  c and 8.1  2.1  c, respectively, in milan; 4.3  1.6  c and 7.7  1.7  c, respectively, in bergamo; and 3.2  2.0  c and 7.2  1.6  c, respectively, in brescia. however, figure 6 also highlights that the three italian cities experienced a relatively cold march with a mean temperature equal to 9.5  2.8  c in milan, 8.8  2.9  c in bergamo and 8.7  2.4  c in brescia. in march, the daily mean temperature spanned between 4  c and 15  c. this temperature range fits well with the one measured in wuhan in february where the mean temperature was equal to 8.4  3.6  c and the daily mean temperature spanned between 3  c and 18  c. in march, wuhan was significantly warmer: its mean temperature was equal to 12.9  4.1  c and the daily mean temperature spanned between 6  c and 19  c.the above results are summarized in table 2 together with other meteorological indices such as monthly means of the relative humidity, wind speed and atmospheric pressure, which are also found to be comparable in the two locations. it is to be noted that the observed low relative humidity (from 61% to 85%), low-speed wind (from 6 km/h to 11 km/h), and high atmospheric pressure (from 1016 mbar to 1026 mbar) induce atmospheric stability facilitating the spreading of viruses. (source for wuhan: https://www.worldweatheronline.com/wuhan-weather-averages/hubei/cn.aspx, accessed on 15 april 2020.) in january and february, the two locations shared strikingly similar weather conditions, but in march wuhan got warmer fast while the italian provinces experienced cold weather similar to that of wuhan in february. these facts could explain why the covid-19 pandemic spread equally fast in both regions, but the italian regions were more severely affected. as figure 6 shows, in italy, the cold weather lasted longer with unusual cold weeks at the beginning and the end of march, favoring the pandemic spread. table 3 reports the covid-19 death statistics as for 15 april 2020, the mean weather condition of march for each italian region with their population densities. the table's rationale is that most people who died were infected in march. the data indicate that the colder northern regions with temperature roughly ranging between 3  c and 14  c and with low-speed winds roughly ranging between 8 km/h and 12 km/h were those most affected by the pandemic. the number of deaths sharply decreases by moving toward the southern regions that were on average about 2  c warmer. the latter regions also had stronger wind roughly ranging between 12 km/h and 15 km/h. northern regions were also slightly dryer (rh = 66%) than the southern ones (rh = 73%).the pearson correlation coefficients are calculated between the weather indices and the logarithm of the deaths/1mil record because the latter can be hypothesized to increase exponentially with environmental variables. in fact, it is expected that each person could infect or cause the death of a number  of people each day, which yields to a geometric sequence with an exponential growth in time as n(t) = (1 + ) t1 , where t is the number of days from the first infection. as a result that  is expected to be small with respect to 1 (for example, for n(50) = 1000 deaths per million people after 50 days of pandemic,  = 0.15), we have that log n(t)  (t  1), which is our model to be tested.we obtain high significance correlation levels: r t = 0.49 with p 20 (1  r  r t ) = 1.4% for the temperature; r h = 0.37 with p 20 (1  r  r h ) = 5.4% for the humidity; and r w = 0.67 with p 20 (1  r  r w ) = 0.1% for the wind speed. possible co-factors are discussed in section 3.the above considerations and statistical results suggest that weather temperatures roughly ranging between 4  c and 12  c together with weather conditions of low relative humidity and low-speed winds could be those that mostly favor the propagation of covid-19 and/or aggravate the susceptibility of people to its secondary pneumonia. for 15 april 2020, the united states of america overtook italy and china as the country with the highest number of confirmed covid-19 cases with more than 600,000 cases (nearly 2000 cases per million people) and 26,000 deaths (nearly 86 deaths per million people). indeed, the weather condition of the usa has been relatively similar to that of western europe in march and of that of wuhan in february. the usa were chosen because the country is geographically vast and strongly interconnected, all states reacted nearly simultaneously to the pandemic and the available information is homogeneous and of high quality.to test such a relation, mean temperature and relative humidity data were collected for march for each of the 51 states of the union using as reference their largest city and compared against the covid-19 deaths per million people data for each state. (web pages: https://www. worldweatheronline.com, and https://www.worldometers.info/coronavirus/country/us/, accessed on 15 april 2020.) as above, the weather records of march were used because most of the people who have died by april 15 were very likely infected in march. the data are reported in table 4 and plotted in figure 7 . table 4 and figure 7 confirm that the codiv-19 lethality has been worst in states with an average temperature ranging between 4  c and 12  c. in this temperature range, there are 30 states with an average of 82 deaths per million people with new york being the most affected state with 591 deaths per million people. there are other 21 colder or warmer states, and they had on average 34 deaths per million people. table 4 .the state of louisiana appears anomalous. in fact, despite its 23  c, it had 237 deaths per million people. indeed, according to several news agencies, new orleans has been a center of the coronavirus crisis likely because over 1.4 million people, coming from around the world, flocked to the city to celebrate a carnival for more than a month, culminating in the mardi gras celebration at the end of february. this event made probable that even a few persons could infect numerous people. (sorce: https://www.nytimes.com/2020/04/13/us/coronavirus-new-orleans-mardi-gras.html, accessed on 15 april 2020.) by excluding the state of louisiana from the above statistics, there were 20 states colder or warmer than the range from 4  c to 12  c which had on average 23 deaths per million people. this suggests that the covid-19 lethality in the states with a mean temperature between 4  c to 12  c was on average nearly 4 times larger than in the other states: that is 80% versus 20%, respectively. table 4 and figure 7 also compare the mean relative humidity values for march for each of the 51 states of the usa. the records confirm that states with relative humidity levels between 60% and 75% were the most affected. within this range 35 states are found with on average 81 deaths per million people. the other 16 states have on average 21 deaths per million people. this makes again a 80% versus 20%, respectively. possible co-factors are discussed in section 3. figure 7 fits the data with gaussian functions of the typewhere a is the maximum value,  = mean and  = standard deviation. for the temperature data we get: a = 162 deaths/1mil;  = 1.5  c ;  = 1.5  c . for the relative humidity data we get: a = 100 deaths/1mil;  = 66%;  = 7%. the pearson correlation coefficients are calculated between the logarithm of cases/1mil and deaths/1mil because they can be hypothesized to increase exponentially with the environmental variables versus the function f (y) = |x  |, where  is the mean calculated above for the temperature and humidity: see also the explanation in section 2.1.using cases/1mil, for the temperature it is found r t = 0.29 with p 50 (1  r  r t ) = 2%, and for the humidity r h = 0.29 with p 50 (1  r  r h ) = 2%. using deaths/1mil, for the temperature it is found r t = 0.23 with p 50 (1  r  r t ) = 5.4%, and for the humidity r h = 0.27 with p 50 (1  r  r h ) = 2.9%.if the state of louisiana is excluded, for cases/1mil it is found r t = 0.40 with p 49 (1  r  r t ) = 0.2%, and r h = 0.30 with p 49 (1  r  r h ) = 1.8%. using deaths/1mil, it is foundthe above considerations and statistical results suggest that weather temperatures roughly ranging between 4  c and 12  c together with weather conditions of low relative humidity between 59% and 73% could be those that mostly favor the propagation of covid-19 and/or aggravate the susceptibility of people to its secondary pneumonia. possible co-factors are discussed in section 3. table 5 collects data regarding the covid-19 pandemic situation for each continent as for 15 april 2020. together with the patterns shown in figures 1 and 2 , and the data reported in table 1 , the western european countries and the united states of america, together with a few other countries with similar climatic conditions, have been most affected by the covid-19 pandemic. colder countries such as canada and asian russia, as well as the warmer central and southern america, africa, southern asia and australia, have been scarcely affected. this is particularly evident by comparing the number of deaths per million people among the continents. mean monthly land temperature data from the climatic research unit (cru) time-series (ts) version 4.03, which are available from january 1901 to december 2018 [18] , were collected for the 151 world countries having a population of at least one million people. (sorce: https://crudata.uea. ac.uk/cru/data/hrg/cru_ts_4.03/, accessed on 15 april 2020.) as a result of the changing climate, monthly averages from 2000 to 2018 were used to determine their whether-climatic condition for march, when the pandemic spread around the world. these 151 countries were collected according to three climatic zones: (1) 13 cold countries with march mean temperatures lower than 2  c; (2) 41 temperate countries with march mean temperature between 2  c and 14  c; and (3) 97 warm countries with march mean temperature higher than 14  c.relative to the analysis result shown in figure 7 , the temperature range between 2  c and 14  c was used to allow a certain variability because on a world scale the pandemic did not start simultaneously in all countries and because the climatic averages can vary from the actual monthly values by about 2  c. sweden was added to the group (2) despite it belongs to the cold country group (1) because nearly all of its population lives in the warmer southern region. all data are reported in the table provided in the supplementary file. figure 8 shows boxplots that highlight the lower outliers, "minimum", first quartile, median, third quartile, "maximum", higher outliers for each of the three groups. they show the three temperature country groups in the function of their number of covid-19 cases and deaths per million people and the percent of deaths per number of cases. in the latter case, only the countries with more than 100 cases/1mil were considered. the boxplot values are reported in table 6 .the boxplot analysis clearly shows that the countries with march mean temperatures ranging between 2  c and 14  c have been the most affected by the covid-19 pandemic: their median of the number of cases per one million people is nearly 20 times larger than the median for the warm countries. on 97 warm countries, only 21 had a number of cases per one million people larger than 100. furthermore, even if there are a few warm countries with a high number of covid-19 cases per million people, their mortality rate has had a median 4.6 times lower than the countries belonging to the second group. thus, the evidence is that getting infected in warm countries leads to a less severe clinical condition. the same finding, however, could have been also caused by the relatively low median population age of several warm countries such as the african ones, as discussed in the next section. . in (c) only the countries with more than 100 cases/1mil were considered to reduce statistical volatility. see the supplementary file for the data. right panels: equivalent scatterplots in function of the march mean relative humidity for the same countries (red) with the correspondent k density smooth function (blue). table 6 . boxplot data: see figure 8 . the climatic research unit also provides monthly mean water vapor pressure data for the same countries and periods. we used the tetens equation to calculate the saturation vapor pressure of water from the recorded temperature because of its ease of use and relative accuracy at temperatures within the normal ranges of natural weather conditions. (web site: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/tetens_ equation, accessed on 15 april 2020.) then, we estimated the monthly average of the relative humidity (rh) values by calculating the ratio between vapor pressure and the saturation vapor pressure and, finally, the climatic average for each country and month using the data from 2000 to 2018, as done for the temperature. all rh data are collected in the supplementary files.the data were analyzed in the following way. first, we divided the countries with more than 100 cases per million people (case a: 65 countries) from the others (case b: 88 countries). the data are shown in the right panels of figure 8 which shows that, on average, countries with rh values roughly between 60% and 85% were the most affected by the covid-19 pandemic with the rates falling significantly for rh values lower than 60%. we also divided the countries as done above, according to the same three temperature intervals. set a has 9, 33 and 21 countries, respectively. set b has 3, 8 and 76 countries, respectively. for the countries belonging to the set a, we found an average of rh = 73%  11% divided into the three temperature groups as: (1) rh = 81%  13%; (2) rh = 72%  7%; (3) rh = 70%  14%. for the countries belonging to set b, we found an average of rh = 61%  17% divided into the three temperature groups as (1) rh = 60%  15%; (2) rh = 61%  11%; (3) rh = 61%  18%. thus, very dry climates appear to reduce the severity of the pandemic.by repeating the pearson correlation analysis between the logarithm of cases/1mil and deaths/1mil and the function f (y) = |y  | with  = 8  c for the temperature and  = 72.5%  c for the humidity, it is found: for cases/1mil, r t = 0.55 with p 151 (1  r  r t )  0.01%, and r h = 0.23 with p 151 (1  r  r h ) = 0.2%; for deaths/1mil, r t = 0.57 with p 151 (1  r  r t )  0.01%, and r h = 0.31 with p 151 (1  r  r h )  0.01%.these results confirm those found for italy and the usa, and further indicate that the covid-19 pandemic diffusion and lethality rates are mostly related to weather-climatic conditions. the highest rates are found in places that in march had mean monthly temperatures roughly between 4  c and 12  c and with relative humidity roughly between 60% and 85%. these results are consistent with the analysis of the previous sections. possible co-factors are discussed in section 3.this section discusses possible co-factors that could contribute to the diffusion and severity of covid-19. these are the local median population age and air pollution quality.data collected as to date (16 april 2020), although still incomplete, suggest a demographic influence on the covid-19 pandemic. (sorce: https://www.worldometers.info/coronavirus/coronavirus-agesex-demographics/, accessed on 16 april 2020.) for example, preliminary works from china suggest that the probability of dying if infected by the virus is larger for males than females, it is larger in the presence of pre-existing health conditions, and it is significantly larger for the elderly than for younger people. (source: https://www1.nyc.gov/assets/doh/downloads/pdf/imm/covid-19-daily-data-summarydeaths-04152020-1.pdf, accessed on 15 april 2020.) this evidence suggests that demographic statistics could significantly affect the covid-19 pandemic and its consequences.regarding the situation for italy, table 3 also reports the regional population density and mean population age. (source: http://www.comuni-italiani.it/statistiche/eta.html, accessed on 15 april 2020.) the population density does not appear to be significantly correlated to the pandemic rates as there are regions with low or high density both in the upper and lower part of the table: r pd = 0.12 with p 20 (r pd  r  1) = 31%. on the contrary, a more significant correlation is found between covid-19 and the mean population age: r ma = 0.34 with p 20 (r ma  r  1) = 7.1%. in fact, regions with a higher percentage of elderly are usually more affected by the pandemic, but there are important exceptions that weaken the correlation pattern. for example, lombardia was by far the most affected region (deaths/cases = 18.3%) despite its relatively low mean population age (44.3 years), while thirteen regions have a larger percentage of elderly, including the province of basilicata which had the lowest deaths/cases value (6.6%). thus, the population age is co-factor, but it does not seem to be the main variable determining the pandemic diffusion.regarding the situation for the usa, table 4 also reports the median population age for each state. (source: http://www.statsamerica.org/sip/rank_list.aspx?rank_label=pop46&ct=s09. median age in 2018. accessed on 15 april 2020.) the comparison of these data versus the covid-19 ones shows only a modest and, probably, not significant correlation ranging between r ma = 0.10 with p 50 (r ma  r  1) = 24% and r ma = 0.17 (excluding the state of louisiana) with p 49 (r ma  r  1) = 12% according to the adopted record. in fact, the usa median population age varies between 31 and 44.9 years with an average of 38.5 years. by considering the first twenty states most affected by covid-19, their mean median population age is 38.7 years for cases/1mil, 38.8 years for deaths/1mil and 38.6 years for deaths/cases; just above the national mean. the state of new york has a median population age of 39 years and has been the most affected one, despite there are nineteen states with a higher percentage of elderly including the cold montana (3  c) and the warm hawaii (23  c) that were among the states less affected by covid-19.regarding the situation for the entire world, figure 9a shows the world map of the countries relative to their median population age and it appears that the most affected countries-e.g., the european and the northern american ones-could be those with the highest population age and, therefore, with the highest percentage of the elderly. to test a possible demographic age effect and compare it against the weather patterns analyzed above, we show in figure 9b ,c boxplots of the country median age against the same sets of countries divided into weather temperature zones used in figure 8 .the analysis shows that, while a large number of warm countries (t > 14  c in march) also have a low median age, both the cold countries (t < 2  c in march) and the temperate countries (2  c < t < 14  c) have a compatible median population age. figure 9d ,e show that the world countries distributions per cases/1mil and deaths/1mil per country median age peak for countries with a median age of around 40-45 years, but in the former case the distribution is significantly wider than in the latter case. in fact, figure 9f shows that the distribution of deaths/cases per country median age appears to be made of two superimposed distributions: a uniform one per median ages between 27 and 47 years and values up to 5%, plus a set of seven countries (italy, spain, the netherlands, france, belgium, sweden, the united kingdom) with deaths/cases rates larger than 10%. these seven countries belong to the same weather-climatic region.by repeating the pearson correlation analysis between the logarithm of cases/1mil and deaths/1mil and the median age of the country population, it is found: for cases/1mil, r ma = 0.8 with p 151 (r ma  r  1)  0.01% and for deaths/1mil, r ma = 0.7 with p 151 (r ma  r  1)  0.01%. however, these results are incompatible with those found in italy and in the usa and suggest a coincidental finding induced by the large number of warm countries that also have a low median population age. in fact, the correlation does not hold by restricting the sample.for example, table 7 indicates that among the first ten countries with the highest median population age (between 44.4 and 48.6 years) only italy had a significant death rate (deaths/1mil = 358) while the other nine countries had a significant lower lethality rate ranging between hong kong (deaths/1mil = 0.5) and portugal (deaths/1mil = 59). among the first five countries with the highest median population age (between 45.3 and 48.6 years), japan and germany have a larger median population age while hong kong and greece have a lower median population age than italy. the relatively low death rate of these four countries relative to that observed in italy is better explained by their different climatic-weather conditions because, in march, japan and germany are significantly colder, while greece and hong kong are significantly warmer than italy by several celsius degrees. the complete table for all 151 countries with more than one million people is found in the supplementary materials.these results suggest that although the median population age of a country is an important co-factor for the covid-19 diffusion and lethality rates, such a parameter is not as important as the climatic-weather ones. the same conclusion can be derived from the time evolution of the pandemic that, for example, in europe from february to may, evolved from the warm south-ovest region (spain and italy) toward colder nord-eastern region, with the cold eastern-european countries that were the least affected despite their high median population age.atmospheric stability related to high atmospheric pressure and low-speed winds also cause a higher concentration of air pollutants [19] that could carry viruses. air pollution increases the risk of respiratory diseases by reducing lung function making people living in particularly polluted areas more susceptible to asthma, respiratory infections, lung cancer and other diseases [20] . air pollution has been explicitly considered to be a co-factor in the extremely high level of sars-cov-2 lethality in northern italy [21] .however, as figure 10 shows, air quality real-time world-maps provided, for example, by berkeley earth or by iqair suggest that the air in regions such as china, india and south-eastern asia is significantly more polluted than in the european and northern american countries. (web pages: http://berkeleyearth.org/air-quality-real-time-map/, and https://www.iqair.com/, accessed on 15 april 2020.) in general, the world pandemic patterns shown in figures 1 and 2 and the world pollution patterns shown in figure 10 are very poorly correlated. on the considered country scale, the correlation appears even negative as if air pollution could reduce the covid-19 diffusion and lethality, which would be counter-intuitive based on the known negative effects of continued air pollution exposure on human health. in fact, from table 5 , europe had 1292 cases and 118 deaths per million people while asia had 72 cases and 2.6 deaths per million people (note that asian russia does not count much because it is scarcely populated). moreover, by comparing the country air quality index by iqair (table 8) against the logarithm of the country cases/1mil and deaths/1mil, we obtain the following strong negative pearson correlation coefficients: for cases/1mil, r iqr = 0.48 (p 90 (r iqr  r  1) = 100%) and for deaths/1mil, r iqr = 0.46 (p 84 (r ma  r  1)  100%).in italy it is possible to highlight the emblematic case of the small republic of san marino located on the hills between the regions of emilia-romagna and marche. san marino has been the country in the world with the highest number of infections per million people (cases/1mil = 11,632) despite its cleaner air, while the nearby italian province of rimini was significantly less affected (cases/1mil = 5214). it is possible that this happened because, despite their higher air pollution levels, the main cities of this province (rimini, cattolica, riccione) are located nearby the coast and are a few celsius degrees warmer than san marino, whose temperature in march could have been close to the critical temperature of 8  c.thus, the above results suggest either that air pollution mitigates the convid-19 pandemic (which appears unlikely), or the found negative correlation is accidental because the phenomenon is driven by other major factors such as weather-climatic conditions.in fact, the main viral carriers are not aerosols, particulates (pm10 or pm2.5) or other typical pollutants but, rather, water droplets exhaled by infected people when they blow their nose, cough, sneeze, or just breathe [22] . the physical characteristics and dynamics of such water droplets in the air strongly depend on the weather conditions of the place such as temperature, relative humidity and wind speed. in conclusion, the data show a relatively low covid-19 diffusion and mortality rates in the warm but polluted asian countries in contrast to the high mortality levels of the colder but less polluted european countries and the united states of america (see figure 2 ). this suggests that weather, not air pollution is the main cause for the diffusion and lethality of the covid-19 pandemic, at least at the considered synoptic scale.as a result of the seasonal cycle, the geographical regions most exposed to the initial infection continuously change in time. to identify them i propose in figures 11-14 isotherm world maps for each month of the year from january to december. for a correct interpretation of the diagrams, note that the disease manifests itself about two-three weeks after the infection.the temperature data used are from the climatic research unit (cru) time-series (ts) version 4.03 of high-resolution 0.5   0.5  gridded data of month-by-month variation in land temperature, which are available from january 1901 to december 2018 [18] . as a result of the changing climate, the depicted diagrams are based on monthly averages from 2000 to 2018.to better highlight the geographical zone of interest, the chosen colors cover the following bands: light-green (0  c-4.0  c); light-gray (4.0  c-12  c), the likely most affected zone estimated above; and light-yellow (12  c-16  c). the colder and warmer zones are colored differently, as indicated in the legend. the figures also show a small "x" over china, which indicates the approximate position of wuhan. data and graphical tools to reproduce the graphs are available also on knmi climate explorer. (source: https://climexp.knmi.nl/start.cgi, accessed on 15 april 2020.)for the winter months of january, february and march, the isotherm maps depicted in figure 11 show a geographical correlation with the covid-19 pandemic patterns by country and territory shown in figures 1 and 2 . the light-gray area is the most affected, while the colored areas, both colder or warmer, are those that have currently experienced a less severe pandemic. january-wuhan gradually turns from the light-green zone to the light-gray zone as this region gets warmer.  february-when the pandemic affected the region most severely, wuhan is found in the middle of the light-gray zone. the light-gray zone covers the region spanning from iran to italy, spain, and partially covers southern-east france and north algeria. in these countries, the epidemic has been observed to spread fast. from august to december (figures 13 and 14) , the seasonal movement of the temperature patterns reverts: august is similar to june; september is similar to may; october is similar to april; november is similar to march; and december is similar to february. similar diagrams could be obtained for water vapor pressure or relative humidity. however, they would not add much information because these variables are partially related to the air temperature patterns. in general, figure 8 showed that very dry climates (rh < 60%) appear to reduce the spread of sars-cov-2.respiratory virus infection rate is usually seasonal [7] [8] [9] [10] . this applies also to the coronaviridae family of covid-19 [11] . in general, there are likely several biological, physical and sunlight mechanisms that can seasonally influence the survival and transmission of viruses in the air, as well as the susceptibility of the host immune system [16] . the weather conditions that facilitate this type of diseases include moderate cold and dry weather, high pressure, low-speed wind and modest rain, as it happened from january to march 2020 both in wuhan and in northern italy. similar weather conditions occurred in other countries where the pandemic has been significant, for example in western europe and the united states of america.the covid-19 infection primary transmission route from person to person is through contact with respiratory water droplets exhaled by infected persons. contacts with surfaces contaminated by secretions or oral nose pharyngeal emissions could be a secondary transmission route. in fact, a person can also catch the virus if he or she touches a surface or object that has the virus on it and then touches his or her mouth, nose, or eyes.exhaled water droplets floating in the air could be as small as 0.5 to 10 micron and carry around coronaviruses, which have a size of about 120 nm. such droplets are generated when, for example, people blow their nose, cough or sneeze, or just breathe. the warm and humid lungs add moisture to the breath. thus, when people exhale on a cold day, the water vapor contained in their breath partially condenses as the air cools down. therefore, when the air temperature is low, but not freezing, and the relative humidity is neither too low nor too high, as it happens in the winter in the most affected regions, water-based small droplets, which could carry viruses, more easily form and remain floating in the air for a longer time because they do not evaporate easily nor fall fast on the ground by further capturing additional water vapor. thus, viruses could survive floating in the air protected by a small respiratory droplet long enough to infect somebody else who could pass by and then breathe in those droplets.high temperature and dry air prevent the formation of such small condensation droplets or make them evaporate fast exposing the virus directly to the air which should induce a rapid destruction of its capsid. larger droplets emitted with the cough fall rapidly to the ground and evaporate fast if the air is warm or very dry inducing again a rapid death of the virus. freezing weather favors the formation of large droplets that fall fast on the ground. rain facilitates the removal of virus-carrying droplets and virions because it captures them in the air and makes them fall on the ground. high atmospheric relative humidity would also facilitate the fall of such droplets by preventing them to become sufficiently small to float in the air for a time long enough to reach and, therefore, contaminate far distances. high atmospheric pressure reduces the wind speed, and virus-carrying droplet density could increase in the urban area. northern hemisphere winters also have fewer hours of sunlight and uv exposure that have a sterilizing effect [23] . in addition, cold weather usually increases the susceptibility of people to virus attacks, whereas summer warmer temperatures, more abundant uvb sunlight, and vitamin-rich food strengthen the immune system.cold weather also forces people to gather more likely in closed warm environments. here it is easier to get infected because of poorer air exchange. in fact, in indoor environments-such as apartments, offices, shops, schools, restaurants, cruise ships, etc.-although the water of the infected droplets could evaporate faster exposing the virus to an inhospitable environment, the air concentration of floating virions, which could still remain active for a while, could increase so much to easily infect other people [22] . indoor environments are also not protected nor sterilized by uv solar radiation: a fact that prolongs the life of the virus in such environments.thus, there are numerous direct and indirect mechanisms supporting the hypothesis that seasonal weather conditions affect the diffusion of sars-cov-2, as it has been observed for many other respiratory viral infections.in any case, the virus by itself can survive also high temperatures, as it lives within human bodies and, therefore, people could get infected also in warm places, as it has been observed worldwide. this evidence, however, does not contradict the fact that the covid-19 pandemic has been worst and developed more rapidly in specific countries which, during winter 2020, shared a common weather condition. the few observed anomalous cases could have simple explanations.for example, as of the date (15 april 2020), the warm state of louisiana in the united states of america counted 237 deaths per million people and was the fourth most affected state of the usa. however, this apparent anomaly was likely due to its famous carnival festivals that attracted into the city historic center 1.4 million people from all around the world, making the city the main infection hub. similarly, the coronavirus outbreak in the city of daegu in south korea was induced by a very large service gathering by the shincheonji religious group in a closed space. (web page: https://edition.cnn.com/2020/02/26/asia/shincheonji-south-korea-hnk-intl/index.html, accessed on 15 april 2020.)we also checked whether air pollution could have been a relevant co-factor for the sars-cov-2 lethality in some countries. our analysis suggests a poor correlation because heavily polluted countries such as india and the south-eastern asian countries (including also southern china, hong kong, and taiwan) have been modestly affected by the pandemic. for example, as of the date (15 april 2020), despite its close connections with china, hong kong (7,392,000 people by 2017) had about one thousand cases with only four deaths. note that the covid-19 started earlier in hong kong than in italy because on 02/15/2020 in hong kong there were 56 cases while in italy there were 3 cases. (source: https://www.worldometers.info/coronavirus/, accessed on 15 april 2020.) the warm and dry qatar, bahrein and the united arab emirates (uae) with their crowded and very polluted capitals (doha, manama and dubai: source: https://www.thenational.ae/uae/world-environmentday-middle-eastern-cities-choked-by-air-pollution-1.870540, accessed on 15 april 2020) had a number of covid-19 cases-1288, 982 and 542 cases/1mil, respectively-probably due to their international connections, but only 2, 4 and 3 deaths per million people, respectively. this is a mortality rate per infected people nearly 50 times lower than that observed in italy and other western european countries. by contrast, the small republic of san marino located on hills in italy between the regions of emilia-romagna and marche was much more affected by the covid-19 pandemic than the nearby cities despite its cleaner air. this could have happened because san marino is a few degree colder than the nearby warm cities located in the valley and on the coast.indeed, as of the date (15 april 2020), on 151 countries of the world with a population larger than one million people, among the 80 countries that had at least 50 cases/1mil, those with a mortality rate larger than 10% were seven and from western europe: belgium, italy, and the united kingdom, 13%; france, 12%; netherlands, 11%; spain and sweden, 10%. on the contrary, the last seven countries were all from warm zones: the united arab emirates (uae), 0.6%; oman, bahrain, hong kong, 0.4%; singapore 0.3%; kuwait, 0.2%; and qatar, 0.15%. note that the latter seven countries are internationally well interconnected, with high densely populated cities and medical technology not superior to that of the european countries. thus, the different lethality rates, by a factor of 20 and above, observed between the two groups are likely due to their very different winter climatic conditions, with the european countries significantly colder than the latter.among the other 72 countries with less than 50 cases per million people, none is from europe. there are 43 warm african countries except for the colder marocco (cases/1mil = 55; deaths/1mil = 3, and deaths/cases = 5.5%) and tunisia (cases/1mil = 66; deaths/1mil = 3, and deaths/cases = 4.5%), with the addition of the mauritius islands (cases/1mil = 255, deaths/1mil = 7, and deaths/cases = 2.7%; note that these islands are a popular touristic place which could explain the relatively high infection rate). large but warm countries such as indonesia and india had just 19 and 9 cases per million people, respectively.thus, the relatively low covid-19 diffusion and mortality rates, and the low ratio between mortality and infection rates observed in warm countries (see figure 11 ) relative to the high mortality levels of colder countries such as those in europe and the united states of america indicate that weather, not air pollution is the main factor for the diffusion and lethality of the covid-19 pandemic. a correlation between the number of covid-19 cases and higher polluted areas, such as large cities, could be accidental, and simply due to the higher population density of these places where it happens that more air pollution is also produced. in general, air pollution is not expected to be a major carrier of the coronavirus since the virus is mostly diffused in the air by human breath. the question about whether people living habitually in air polluted areas could be more sensitive to the infection because of a weakened immune system is a different topic, but still, pollution appears to only play a secondary role relative to weather conditions. finally, we checked a possible influence on the covid-19 pandemic of the median population age of the place. the analysis was carried by comparing the regions of italy, the united states of america, and the countries of the world. we did find a correlation with the covid-19 but, by considering all local and global evidences, it appears weak relative to the one observed with the weather-climatic patterns. thus, we conclude that places with a higher median population age could be disadvantaged, but still, the severity of the pandemic is driven mostly by the weather-climatic conditions that regulate both the diffusion of the virus through the air and the susceptibility of the immune system of the people to viral attacks. an additional detailed analysis may need to compare the weather records using age-standardized covid-19 records divided by age categories, but this operation requires additional detailed data for each countries and regions. whether this additional analysis could improve the reliability of the results herein presented is left to further research.with regards to the mortality rates, a role is also played by the different quality of the health system of each country and region, but this analysis goes beyond the purpose of this work. for example, there have been reports of a large number of infections occurred within elderly care housing centers and hospitals, which had to and should be prevented. e.g., wang et al. [24] found that in a single-center case series of 138 hospitalized patients with confirmed ncip in wuhan, china, presumed hospital-related transmission of 2019-ncov was suspected in 41% of patients, 26% of patients received icu care and mortality was 4.3%.based on the above considerations, this work explored the possible link between covid-19 pandemic and weather conditions. we showed that the region of wuhan in the hubei province, in central china, and the italian provinces of milan, brescia and bergamo-which to date have been the most affected by the covid-19 pandemic-presented a striking similarity in weather conditions between january and march. in particular, the weather condition in wuhan in late january and february-when the covid-19 infection affected that region most severely-was nearly identical to the weather conditions between february and march experienced in the italian northern provinces. the same correlation was confirmed by a detailed analysis of the relation between weather conditions and the pandemic situation in the united states of america. these findings suggest that weather temperatures between 4  c and 12  c together with low humidity values between 60% and 80% and low-speed winds (about 10 km/h) could be those that mostly favor the spread of covid-19 and/or aggravate the susceptibility of the population to its secondary pneumonia.we used this result to create a specific isotherm world map for each month from january to december to highlight the timing and the position of the world regions that could be most affected by the pandemic in the upcoming months. to date-15 april 2020-the model appears to have well described the pandemic evolution as, for example, it has well predicted the pandemic strong development from february to the end of march in iran, italy, spain, france, germany, the united kingdom and the united states of america, in order of time. thus, it is possible that in the absence of adequate prevention policies, as the weather gets warm, the pandemic is likely to move following the seasonal temperature cycle and could migrate toward northern regions of the northern hemisphere while weakening in the southern ones such as china and italy. the southern hemisphere appears to be more protected because most of its land, except for a few regions, is always sufficiently warm throughout the year. in addition, also the relatively low median population age of several warm countries, such as the african ones, could contribute to mitigating the effect of the pandemic in those countries.furthermore, the weather model suggests that in the northern hemisphere there may be a possible second wave of infections in the autumn following the return of the cold season. in general, the pandemic could return to the middle latitude regions (roughly 30  -60  n and 30  -60  s) with a 6-month cycle and in the other regions with an annual cycle. although the transmission of covid-19 should go down as weather temperature goes up, the virus may not disappear completely. the infection rate could simply slow down, as suggested by the evidence that people get infected also in warm regions, although in these places the percentage of deaths per million people appears to be significantly lower than in the cold weather regions ( figure 2 ). thus, although the optimized isotherm maps proposed in the present work could be useful to optimize the timing of the required covid-19 epidemic control policies that each country needs to implement, people and governments should be warned against lowering their guard. in late 2019, a novel virus strain from the family coronaviridae, referred to as 2019-ncov (or sars-cov-2) began spreading throughout china. 1 central among 2019-ncov concerns are its high transmissivity, potentially severe flu-like symptoms, and high case fatality rates. 2 in the ensuing months, the virus has transmitted globally, prompting the world health organization to declare a pandemic on march 11, 2020 . at the time of this writing, cases of covid-19, the disease caused by 2019-ncov, have been detected in 134 countries (fig.  1a) .much remains unknown about covid-19. an important question concerns the conditions that affect transmission. previous studies show that transmission of h3n2, 2009 h1n1, and other strains of influenza are sensitive to environmental conditions, and in particular decline with higher temperatures and humidity. [3] [4] [5] [6] [7] if covid-19 exhibits similar climatic sensitivities, it is possible that warmer temperatures during the boreal summer months may lower transmission rates for northern hemisphere countries while cooler temperatures increase transmission rates for southern hemisphere countries over the same period. such climatic determinants of transmission present opportunities and challenges for policymakers and scientists, as seasonal changes both open windows of opportunity to constrain the spread of the virus, while also accelerating rates of transmission in locations where stringent public health measures have not yet been put in place.several research efforts are underway to understand the temperature-covid-19 transmission pattern. however, to date, results from existing studies compare temperature and covid-19 cases across countries or across regions within individual countries. these empirical frameworks conflate location-specific characteristics -such as testing capacity, population density, and health services -with temperature variation. [8] [9] [10] because temperature is correlated with many (often unobservable) confounding factors, such cross-sectional comparisons may not have a causal interpretation. [11] [12] [13] for example, countries that are cooler on average also tend to have higher income per capita 14 which may affect the number of new covid-19 cases by enabling more public health measures such as testing and hospitalizations. moreover, to our knowledge, prior empirical estimates of the covid-19-temperature relationship only examine cases within china, which may not be suitable for understanding the temperature-covid-19 relationship globally. additionally, several studies compare temperature and covid-19 transmission across countries, but make no attempt to estimate a statistical relationship between temperature and covid-19 cases 15, 16 or to generate empirically-based seasonal projections.in this paper we statistically estimate a plausibly causal, global relationship between 3 temperature and covid-19 transmission and use these empirical estimates to generate highresolution seasonal projections of new covid-19 cases under the changing global climate over the next 11 months. to achieve this, we collect daily temperature, precipitation and specific humidity for every 0.25  latitude by 0.25  longitude pixel of the planet generated by a state-of-the-art climate reanalysis model in near real-time. we aggregate pixel-level weather variables to the country level using population weights and link to daily country-level reports of new covid-19 cases across the world for the period between january 22, 2020 to march 15, 2020 (see data section of methods). this country-by-day global longitudinal dataset enables us to statistically estimate a global function between temperature and new cases of covid-19 per 1 million people. in particular, we leverage the large existing climate econometrics literature 13 to employ a statistical model containing a suite of semi-parametric controls designed to isolate the effect of temperature from potentially confounding factors that also influence new covid-19 cases. these controls account for: time-invariant differences in population characteristics across countries, such as differential population densities and healthcare systems; temporal shocks that influence the pattern of global covid-19 events, such as the who pandemic designation; and seasonal trends that vary latitudinally across the globe. together, these controls aim to isolate idiosyncratic daily variations in temperatures experienced by the same population; we show that results are consistent across a range of alternative statistical models, each of which varies the stringency of these controls (see statistical model section of methods).we find robust statistical evidence that higher temperatures lower the number new cases of covid-19 in a given population. in our main statistical specification, we find that a 1  c increase in local temperature reduces new covid-19 cases per 1 million people by 13%, with a 95% confidence interval of [-21%, -4%] ( fig. 1b and col. 1 of table s1 ). this result is robust to controlling for precipitation and specific humidity, neither of which exhibit statistically significant effects (although point estimates on humidity are negative, consistent with prior evidence for influenza 5 ) ( fig. 1b and col. 2 of table s1 ). our findings are also robust to inclusion of a range of semi-parametric controls, including controlling for seasonal patterns of temperature that are common across countries within particular latitude bands of varying width ( fig. 1b and cols. 4-7 of table s1 ). in our benchmark model (col . 5 of table  s1 ), we control for separate nonlinear trends for countries that fall within each 25  latitude band across the globe. this model accounts for spatially-varying trends in seasonal factors that may correlate both with covid-19 cases and with temperature. decreasing the width 4 all rights reserved. no reuse allowed without permission.(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted march 30, 2020. . of these latitudinal bands, and thus imposing more restrictive controls on spatial patterns of seasonality, yields a coefficient statistically indistinguishable from that in our benchmark model (col. 7 of table s1 ). these estimates are proportional, implying that the level change in the covid-19 case rate per unit change in temperature will be higher in populations where the epidemic has already taken a strong hold. in contrast, lower temperatures will lead to far fewer individuals infected in a population with a low overall case rate. however, we detect no evidence of nonlinearity in this proportional response ( fig. 1b and col. 3 of table s1 ); a 1  c increase in local temperature increases the case rate by 13% on average whether a country is presently relatively cold (e.g. south korea), or relatively warm (e.g. australia).these estimates relate new covid-19 cases to plausibly random daily variation in local temperatures. thus, they reflect multiple possible channels through which changes in temperature can influence new cases. first, temperature is likely to have a biological effect on the virus 2019-ncov itself, as has been documented in lab experiments for influenza. 3 second, temperature may change people's behavior, and thus change the number of new cases caused by a single infected individual. for example, warming temperatures encourage outdoor activities, 17 possibly changing the intensity of social interaction. finally, temperature has a direct effect on other causes of morbidity and mortality, with particularly large impacts on elderly populations. [18] [19] [20] [21] thus, temperature may increase susceptibility to covid-19 by lowering overall health.we combine the estimated temperature-covid-19 relationship shown in fig. 1b with expected seasonal temperatures over the next 11 months to project the effect that upcoming seasonal variation in temperature is likely to have on new cases of covid-19 at high resolution across the globe. fig. 2a shows, at a 0.25  latitude by 0.25  longitude resolution, the estimated percentage change in new covid-19 cases around the globe caused by temperature changes between march 2020 and july 2020 (see fig. s3 for 95% confidence interval). fig.  2b collapses these projections to the country-level, plotting projected percentage changes for each country (x-axis) by latitude of each country's area-weighted centroid (y-axis). the 20 countries with the highest current rate of covid-19 cases per 1 million people are indicated with red dots; notably, the vast majority of the countries with high rates of covid-19 cases lie above the equator, where temperatures are currently suppressed in the boreal winter. the projections shown in figs. 2a and 2b reveal a clear hemisphere-dependent pattern in near-future temperature-driven covid-19 transmission. by july 2020, we project, all things equal, that higher seasonal temperatures will drive covid-19 transmission rates down by 43% relative to march 2020 on average across northern hemisphere countries. during that same period, transmission rates for southern hemisphere countries will rise by 71% on aver-5 all rights reserved. no reuse allowed without permission.(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted march 30, 2020. . age. however, as figs. 2c and 2d show, this relief for northern countries during the boreal summer is temporary. expected cooling by january 2021 implies that average covid-19 transmission is 59% higher than in march 2020 in northern countries. over this same period, warming in southern countries warming lowers transmission by 2%. fig. 3 demonstrates the temporal trajectory of these seasonal shifts in the global pattern of covid-19. each line represents a time series of seasonal projections of new cases of covid-19 per 1 million individuals for each country and every month between april 2020 and january 2021; northern hemisphere countries are in orange and southern hemisphere countries are in blue, with solid lines indicating hemisphere average effects. while temperatures in coming months are likely to depress new covid-19 cases in northern countries, these gains are counterbalanced by large increases in risk for southern countries and a dramatic spatial reversal in the case burden by fall of 2020.using a nearly global sample of confirmed covid-19 cases throughout the course of the recent pandemic, we find that the number of new cases per 1 million individuals responds negatively to rising temperature. this result implies that upcoming seasonal temperature changes will differentially affect covid-19 transmission across the world. projecting our estimates onto the next 11 months of expected seasonal temperatures, we predict that countries that will experience colder conditions -primarily in the southern hemisphere -are likely to see an increase in covid-19 transmission during the boreal summer months followed by a drop in transmission during the boreal winter months. conversely, countries expecting to get warmer during boreal summer months, most of which lie above the equator, will first experience lower covid-19 transmission before a return to higher rates of transmission. some important exceptions to this pattern exist, such as in southern india, where an upcoming monsoonal period is likely to lower temperatures from their current levels and raise the rates of transmission, all else equal.while there is an asymmetric response between southern and northern hemisphere countries, there is a clear need for large-scale public health interventions across all countries. for southern countries, which have generally experienced fewer covid-19 cases to date (fig.  1a) , public health policy must be ramped up in response to rising covid-19 transmission as temperatures cool. northern countries face a crucial window of opportunity to eliminate covid-19 from their populations. in the coming warmer months, rising temperatures are likely to lower overall transmission, making large-scale public health interventions that limit contact amongst individuals, such as shelter-in-place policies and school closings, more effec-tive at achieving and maintaining low overall case rates. however, if such measures are not taken and moderate baseline levels of transmission persist through the summer, cooler fall and winter months could imply a substantial resurgence of new cases ( fig. 2 and 3) . getting the most from these policies during this summer period is critical if northern countries want to eliminate covid-19, rather than experience a second, possibly stronger, second wave of the virus when temperatures fall during the winter of 2021. history hints at the importance of taking advantage of this window of opportunity: the second wave of the 1918 spanish influenza pandemic had much higher mortality rates than the first. 22, 23 although we know of no completed laboratory studies of the temperature-covid-19 transmission relationship to date, we view our approach as complementary to such future results. while laboratory studies isolate the biology of virus transmission, our statistical approach using observed covid-19 cases captures those channels as well as any behavioral adjustments individuals make in response to short-term fluctuations in temperature, such as decisions to go outside, to exercise, to attend social gatherings, and many other possible activities and health investments. as public health officials grapple with the costs and benefits of a range of possible responses to the current pandemic, quantifying the influence of both channels is essential to building appropriate policies.our study has a number of important limitations. first, as is true in any empirical study of disease, we can only observe cases that are confirmed. it is very likely that confirmed cases of covid-19 fall far below actual rates of infection, 24 thus suggesting that our findings may represent an under-estimate of the magnitude of the link between infection and local climatic conditions. relatedly, countries around the world have invested very differently in testing capacity, making such under-reporting heterogeneous across space and time. however, our empirical model is designed to purge estimates of the influence of such differential testing by using a rich set of semi-parametric controls, including fixed effects that vary across both space and time. second, the estimates we show represent average treatment effects across countries and time periods in our sample. it is possible that the effect of temperature on case rates varies across different policy regimes, such as social distancing and the closure of public transportation systems. while such heterogeneity is an important area for future research, it is important to note that our model, by construction, captures many sources of such heterogeneity through its log-linear form. while we find that temperature has a consistent -13% per 1  c effect on the rate of new cases in a given population, this translates into very different levels of cases in different locations. if public health policies successfully lower baseline covid-19 case rates, changing temperatures will have a much smaller effect on total cases than when baseline rates are high. 7 all rights reserved. no reuse allowed without permission.(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. weather we use the era5 reanalysis product from european centre for medium-range weather forecasts (ecmwf), which provides daily gridded weather variables at the 0.25  latitude by 0.25  longitude resolution. 263 specifically, for january 22, 2020 to march 15, 2020, we collect daily mean 2-meter temperature (in degrees centigrade), total 2-meter precipitation (in mm), and mean 1000 hpa specific humidity (in kg/kg). 2-meter and 1000 hpa roughly correspond to conditions near the earth's surface.we link gridded climate data to country-level covid-19 cases by aggregating grid cell information over country boundaries. to preserve any nonlinearities in the temperature-covid-19 relationship, we take nonlinear transformations of climate variables (e.g. second order polynomials) at the grid cell level before averaging values across space. to capture climatic conditions reflective of population exposure, we average across grid cells weighting by the cross-sectional gridded distribution of population in 2011 from landscan. 27 for example, the vector of country-level daily population-weighted average temperature variables we use is computed as t it = [ zi  gi (t gt ) 1 , gi  gi (t gt ) 2 ], where g indicates grid cell, i indicates country, superscripts indicate polynomial powers, and  gi is the share of country i's population that falls within grid cell g.to estimate projected seasonal temperature conditions and their influence on covid-19 transmission, we obtain daily gridded 2-meter temperature from era5, as described above, over the last five years (2014-2018). using the average seasonal conditions over the past five years as a proxy for expected seasonal variation through 2020 and into early 2021 (see fig.  s2 ), we compute monthly averages across all five years of daily temperatures at both grid 1 available at https://github.com/cssegisanddata/covid-19 and accessed via https://github.com/ ramikrispin/coronavirus. 2 available at http://data.worldbank.org/data-catalog/world-development-indicators 3 available at https://cds.climate.copernicus.eu/cdsapp#!/dataset/ reanalysis-era5-single-levels?tab=overview 8 all rights reserved. no reuse allowed without permission.(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted march 30, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.03.26.20044420 doi: medrxiv preprint cell level (see fig. 2a and c) and at country level (see fig. 2b and d) , in the latter case using the same aggregation method described above.we aim to examine whether temperature affects new confirmed cases of covid-19. in contrast, the goal of most epidemiological models is to explicitly characterize all factors contributing to the transmission of a disease; this endeavor is exceptionally important to guide understanding of disease progression and to forecast total case loads. however, identifying the parameters within such complex models in a plausibly causal manner is difficult. this study takes an econometric approach to isolate random variation in one potentially important driver of transmission, temperature. our reduced-form empirical approach is agnostic regarding the mechanisms through which temperature influences case rates, but by providing causal estimates of the role that temperature plays in transmission, allows us to make counterfactual simulations of future conditions under alternative temperature conditions. moreover, these estimates provide empirical grounding for parameterization of other, more structured epidemiological modeling exercises.there are two challenges to causal estimation in this setting. first, surface temperatures generally fall as one moves away from the equator towards higher latitude locations. because similar latitude-dependent gradients exist for other potentially relevant environmental conditions like uv exposure and socio-economic indicators like gdp, a cross-sectional analysis of local mean temperature and covid-19 transmission may be biased by such confounding factors. second, for a given location, surface temperatures tend to trend over the course of a calendar year. covid-19 transmission rates trend as well which may also confound temperature effects with other gradually evolving determinants of transmission.to address these challenges, we conduct a longitudinal (or panel) regression model using daily confirmed covid-19 cases from 134 countries from january 22, 2020 to march 15, 2020. our outcome of interest is the total number of new confirmed covid-19 cases per capita between day t and t  1 in country i, indicated by y it . 4 fig. s1 plots the unconditional distribution of y it for our country-by-day sample, showing a strongly right-skewed distribution with many zero observations. to address this property of the data, we employ the following poisson regression model 5where for country i and day t, t it is population-weighted daily mean temperature (in degrees centigrade). to examine nonlinearity in the relationship between new cases and temperature, in some specifications we also include a quadratic in temperature. w it is a vector of other weather controls, including population-weighted daily total precipitation (in mm) and population-weighted daily specific humidity (in kg/kg). z it is a vector of semi-parametric controls designed to isolate random variation in weather conditions. 29 in our baseline specification, z it includes a full set of country-specific dummies, which remove any time-invariant differences in covid-19 transmission rates across countries. these spatial "fixed effects" address the concern that baseline population characteristics (e.g. economic activity, population density) may be correlated both with transmission and with average temperature. second, z it includes day-specific dummies to remove any common global dynamics in covid-19 transmission. these temporal fixed effects account for global trends or idiosyncratic shocks in covid-19 transmission as the disease spreads globally. finally, in some specifications, z it also includes separate quadratic time trends for all countries lying within regularly spaced latitudinal bands (ranging from 5  to 25  wide). these controls, which vary over space and time, remove any potential seasonality in covid-19 transmission rates that may differ by distance to equator and be correlated with gradually changing seasonal population dynamics, such as time spent outside or work and school schedules. finally, standard poisson models impose that the first and second moments of the outcome be equal. to address this overdispersion issue, we cluster standard errors at the country level. this adjustment relaxes the assumption of equal first and second moments by allowing arbitrary forms of within-county heteroskedasticity and serial correlation in the error term it . 30 to conduct our seasonal temperature projections, for each country i, we calculatewhere is our estimate from equation (1) (projection values are calculated using the results shown in col. 5 of table s1 ). in this calculationt m ar is our constructed estimate of seasonal 5 the main advantage of the poisson model is that it can accommodate skewed outcome distributions unlike an ordinary least squares model. and unlike log-linear models, it does not drop observations when the outcome variable is zero. the poisson model has the additional benefit of being a member of the linear exponential family such that even if the outcome variable is not generated by a poisson process, one can still obtain consistent point estimates through quasi-maximum-likelihood provided that the conditional mean function (i.e., exp(t it +  w it +  z it ) is correctly specified. 28 10 all rights reserved. no reuse allowed without permission.(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted march 30, 2020. . daily temperature during march, computed as the average daily population-weighted march temperature between 2014-2018.t  is the seasonal daily temperature during any other month  , also defined as the average daily population-weighted temperature for month  between 2014-2018. in fig. 2 , we show results for  = july (the hottest month on average across the northern hemisphere), and  = january (the coldest month on average across the northern hemisphere). the estimated impacts, y i,m ar+ represent the percent change in new covid-19 cases between march 2020 and future month  , holding all else equal. as described in the main text, these are proportional projections, underscoring the importance of assessing temperature's influence on covid-19 alongside the many other factors that determine the baseline case rate at a given location and time.11 all rights reserved. no reuse allowed without permission.(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted march 30, 2020. table s1 ), representing a 13% decline in the case rate per 1  c increase in temperature, with a 95% confidence interval of [-21%, -4%] shaded in red. coefficients and model details for all specifications are shown in table s1 : col. 1 (no climate controls), col. 2 (climate controls), col. 3 (quadratic), col. 4 (no climate controls, 25  c latitudinal band trends), col. 6 (quadratic, 25  c latitudinal band trends), and col. 7 (5  c latitudinal band trends). the grey histogram reflects the distribution of population-weighted average daily temperature in  c across all countries in the sample between january 22, 2020 and march 15, 2020. average temperatures for select countries are indicated by green vertical lines.12 all rights reserved. no reuse allowed without permission.(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted march 30, 2020. . 13 all rights reserved. no reuse allowed without permission.(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. 14 all rights reserved. no reuse allowed without permission.(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted march 30, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.03.26.20044420 doi: medrxiv preprint 1 all rights reserved. no reuse allowed without permission.(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. 2 all rights reserved. no reuse allowed without permission.(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. 3 all rights reserved. no reuse allowed without permission.(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. 4 all rights reserved. no reuse allowed without permission.(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted march 30, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.03. 26.20044420 doi: medrxiv preprint appendix tables   table s1 : empirical estimation of the temperature-covid-19 relationship (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6)temperature -0.141*** -0.121*** -0.111* -0.142*** -0.129*** -0.127** -0 (1) using country-by-day longitudinal data. outcome is new covid-19 cases per 1 million population. all models include country and day fixed effects. column 1 includes linear temperature (in degrees c). column 2 adds precipitation (in mm) and specific humidity (in kg/kg). column 3 adds quadratic temperature. columns 4-6 replicates columns 1-3 but adds separate quadratic time trends for groups of countries within the same 25  latitude bin. column 7 replicates column 5 but uses a narrower 5  latitude bin. standard errors clustered at the country-level in parentheses. p-values from two-sided t-tests with *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.all rights reserved. no reuse allowed without permission.(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted march 30, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.03. 26.20044420 doi: medrxiv preprint one health (oh) is a holistic approach which defines the health of humans, animals and the environment as a coherent system. oh as defined by the who includes the design and deployment of policies, legislation and research at multidisciplinary level to assure better public health [1] . hippocrates (460 bc-370 bc), the greek physician and "father of modern medicine", mentioned in his text entitled "on airs, waters and places" (400 bc) that the health of humans depends on a clean environment. he emphasized the importance of medical researchers incorporating geographical locations, climate conditions and the quality of drinking water as factors affecting health and susceptibility to diseases. the interdisciplinary approach of oh combines veterinary and human medicine, environmental science, wildlife biology and public health. oh becomes increasingly important as 61% of infectious agents are zoonotic [2] . several factors influence oh as increasing travel behavior, global trade and change in land use, population growth of humans and animals as well as an increasing use of animal products [3, 4] . the idea of oh can be traced back to ancient times, when traditional healers treated both animals and humans. moreover, plant and animal components (e.g., hooves and bones) were used to cure diseases in humans [5] . nowadays, comparative medicine, an interdisciplinary field of veterinary and human medicine, integrates animals as an important factor in unearthing the origin of diseases. therefore, studying the human/animal interface is crucial.horses are among the most important animals in human history; they have been used in wars, as a means of transport, and even facilitated work in mines. in the late 19th century, horses played a feral horses (equus caballus) can be found on every continent of the earth except antarctica [6] , 58 and have an impact on soil and vegetation [7, 8] , the biodiversity of plants [9] , and several animal 59 species, such as reptiles and small mammals [10, 11] , ants [7] , herbivores [12, 13] and grassland birds 60 [14] . nevertheless, among the genus equus itself, great diversity can be observed [15] . from an oh 61 perspective, horses' influence on the environment depends strongly on several factors such as plant-62 animal coevolutionary history, soil development, climate, frequency of grazing, and animal density 63 [10] . horses play an important role in increasing plant diversity through acting as natural fertilizer 64 and by the dispersal of plant species [9, 16] feral horses (equus caballus) can be found on every continent of the earth except antarctica [6] , and have an impact on soil and vegetation [7, 8] , the biodiversity of plants [9] , and several animal species, such as reptiles and small mammals [10, 11] , ants [7] , herbivores [12, 13] and grassland birds [14] . nevertheless, among the genus equus itself, great diversity can be observed [15] . from an oh perspective, horses' influence on the environment depends strongly on several factors such as plant-animal coevolutionary history, soil development, climate, frequency of grazing, and animal density [10] . horses play an important role in increasing plant diversity through acting as natural fertilizer and by the dispersal of plant species [9, 16] . accordingly, horses can positively influence the biodiversity of both plants and animals. in southwestern spain, free-ranging galician mountain ponies can help in preventing forest fires by eating small plants growing under the shades of long trees. moreover, the consumption of scrub has a positive influence on the maintenance of threatened heathlands and the variety of species living there. furthermore, those ponies are the most important source of food for wolves; consequently, this leads to the indirect protection of farmerslivestock, since wolves do not hunt their animals [17] . the grazing habits of the wild horse have a significant impact on other animal species; for instance, horses consuming spartina grass destroy the nesting habitats of laughing gulls (leucophaeus atricilla)-however, as a result, the shore bird diversity will increase [18] . the presence of wild horses leads to a significant reduction of the desert bighorn sheep and elks sharing the same water source, which is evidence of indirect competition [12, 13] . wild horses can have a negative impact on environmental health, for example horses' trampling leads to an increased soil strength and compaction, which reduces rainwater infiltration [8] . this in return can lead to nutrient and water shortages for plants and trees. horsesbark chewing behavior increases the mortality of trees, which results in changes in vegetation composition and structure [19, 20] . these examples clearly show the influence of the horse is not linear, but rather depends upon the surroundings. thus, a negative influence on one species can have a positive effect on another.in contrast to wild horses, domesticated horses live in close contact with humans. the research of warmuth et al. (2012) discovered that the domestication of horses started approximately 6000 years ago in the ukraine, southwest russia and west kazakhstan [21] . the domestication of animals can be a result of "humans' innate tendency to focus on life and lifelike processes", referred to as biophilia hypothesis by edward o. wilson [22] . to demonstrate the strong animal-human bond, a humans loss of a companion animal-whether natural or by euthanasia-is associated with deep grief and depression [23]; however, compared to other pet animals, horses are frequently sold when not "suitable" anymore [24] . furthermore, the use of horses strongly depends on the cultural background. in some countries, horses are needed for work, and thus have an impact on the economic status of the owner. in high-income countries, horses are primarily used for sport, breeding, animal assisted therapy, or as companions for leisure. besides that, horse meat is a common food source, especially in france, mexico and argentina [25] . despite animals (e.g., cattle in hinduism) playing an important role in religion [26] , which directly affects human mental health [27], horses are not part of any religion. nevertheless, horses have always been deployed as a sign of power. during the iron age, a horse would be sacrificed during the burial of its leader [28] . in roman times, white horses were considered to be holy [29] . horses were also associated with a goddess, epona, who represented horsemanship [30].recently, studies on horseback riding and the horse-rider interaction (hri) have been crucial in assuring horse welfare. hri factors include harmony, coordination dynamics, motor coordination, phase synchronization, and periodicity [31]. the rider is mainly responsible for keeping the horse healthy, trained and motivated, since many horses (e.g., in the uk: 40% of 11,363 dressage horses) do suffer from back pain due to equestrian sport [32,33]. on other hand, hri is also important for the riders, as they often suffer from back pain as well [34] . besides physiological aspects of hri, the psychological interactions between horses and rider are important, but not always easy to follow, since horses are unable to verbalize their pain and emotions [32], whilst still being social animals with highly sensitive reactions to the rider [35] . gathering information on how they influence one another is important to provide improved training methods for horses and riders to assure health benefits and the maintained physical fitness of both. consequently, the patients regulation of the muscle cycle, breathing rhythm, strength of the torso muscle, improvement of balance, coordination and symmetry is positively influenced [39, 44] . therefore, the proper position of the rider on the horse's back is necessary to reach optimal physical health benefits [45] and to disturb the horse's back and movement as little as possible. beside the physical impact, the proximity to horses and therapists positively affects the emotional, social and mental well-being of the patients [42], for instance, therapeutic horseback riding is used to support the emotional status of humans with autism spectrum disorder [46] . moreover, handling patients in nature can have a positive influence on the quality of life of patients compared to routine therapeutic settings in hospitals [45] . however, many obstacles might prevent hippotherapy, such as patients being afraid of horses or financial barriers [43].the working horse can have a drastic impact on the socioeconomic status of the owner and consequently on mental health particularly in case of disease or death [47] . in low income communities, the owners livelihood is limited by factors such as poverty, low status and limited access to resources. therefore, working horses enhance capital and secure sustainable livelihoods [48] . in central ethiopia, where horses are used as cart taxis, the loss of working horses restricted business and signified a major economic crisis for the local community [49] . chang et al. (2010) found out that low-income communities have achieved a positive income using working horses [50] . besides the economic factors, owning working horses can benefit status, leading to stronger social relations [51] . however, national policies and institutions that monitor and support working with horses are often weak or non-existent in developing countries [52] . consequently, illness and injuries of working horses are often the result of a lack of knowledge of wound and disease management. other reasons that influence the performance of working horses are overloading the horse, insufficient access to water and food as well as veterinary care and inadequate recovery phases [53] .in the 1890, horses played a crucial part in developing the first antidote to cure diphtheria (corynebacterium diphteriae) in humans [54] . horse serum is also used as an anti-venom, for example, when humans are bitten by snakes (e.g., brazilian bothrops or crotales) [55] . however, horse serum can cause an allergic reaction in humans named serum sickness, as reported after the introduction of the diphtheria-antitoxin in 1894 and with equine rabies immunoglobulin [56, 57] . wilde et al. (1989) point out the importance of standardizing the purification methods and potency criteria to achieve as low side effects as possible [58] .as an animal model, horses were used in the research of hepatitis c, since the virus displays great similarities to the equine hepacivirus [59, 60] . furthermore, horses were employed as a model for respiratory diseases (human allergic neutrophilic asthma) [61] , orthopedic problems (focal articular cartilage injuries) [62, 63] , and in defining the causes of depression as an ethological animal model [64] .several infectious diseases are known to affect both horses and humans, see table 1 . zoonotic diseases are those transmitted from horse to human through direct contact (e.g., hendra virus) or indirect infections due to vehicles such as food products (e.g., botulism) or vectors like ticks (e.g., lyme-borrelioses) and mosquitos (e.g., west nile fever) [65] . zoonotic diseases are mostly an interface between wildlife, animals and humans [66] . therefore, the transfer rate of zoonotic diseases highly depends on the immune status of the animals and humans, pathogen-control measurements and the contact to wildlife [67] . to monitor the transmission of zoonotic infections, several surveillance systems do exist [66] . despite many reports on zoonotic diseases, no study has been recorded on reverse zoonosis, where human is the main source of infection to horses. besides infectious diseases, non-communicable diseases (ncds) such as skeletal and joint diseases, cardiovascular problems, psychological problems or metabolic disorders are of great concern for horses and humans. ncds are the result of genetic, physiological, environmental and behavioral factors and persist over a long duration of time [103] . since horses are often kept in stables, physical inactivity may be a man-made reason for skeletal and joint diseases in horses. on other hand, the extensive training of a horse can lead to ncds, e.g., post-traumatic osteoarthritis [104] and back problems [32] . psychological disorders can evolve because of inappropriate housing management, weaning methods, and social or feeding restrictions [105] [106] [107] . horses can develop stereotypic behavior-such as weaving, wind sucking, crib biting or box walking-when living in a poor and unattractive environment [105, 108] . furthermore, unhealthy diets, especially highly concentrated and sugar-containing diets, can cause diseases such as equine metabolic syndrome [109] . if keeping horses in stables with bad air quality and low hygiene, horses and their keepers can develop respiratory problems, like the chronic obstructive pulmonary disease [110, 111] . other ncds such as colitis-x, caprophagy in foals or buttress foot can be influenced by humans as well [112] . since the welfare of farm animals is the human responsibility, several welfare concepts, like "the five freedoms", exist to prevent management-related diseases [113] . pain in the lower back, hip joint and hamstring muscles are the most common horse riders' orthopedic problems [114] .there are various risk factors, such as climate change and antimicrobial resistance, which have a negative impact on the health of both humans and horses. in order to counter this, the u.n. developed the "sustainable development goals" focusing on 17 targets, such as "zero hunger", "good health and well-being" and "climate action" [115] , with the ambition to reach a sustainable future for everyone. even those goals are anthropocentric, from a oh perspective horses are a crucial part in goal 3 "good health and well-being", since this objective aims to reduce the spread of infectious diseases. as already mentioned above, the health of working horses is significant for the income in certain communities. therefore, horses are also of relevance to goal 2 "zero hunger".the global earth warming has among others an impact on food security and health issues [116] . climate change affects the availability of freshwater resources, natural ecosystems and agriculture [117] . the food crisis in 2006-2008 caused by the rising demand for food and animal feed products combined with factors such as drought periods and crop diseases, demonstrated the insecurity of our ability to feed the world [118] . toreti et al. (2019) point out the need to improve adaption strategies in agriculture management to defend weather-related crop diseases and plant pests [119] . rising temperatures also affect the spread of infectious diseases, e.g., west nile virus recorded in new niches as consequence of changes in the mosquito's lifecycle and distribution range [116] . likewise, the migration behavior of wild birds (amplifying hosts of, e.g., west nile virus and borrelia burgdorferi) is changing, which leads to the emergence of new infection centers [120] [121] [122] [123] . de la roque et al. (2008) stressed that extreme weather conditions are of greater concern in the transmission of infectious diseases [117] . for instance, heavy precipitations are associated with a higher number of hanta virus infections, where the horse farm environment is an excellent site for rodent breeding. therefore, horse owners or care takers are more likely to be infected with hanta virus [124] . the latter is an example of the indirect involvement of horses in the spread of diseases. ncds are affected with by weather conditions as, e.g., cardiovascular problems and respiratory diseases are associated with rising heat waves and environmental pollution [125, 126] . hence, stable management and training should be adapted in order to prevent heat stress. nevertheless, to protect public and animal health from the adverse effects of climate change, it is necessary to introduce vaccination campaigns, public education, suitable technologies such as water filtration and insecticides, and surveillance systems such as weather warnings and disease monitoring with a focus on the migration behavior of animal species.in 1951, starr and reynolds published the first report on suspected antimicrobial resistance (amr) in livestock farming [127] . since then, amr are rapidly rising due to factors like global trade and the intense international transport of animals [128] . harbarth et al. (2015) refer to the fact that the extensive use of antibiotics always stressed bacteria to develop mutations, or recombinant pieces of dna to resist antibiotic [129] . the use of growth-promoting antibiotics in industrial livestock farming is a trigger for the amr [130] . from the oh-perspective, the same antibiotic is deployed in veterinary and human medicine [131] . consequently, the transfer of resistant strains to humans can occur through food products, direct contact or contaminated environments [128] . amr in horses was first documented in 1970 [132] , almost twenty years after the first discovery in animals. several studies report about methicillin-resistant staphylococcus aureus (mrsa) and extended spectrum beta-lactamase (esbl)-producing enterobacteriaceae [89, 133, 134] , which also risks human's health [92] . van duijkeren et al. (2011) identified the possible transmission of mrsa from a horse to a human [135] . recently, salmonella typhimurium cases have raised the awareness of multidrug resistance in horses [136, 137] . finally, the responsibility for the administration of antibiotics to animals lies in the hands of humans; therefore, strict guidelines must be implemented to achieve oh.both novel infectious diseases or new phenotypes of known pathogens have a huge impact on horse/human health and relationships. important emerging diseases are depicted with an "e" superscript in table 1 . the most prominent example of emerging disease is hendra virus, which was implicated in fatal cases in both humans and horses in australia. the virus belongs to the paramyxoviridae genus, with a natural reservoir in flying foxes. hendra virus is directly transmitted when people are in contact with the secretions of an infected horse [92] . middleton et al. (2014) discussed the hendra virus vaccine for horses as a oh approach, since it protects horses, human and the environmental health as the eradication of infected flying foxes is not an option because of the massive impact it would have on the ecosystem [71] . recently, the epidemic of coronavirus disease 2019 (covid-19) triggers the question of a possible animal reservoir. around 10% of horses in the usa were positive for -coronavirus [138] , which is the cause of the covid-19. no direct relation between the human and horse coronaviruses was recorded, but the coronavirus is a highly mutated microorganism, which could always jump the species barrier [139] .despite the need of oh several decades ago, only recently has more attention been given. discussions at the scientific level are urgently needed; however, the involvement of the public and community members at local, national and global levels is essential to assure the implementation of oh.cooperation between "open-minded" interdisciplinary professions bringing together oh aspects from various research areas will be a strong approach to increasing awareness beyond the anthropocentric perspective. in other words, keeping animals and environment health primarily for the service of human health is no longer valid. if a 'radical' oh approach assumes that the health of humans, animals and the environment are of equal value to one another and interactive, then the responsibility of humans becomes immediately apparent, especially in the case of man-made issues. the public must be educated before direct interaction with horses; therefore, legislation with social license to operate the horse is necessary. while the oh approach is often associated with zoonotic infections, other oh aspects are important, especially the ncds and maintaining a healthy environment as well as the production of effective vaccines. ultimately, the horse as a crucial part of oh represents a valuable opportunity to demonstrate the constructive interference of oh aspects between animals, the environment and humans. funding: this research received no external funding. we acknowledge the support of the open access publication funds of the university of goettingen. en este protocolo se revisarn las principales enfermedades importadas que afectan al sistema circulatorio y al aparato respiratorio. en el primer apartado, ms breve, se indicarn los principales problemas cardiolgicos importados y en segundo lugar los sndromes respiratorios ms frecuentes, siguiendo el esquema habitual de estas monografas y distinguiendo los problemas en relacin con la infeccin por el virus de la inmunodeficiencia humana (vih), los sndromes caractersticos de los viajeros y aquellos relacionados con la inmigracin.la presencia de cardiopata importada debe ser estudiada de forma protocolizada (fig. 1 ). en el paciente con infeccin por el vih, los tres problemas cardacos principales son la endocarditis (relacionada con el uso de drogas por va parenteral), las arritmias (en relacin con el consumo de cocana) y el desarrollo de cardiopata isqumica (relacionada con la inflamacin producida por el vih y/o la modificacin de los factores de riesgo cardiovascular por el empleo de diversos antirretrovirales). excepcionalmente la infeccin por toxoplasma gondii puede ocasionar una miocarditis clnica. todas estas circunstancias aparecen tanto en pacientes autctonos como en el viajero o inmigrante. nicamente debemos sealar dos aspectos peculiares de la raza negra: la mayor prevalencia de hipertensin arterial y la elevacin de la creatinfosfocinasa (cpk) sin consecuencias patolgicas, que puede llevar a errores diagnsticos1. en el viajero, los principales problemas cardiacos se relacionan con la hipoxia (durante el viaje en avin o en destinos situados a alturas superiores a los 2.500 m) y afectan a personas con cardiopata isqumica o congnita. otra posibilidad de afectacin cardaca es el tromboembolismo pulmonar del viajero que se contempla en apartados posteriores. excepcionalmente, algunas enfermedades infecciosas graves pero muy infrecuentes (leptospirosis, virosis tropicales, tripanosomosis africanas) pueden ocasionar miocarditis en el contexto de una enfermedad sistmica2. finalmente, debemos sealar una entidad inhabitual pero muy caracterstica: el sndrome de irukandji que aparece tras el contacto con un tipo especial de medusas3. en el inmigrante, las lesiones cardacas pueden corresponder a mltiples causas: congnitas (especialmente en africanos subsaharianos), post- infecciosas (cardiopata reumtica o miocardiopatas relacionadas con eosinofilias prolongadas), nutricionales (beri- beri) e infecciosas. en este ltimo apartado, los principales agentes causales son los parsitos, principalmente tripano- soma cruzi con afectacin miocrdica y del sistema de excito-conduccin cardaco. otras parasitosis con afectacin de las estructuras cardacas son las ocasionadas por entamoeba histolytica, con afectacin pericrdica, algunas cestodosis (echinococcus spp., cisticercosis) y las triquinelosis4.las estructuras pulmonares se afectan frecuentemente en el paciente con infeccin por el vih5, 6 (fig. 1). el diagnstico de estas complicaciones se basa en varias consideraciones. adems de las infecciones, deben incluirse en el diagnstico diferencial otros procesos patolgicos como las neoplasias, (tanto relacionadas con la inmunosupresin, sarcoma de kaposi y linfoma no hodgkiniano, como tumores primarios) y la hipertensin pulmonar primaria. la incidencia de determinadas infecciones depende de reas geogrficas y, sobre todo, del control de la inmunosupresin mediante tratamiento antirretroviral. en ocasiones, las manifestaciones pulmonares dependen de la reconstitucin inmune tras la instauracin de tratamiento antirretroviral. algunas infecciones pueden ser prevenidas mediante vacunacin (streptococcus pneumoniae) o quimioprofilaxis (tuberculosis, neumona por p. jiroveci). la primera consideracin en el diagnstico de los problemas pulmonares del inmigrante (o el viajero de larga estancia) es la necesidad de incluir en este las mismas posibilidades que en la poblacin autctona, teniendo en cuenta que en algunos colectivos, por razones laborales, culturales y/o genticas, procesos ya presentes en nuestro medio (asma, enfermedad pulmonar obstructiva crnica, neumoconiosis) pueden tener una prevalencia mayor. centrndonos en el aspecto de las enfermedades infecciosas, y con independencia de las manifestaciones clnicas o radiolgicas, siempre debe pensarse como primera posibilidad diagnstica en la tuberculosis y descartarla por los mtodos habituales. otras posibilidades diagnsticas se basan en la presencia o ausencia de eosinofilia y el patrn radiolgico pulmonar (fig. 1)7, 8. as, la eosinofilia sugerir una helmintosis (excepto en la hiperinfeccin por strongyloides spp., en la que desaparece este dato hematolgico o en las hidatidosis en las que el quiste est intacto). en este contexto, el patrn radiolgico puede sugerir el agente etiolgico; la presencia de infiltrados bilaterales sugiere una eosinofilia pulmonar tropical, la asociacin de hipertensin pulmonar con patrn miliar una esquistosomosis crnica y la afectacin pleural predominante una paragonimosis. en ausencia de eosinofilia, existen algunos patrones radiolgicos sugerentes de entidades concretas. as, la presencia de neumona bilateral con afectacin sistmica en un paciente que ha recibido corticosteroides o est infectado por htlv-i sugerir como primera posibilidad una hiperinfeccin por strongyloides spp. por otro lado, la existencia de un ndulo o masa pulmonar aislada deber evocar una hidatidosis o una dirofilariosis. finalmente, varias infecciones inhabituales en nuestro medio pueden simular una tuberculosis (fibrosis, cavitaciones, etc.), en concreto la melioidosis (producida por burkholderia pseudomallei y formas crnicas de micosis primarias (histoplasmosis, cocci- diomicosis, paracoccidiomicosis y blastomicosis). el estudio directo (esputo o lquido pleural) y la serologa permitirn el diagnstico final en estas circunstancias.los problemas respiratorios constituyen uno de los cinco sndromes principales en el viajero que regresa (junto a la fiebre sin foco aparente, la diarrea, las lesiones cutneas y las enfermedades de transmisin sexual). aunque la incidencia es variable, dependiendo de las series, aproximadamente el 10-20% de los problemas mdicos por los que consulta un viajero tienen relacin con las estructuras respiratorias.el anlisis de la bibliografa permite realizar algunas observaciones generales9, 10 (fig. 2 ). la mayor parte de los problemas respiratorios son de causa infecciosa, aunque no debe olvidarse nunca la posibilidad de un tromboembolismo pulmonar tras viajes prolongados11. dentro de las infecciones respiratorias, es til distinguir aquellas en las que se afecta el tracto respiratorio superior de las que afectan al pulmn y la pleura. las infecciones de las vas respiratorias altas habitual- mente son de causa viral, siendo los principales microorganismos responsables, en orden descendente, los virus de la gripe (clsicos o actuales), seguidos de los rinovirus, adeno- virus y virus respiratorio-sincitial. el empleo de tcnicas in- muno-cromatogrficas y la prueba de la reaccin en cadena de la polimerasa (pcr) en tiempo real ayudan en el diagnstico, principalmente cuando existen factores de riesgo y posibilidad de tratamiento etiolgico (especficamente virus de la gripe a o b). en presencia de afectacin parenquimatosa pulmonar con fiebre, es til considerar tres situaciones: la afectacin bilateral pulmonar con criterios de gravedad, la presencia de neumona sin criterios de gravedad (con o sin eosinofilia) y la afectacin subaguda caracterizada principalmente por tos. probablemente, la situacin ms preocupante para el clnico es la presencia de fiebre con afectacin bilateral pulmonar con criterios de gravedad. en esta situacin, adems de los agentes habituales causales de neumona grave, deben incluirse como posibilidades diagnsticas otros microorganismos como plasmodium falciparum (malaria grave), rickettsiosis, fiebre tifoidea, leptospira interrogans (enfermedad de weil), burkholderia pseudomallei (melioidosis) y virus, especialmente coronavirus (agentes causales del sndrome agudo respiratorio severo [sars]) y hantavirus del nuevo mundo (especialmente los virus andes y sin nombre). en esta situacin clnica es imprescindible un estudio microbio- lgico exhaustivo que incluya: frotis sanguneo, hemoculti- vos, cultivo de esputo, antgenos urinarios (legionella spp. y s. pneumoniae), estudio de orina (campo oscuro) y serologa. una vez obtenidas las muestras, y hasta obtener el diagnstico definitivo, adems de medidas de soporte, el tratamiento emprico debiera incluir a nuestro juicio un tratamiento antimicrobiano que incluya los principales agentes causales. en este sentido, la combinacin de tigeciclina y cefepima incluira a todas las bacterias clsicas e intracelulares responsables de este sndrome. evidentemente, la deteccin de plasmo- dium spp. condicionar un tratamiento especfico. la presencia de afectacin pulmonar sin criterios de gravedad puede asociarse o no a eosinofilia perifrica. en presencia de eosin- ofilia, las principales posibilidades diagnsticas son el sndrome de katayama (producido por la respuesta a la infeccin por schistosoma spp.), el sndrome de loffler (ocasionado por el paso transpulmonar de geohelmintos, principalmente as- caris spp. y uncinarias), la paragonimosis (relacionada con el consumo de crustceos) y la forma aguda de dos micosis primarias (coccidiomicosis y paracoccidiomicosis). el estudio microbiolgico del esputo y la serologa permitirn el diagnstico final. en ausencia de eosinofilia, los agentes causales de neumona son similares a los de cualquier neumona adquirida en la comunidad (streptococcus pneumoniae, haemo- philus influenzae, staphylococcus aureus). adems, debe considerarse siempre la posibilidad de otros dos microorganismos menos frecuentes en la poblacin autctona: legionella pneu- mophila (sobre todo en viajes en cruceros o estancia en complejos tursticos) y coxiella burnetti (con mayor frecuencia en viajeros procedentes de frica subsahariana). por ltimo, en el paciente con tos prolongada despus del viaje y sin fiebre, la presencia de eosinofilia sugiere las mismas posibilidades diagnsticas mencionadas previamente. en ausencia de eosi- nofilia, las tres posibilidades diagnsticas que deben incluirse son la tuberculosis, la histoplasmosis (sobre todo si existe el antecedente epidemiolgico de estancia en cuevas) y la tos- ferina (que debe sospecharse en presencia de linfocitosis marcada en el hemograma).the covid-19 pandemic has significantly challenged the global community. high-stakes policy decisions require projections of the course of the pandemic across different geographic regions. thus, it is critical to know how weather conditions impact the transmission of the disease [1] . given that many related viral infections such as seasonal flu [2, 3] , mers [4] [5] [6] , and sars [7] show notable seasonality, one may expect the transmission of sars-cov-2 virus to be similarly dependent on weather conditions. earlier works indicate that temperature, humidity, air pressure, ultraviolet light exposure, and precipitation potentially impact the spread of covid-19 through changing the survival times of the virus on surfaces and in droplets, moderating the distances the virus may travel through air, and impacting individual activity patterns and immune responses [8] [9] [10] [11] [12] .yet, there is limited agreement on the shape and magnitude of those relationships. while many studies find a correlation between variations in temperature [13, 14] , relative and absolute humidity [15] [16] [17] [18] [19] [20] [21] [22] [23] , ultraviolet light [24] , and wind speed, visibility, and precipitation [25] [26] [27] with measures of pandemic severity [28] , other works [24, 29-31] indicate weaker, inconsistent, or no relationships. a recent review finds inconclusive evidence for the relevance of weather in the transmission of covid-19 [1] .it is unclear what explains the inconclusive results. earlier samples based on datasets focused on china may be too narrow [16, 19, 24, 32] . others have studied only a subset of weather components that complicate comparisons [18, 19, 33] . most have not controlled for other important correlates such as government and public responses, population density, and cultural practices [15-17, 24-26, 32, 34] . another especially under-studied factor is the delays between infection and official recording of cases. these delays, estimated to be close to 10 days [35, 36] , confound attempts to associate daily weather conditions with recorded new cases. extending time windows over which transmission trends are calculated may partially address this challenge, but significantly reduces the number of data points, complicates interpretation and projections, and increases the risk that results are driven by spurious correlation between weather and location specific factors and trends. therefore, lack of corrections for these delays may partially explain the inconsistent and inconclusive findings to date. this paper assembles one of the most comprehensive datasets of the global spread of covid-19 pandemic until late april 2020, builds and validates a statistical method for the estimation of reproduction number controlling for detection delay, location-specific density, and time variant responses, estimates the association of weather conditions and the reproductive number of covid-19, and provides year-round, global projections.to track infections, we use the official case reports from various countries. our starting point is the data collected and compiled by the johns hopkins center for systems science [37] . we augment these data with those coming from the chinese center for disease control and prevention, provincial health commissions in china, and iran's state-level reports. the data from the beginning of the epidemic (december 12, 2019) to april 22, 2020 are used for our analysis. we assemble disaggregate data on the spread of covid-19 in australia (8 states), canada (10 states), china (34 province-level administrative units and also 301 individual cities), iran (31 states), and the united states (3144 counties and 5 territories) and use country level aggregates for the rest of the world. overall, our dataset includes cumulative infection data for 3739 distinct locations.we use the historical weather database (world weather online and openweather ltd., 2020) to compile weather data. for each location for which we have infection data, we use the weather data for the longitude and latitude of the centroid of that location. we collected minimum and maximum daily temperature, humidity, precipitation, snowfall, moon illumination, sun hour, ultraviolet index, cloud cover, wind speed and direction, and pressure data; however, only a subset of these variables proved relevant in our analysis. we used population density data from demographia (cox., w, demographia, the public purpose), the united states census (u.s. census bureau, data.census.gov/cedsci), the iran statistical centre, the united nation's projections, city population (citypopulation.de), and official published estimates for countries not covered by these sources. we also projected contagion risk forward in our simulations for the list of highly-populated cities.a critical parameter in understanding the spread of an epidemic is the basic reproduction number, r0, which reflects the number of secondary cases generated by an index patient in a fully susceptible population. an epidemic is expected when r0 is above 1 and will die out with r0 values below 1.measuring 0 directly requires data that are often not available at scale [38] . however, early in the epidemic before the stock of susceptible populations is depleted, 0 is close to the reproduction number, , which measures the number of secondary cases from each infected case. reproduction number can be approximated () based on the number of new infections (im) per currently infected individual, multiplied by the duration of illness () (equation 1). actual new infections on any day (in) are not directly observable and should be estimated. data on measured daily infections (im) lags actual new infections by both the incubation period and the delay between onset of symptoms and testing and recording of a case. we use published measures to quantify the distribution of incubation period (averaged between 5 to 6 days [25, 35, 36, 39] ) and onset-to-detection delay (ranging between 4 to 6 days [35, 36] ) to quantify the overall detection delay. given the variance in detection delay, a simple shift of measured infection by the mean delay (about 10 days) offers an unreliable estimate for true infections (see section s3 and s5.2.2.2 in supplementary document). we therefore use an optimization to find the daily estimated new infections () that are consistent with the observed measured infections (im) and the overall detection delay distribution (see section s3 for details). we use the ( ) as our dependent variable. this formula is robust to existence of asymptomatic cases and under-counting (which is likely due to imperfect test coverage) as long as the changes in test coverage are not correlated with weather conditions 10 days ago (see sections s3 and s5.2.2.3 in supplementary document). we use a delay of =20 days from exposure to resolution and results are robust to other durations of illness (see section s4.1 in supplementary document). for each location we only include days with  values above one.  values proceed actual detection, and thus the reliability of early values for each location is affected by irregularities in early testing. moreover, an unbiased estimate for ( ) requires  days of prior new infection estimates. thus, to ensure robustness we separately exclude the first 20 days after the  reaches one in each location. robustness to these exclusion criteria and exclusion of outliers based on ( ) values are discussed in section s4.2 and s4.3 in supplementary document.prior research [15, 23, 40] suggests various weather-related factors may have a role in the survival of the virus on surfaces, spread of droplets containing the virus, as well as behaviors and responses of human hosts relevant for understanding reproduction number. we therefore include the following daily variables as predictors: temperature (mean (  ) and diurnal temperature (difference between maximum and minimum daily temperature;  ), both in celsius), relative humidity (h) (percentage), pressure (p) (millibars), precipitation (c) (millimeters), snowfall (s) (centimeter), wind speed (w) (km/hour), and number of hours of sun received per day (u). we also explore a few interactions among these variables.different locations vary in their reproduction number due to various location-specific factors. while location fixed effects can control for many of those variations, our simulation studies show that fixed effects, combined with measurement error inherent in inferring  from reported infections, may significantly attenuate and bias weather effects. empirically we do not find such sensitivity (see supplement s4.2) and results are consistent with or without fixed effects. nevertheless, we report fixed effect results in the supplement and in our preferred specification control for log-transformed population density. moreover, public gathering bans, school closures, physical distancing, and other responses to the covid-19 outbreak endogenously changes in each location and could confound our findings. to account for these changes, we include a location-specific linear trend in predicting ( ).given the large variations in  values estimated in this method, we use a log transformation of ( ) and linear models to predict (ln()). thus, the exponential of each estimated effect is the multiplier changing  around its base-value indicated by the location-specific density, policies and responses. we designed and validated our statistical model for estimating ln() by testing its ability to identify true parameters in synthetic data. specifically, we built a stochastic simulation model of covid-19 epidemic, generated synthetic infection data using historical weather inputs and known impact functions, and fine-tuned the statistical model until it could reliability identify true effects in a large set of simulated epidemics. we found that: a) whereas given actual infections ( ), our method, with or without fixed effects, would identify the true functional form relating temperature to transmission rate, estimates become less reliable and significantly attenuated when true infections are inferred rather than exact; b) our method of estimating true infections (see sections s3 and s5.2.2.2 in supplementary document) offers significantly better results than simple shifting of official infection counts; and c) the most reliable results in synthetic epidemics are found when location-specific trends (but not fixed effects) are used in model specification.separately, authors ng and mg created a more realistic individual-based model of disease transmission and used that to generate a separate test dataset with synthetic epidemics. three scenarios used actual temperatures from a sample of 100 regions and three different functions for temperature effect (including the placebo scenario of no effect). then author rx, who was blinded to the true specification of temperature effect in the latter synthetic dataset, was able to approximate the true function with correct qualitative shape using the refined statistical method. details on this test are reported in the section s5.3 in supplementary document.in short, the preferred specification includes location-specific trends, excludes days with < 1, and the first 20 days after  exceeds one for the first time, and includes the following main and interaction effects: linear spline effect of average temperature with the knot at 25 degrees (see section s4.5 for alternative knot values), diurnal temperature, relative humidity, quadratic effect of pressure ( transformed: x -1000), precipitation (transformed: ln(x+1)), snowfall (transformed: ln(x+1)), wind speed (transformed: ln(x+1)), number of hours of sun received per day, and interaction between relative humidity and average temperature.while more complex specifications including nonlinear models could be used, we opted for a simpler and more theoretically-driven alternative for two reasons. first, location-specific trends account for much of the predictive power of the model, and thus, fine-tuning weather terms using cross-validation does not offer significant improvements in predictive power. second, effects from more complex models would be harder to interpret and communicate, and less reliable to extrapolate.after calculating a weather response function using existing data, we project the impact of weather conditions on the relative future risk of pandemic for all locations in our sample as well as the major urban areas of the world (those with more than 0.5 million population as of 2017; a total of 1072 cities) that constitute about 30% of the world population. a summary of results is provided in the main paper and the online appendix and an interactive online platform offer details. table 1 reports our main regression results. this statistical model closely tracks ln() values (r 2 =.534). much of the accuracy is due to location-specific trends. as expected, (log) population density is strongly associated with ln() (=.179, 95% ci, .159 to .199). most locations show rapid reductions in reproduction number captured in the location-specific trends. specifically, on average  goes down by 4.2% (sd=2.8%) per day since estimated number of new infections exceeds 1 for the first time in each location. mean temperature (  ), diurnal temperature ( ), air pressure (p), wind speed (w), snowfall (s) and precipitation (c) are significant predictors of transmission.effect of mean daily temperature (  ) is best characterized within two regimes, below and above 25 degrees celsius, and in interaction with humidity. temperatures higher than 25 are associated with lower transmission rates (by 3.1% (95% ci, 1.5% to 4.8%) per degree celsius; excluding interaction with h) while those below that threshold have a smaller impact (0.5% (95% ci, 0.29% to 0.77%) reduction in transmission rates per degree celsius). the negative effect of . cc-by-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. (which was not certified by peer review)the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 8, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.05.20092627 doi: medrxiv preprint temperatures above 25 degrees is strengthened at higher levels of relative humidity-10% increase in relative humidity is associated with an additional 1.2% (95% ci, 0.6% to 1.7%) decrease in transmission rates for each one degree increase in temperature above 25 degrees. figure 1 -a provides a graphical summary of the joint estimated relationship.air pressure (p) has a weak u-shaped effect on the reproduction number, with minimum around 1,004 millibars. one millibar of pressure increases the estimated reproduction number by approximately 0.8% (95% ci, 0.6% to 1%) at the median pressure (1016 millibars) in our sample. we also find weak but significant positive effects of diurnal temperature, precipitation, snowfall and wind speed on reproduction number. with one standard deviation increase in diurnal temperature ( ), log-transformed precipitation (p), log-transformed snowfall (s) and log-transformed wind speed (w), the estimated reproduction number increases by 1.9% (95% ci: 0.6% to 3.1%), 2.9% (95% ci: 1.6% to 4.2%), 1.4% (95% ci: 0.3% to 2.5%), and 3.8% (95% ci, 2.5% to 5.1%) respectively.overall, the association of various weather variables with covid-19 transmission is moderate and potentially relevant to assessing the risk of contagion in different locations across the globe. figure 1 -b provides a histogram of the variations in relative  associated with the combined set of weather variables in our estimation sample. the ratio between any two values can be interpreted as the ratio in  due to differences in weather, all else equal. the gap between the 5 th and 95 th percentile in this distribution indicates a change in relative  by 43%. given that the typical reproduction number estimated for covid-19 is in the range of 2 to 3 [41, 42], estimated weather effects alone, may not provide a path to containing the epidemic in most locations, but could notably impact the relative transmission rates. validation of our statistical method using synthetic data showed that our method is capable of identifying the correct sign and shape for the impact of weather variables and that those estimates are potentially conservative (i.e., downplaying the true impacts we also conducted six different tests to assess the robustness of our finding. first, our results do not change with the use of different illness durations to calculate  (table s1 in section s4.1). second, our main findings are robust to excluding extreme values of the dependent variables, last few days of data, or including location fixed effects in the analysis (table s2 in section s4.2). third, our results are largely insensitive to different exclusion criteria for initial periods (tables s3 and s4 in section s4.3) . fourth, a placebo test where weather variables in each location are permuted and shifted by a random number of days shows no effect of the weather variables in most of our model specifications, adding confidence that results cannot be attributed to mechanical features of the statistical model (table s5 in section s4.4). finally, we found a significant and qualitatively relevant negative effect of moon illumination on reproduction number (which also did not change other weather effects; see table s7 in section s4.6). absent theoretical explanations, we decided not to include that effect in the main specification, but we find it worth further exploration.the associations between weather variables and transmission rates highlight the potential to project the risk of covid-19 spread as a function of weather conditions. of course, our results . cc-by-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. (which was not certified by peer review)the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 8, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.05.20092627 doi: medrxiv preprint are associative and extrapolating out-of-sample includes unknown risks. with that caveat in mind, one could calculate the weather components' contribution for any vector of weather variables based on table 1 . exponentiating that value (as we do in figure 1 -b) leads to a multiplicative weather score which is associated with reproduction rate independent of the location-specific characteristics and responses. such scores are therefore comparable across locations and the ratio between two scores offers a measure of relative transmission risk for two vectors of weather variables. we define "relative covid-19 risk due to weather" (crw) as the relative predicted risk of each weather vector against the 90 th percentile of predicted risk in our estimation sample, 1.33 (figure 1-b) . the choice of this reference point is somewhat arbitrary and is made to make a value of 1 a rather high risk of transmission due to weather. a crw of 0.5 reflects a 50% reduction in the estimated reproduction number compared to the reference weather condition. formally: it is important to note that these scores do not reveal the actual values of reproduction number; that value is highly contingent on location-specific factors and policies, for which we have no data outside of the estimation sample. for example, the covid-19 reproduction number in new york city is likely larger than a rural district in upstate new york. our projections cannot inform the absolute risks for either location. crw scores could be compared to inform relative risks due to weather (i.e., assuming all else equal) across locations or within a location over time. . cc-by-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. . these projections use weather data from 2019-2020, averaged over a 15-day moving window, for 2020-2021 dates; as such, they include historical noise despite averaging. many of these large cities go through periods of higher risk as well as reduced risk during the year. as discussed before, we cannot associate these risks with absolute reproduction numbers, and our estimates are likely conservative. nevertheless, assuming typical reproduction rates in the 2-3 range, one needs crws below 0.3 to contain the epidemic based on weather factors, a condition rarely observed in our data. the website projects.iq.harvard.edu/covid19 provides these projections for the 1,072 largest global cities. . cc-by-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. (which was not certified by peer review)the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 8, 2020. combining one of the most comprehensive datasets of covid-19 transmission to date with weather data across the world, this paper provides evidence for the association of various meteorological variables with the spread of covid-19.while we find a stronger effect (a 3.1% (95% ci, 1.5% to 4.8%) reduction in  for every degree increase) for temperatures above 25 degrees celsius, the relatively mild slope of temperature effect below 25 degrees suggests many temperate zones with large population density may face larger risks, while some warmer areas of the world may experience slower transmission rates. for example, the estimated associations may partially explain the smaller sizes of outbreaks in southern asia and africa to date.we also show that the challenge of estimation due to detection delay is significant and at best conservative estimates may be expected from standard regression methods. this observation may partially explain inconclusive and inconsistent prior results. overcoming this challenge not only requires careful estimation of true infections based on reported cases, but also may benefit from methods that correct for the resulting bias, e.g., indirect inference [43] . other limitations of the study include: the variance in reliability and availability of transmission data across the globe; oversampling from u.s. locations; use of last year's weather data to project next year's outcomes; and use of correlational evidence to inform out-of-sample projections.. cc-by-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. (which was not certified by peer review)the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 8, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.05.20092627 doi: medrxiv preprint despite these limitations, consistent results using various conservative specifications and validation tests are promising indications of true impacts of weather conditions. these effects may offer partial relief to some regions of the world during the summer, but it is important for policymakers and citizens to remain vigilant in their responses to the pandemic, rather than assuming that summer climate naturally prevents transmission. in fact, much of the variation in reproduction number in our sample is explained by location-specific responses, not weather. ultimately, weather much more likely plays a secondary role in the control of the pandemic.the authors declare no competing interests.ficetola, g.f. and d. . cc-by-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 8, 2020. gourieroux, c., a. monfort, and e. renault, indirect inference. journal of applied econometrics, 1993. 8(s1): p. s85-s118.. cc-by-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 8, 2020. . cc-by-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 8, 2020. .all code and data for this research is available at https://github.com/marichig/weatherconditions-covid19.case and coordinate data were first taken from jhu's published case reports, available at https://github.com/cssegisanddata/covid-19, which covered all locations in the united states and 258 of the 590 locations from outside the u.s., including breakdowns for canada into 10 states/territories, and australia into 8 states. the remaining locations were made up of 301 chinese cities and 31 iranian states, and for these case and coordinate data were taken from the chinese center for disease control and prevention, provincial health commissions in china, and iran's state level reports.some locations included in the u.s. case reporting data were dropped from the main analysis. namely: errors in the reported coordinate data were also identified and resolved manually. (for instance, congo-brazzaville was reported to have the same coordinates as congo-kinshasa.) with this coordinate data, weather data is collected primarily through world weather online (wwo), which provides an api for data collection -the python "wwo-hist" package <https://pypi.org/project/wwo-hist/> was used to access this api. historical weather data were collected for each day between 1/23/2019 thru 4/22/2020, with data from 2019 being used for future projection.the following variables were collected: maximum daily temperature, celsius; minimum daily temperature, celsius; average daily temperature, celsius; precipitation, millimeters; humidity, percentage; pressure (atmospheric), millibars; windspeed, kilometers per hour; sun hours (i.e., hours of sunshine received); total snowfall, centimeters; cloud cover, percentage; ultraviolet (uv) index; moon illumination, percent (i.e., percentage of moon face lit by the sun); local sunrise and sunset time; local moonrise and moonset time; dew point, celsius; "feels like", celsius; wind chill, celsius; wind gust (i.e., peak instantaneous speed), kilometers per hour; visibility, kilometers; and wind direction degree, clockwise degrees from due north. a description of each variable is available at https://www.worldweatheronline.com/developer/api/docs/historical-weather-api.aspx. the ultraviolet (uv) index data was not consistently reported from wwo, and was instead gathered using openweathermap <https://openweathermap.org/> and the python "pyowm" package <https://pypi.org/project/pyowm/>.. cc-by-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 8, 2020. we interpolated over any missing entries in the temperature and uv data provided. the reported temperature data were missing for most (but not all) locations 9/15-17/2019, 10/22/2019, 11/27/2019, and 12/15/2019, which were then interpolated using five-day moving averages. uv data were missing for less than 0.1% of date-location pairs, with the main gaps occurring on 6/2/2019, 8/13/2019, 12/2/2019, 2/18/2020, and 2/21/2020, which were interpolated using three-day moving averages. this averaging should not impact the analysis given that most of the above dates fall outside the pandemic's date-range.population density data was sourced from demographia (cox., w, demographia world urban areas, 15 th edition, the public purpose), which provided data for urban areas with population greater than 500,000; the united states census (u.s. census bureau, data.census.gov/cedsci); the iran statistical centre; the united nation's projections; city population (citypopulation.de); and official published estimates for countries not covered by these sources. for data sourced from demographia, the population densities reported are urban densities, whereas other sources primarily reported overall density (spanning urban and non-urban areas). the urban and overall densities are largely on different orders, which weakens the inclusion of population density as an independent variable.reported data on daily detected infections for covid-19 do not reflect the true infection rate on a given day, rather, it lags the true infections due to both the incubation period (during which patients are asymptomatic and less likely to be tested), and the delay between onset of symptoms, testing, and incorporation of test results into official data. we need estimates for the true infection rates for each day to calculate the daily reproduction number (i.e., ( )), therefore identifying the lag structure between measured infection ( ) and true infection ( ), which we call "detection delay" is key to back tracking from measured infection to estimates of true infection rate.prior research has provided several estimates for subsets of overall detection delay. incubation period, the time between infection to onset of symptoms, has been estimated by several teams. li and colleagues [1] , using data from 10 early patients in china, find the mean incubation period to be 5.2 days, and the delay from onset to first medical visit to be 5.8 days for those infected before january 1 st and 4.6 days for the later cases. lauer and colleagues [2] use data from 181 cases to estimate incubation period with mean of 5.5 and median of 5.1, and offer fitted distributions using lognormal, gamma, weibull, and erlang specifications. in a supplementary graph, they also provide a figure that includes the lags from the onset of symptom to official case detection. guan et al. [3] use data from 291 patients and estimate median incubation period of four days with interquartile range of 2 to 7 days. linton and colleagues [4] use data from 158 cases to estimate the incubation period with a mean (standard deviation) of 5.6 (2.8) days. this delay goes down to 5 (3) when excluding wuhan patients. they also report onset to hospital admission delay of 3.9 (3) days for living patients (155 cases). they provide their full data in an online appendix, where we calculated the onset to case report lag with mean of 5.6 days, median of 5, and standard deviation of 3.8 days. a new york times article [5] reports that the center for disease control estimates the lag between onset of symptoms to case detection to be four days. finally, a bayesian estimation of the detection delay using abrupt changes in national and state policies by wibbens and colleagues find the mode of the delay to be 11 days and ranging between 5 and 20 days [6] .. cc-by-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 8, 2020. overall, these findings are consistent and point to an incubation period of about 5 days and an onset to detection lag of about the same length. we use lauer et al. estimates for a lognormal incubation period with parameters 1.62 and 0.418 (leading to mean (standard deviation) of 5.51 (2.4) days), and another lognormal distribution with parameters 1.47 and 0.52 (resulting in 5 (2.8) days) for onset to detection delay. combining these two distributions using 10 million monte-carlo simulations, we generate the following detection delay lag structure that is used in the analysis. the code calculating this distribution is found at <https://github.com/marichig/weather-conditions-covid19/>. here we develop an algorithm that provides a more accurate estimation of true exposure than a fixed shift in reported data or averaging data over a time period. we later compare our algorithm's performance with the simpler, more common, methods. we find that accurate estimation of effects of weather variables hinges directly on accurately estimating true infections, making the algorithm in this section key to overall estimation.using the delay structure specified in the previous section, one can estimate true infection rates using various methods. the most common solution is to just shift the official infections based on the average, median, or mode of the detection delay (9 to 11 days). this approximation may be fine in steady state, but becomes more inaccurate when estimating time series with exponential growth: the detected infections today are more likely to be from (the many more) recent infections than (the fewer) 10 days ago.the main objective of our algorithm is to find better estimates for the true infection. we first calculate the expected number of daily detected cases, given a series of actual infections unknown in the real world. call the actual infection on day , ( ), and the detected infections on day , ( ). the following equation would relate the two constructs:. cc-by-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 8, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.05.20092627 doi: medrxiv preprint where (. ) takes the expectation on detected infections, (. ) is the probability distribution for the detection delay estimated in section 2 of appendix, and the index ranges between 1 to = 17 days to account for different delay lengths. this equation does not account for test coverage, but as discussed below test coverage cancels out of the final reproduction number calculations, and as such only impacts variability of outcomes and otherwise has limited impact on results. note that this equation is under-specified: for one value of the known measure , one has to find up to values of the unknown (in our case, no detection is expected in the first 4 days, so l-4=13 values of contribute to a value of ( figure s4) ). however, given the overlap on 's determining subsequent values, the system of equations connecting and values for time series extending over days would include known values (for ) and + unknown values. different approaches could then be pursued to find approximate solutions for this system of equations.using exact maximum likelihood suffers from intractability of specifying the likelihood for highly correlated poisson distributions (poisson is a natural alternative in this case). we compared two alternatives, one using normally distributed approximations for as a function of , and another using a direct minimization of the gap between values and their expectation. the latter proves both simpler conceptually and more accurate in synthetic data, so we picked that for the main analysis:given the under-specification of original system of equations, this optimization will include many solutions. to identify a more realistic solution from that set, we add a regularization term that penalizes the gap between subsequent values for , specifically, we use the following optimization:the solution to this optimization can be found using standard quadratic programming methods, allowing for fast and scalable solutions. we conducted sensitivity analysis to find the regularization parameter, , offering the best overall ability of the algorithm to find true infections in synthetic data. the algorithm that works well is with  values in the 0.1 to 0.5 range and not very sensitive to exact value; we used a value of 0.2 in our analysis. an implementation of this code in matlab is available from <https://github.com/marichig/weather-conditions-covid19/>.for each location in our dataset, we used this algorithm to estimate the true infections (( ) = ( )), on a daily basis, starting from 17 days before the first detected infection, and stopping 5 days before the last day with data (because only infections from 5 days or further back could be found in current measures of infection; see the detection delay distribution (figure s4) ). these values were then used to create the dependent variable, ( ), as discussed in the body of the article:cc-by-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 8, 2020. we recognize that not all infections are reported, and a large fraction may remain unknown. assuming that only a fraction f (0f1) of actual infections are reported, im would be f of total infections that could have been detected on a given day, and estimated( ) will be the fraction f of true infections as a result. while these under-estimations are likely very significant if we cared about absolute values of ( ), note that ( ) values show up both in the numerator and denominator of ( ) equation. therefore, multiplying both by a fixed constant makes no difference in the estimated ( ).we also recognize that, early on during the infection, f may increase with expanding test capacity until reaching a steady state value. therefore, as later discussed, we drop the first few data points for each region and check the sensitivity of the result to dropping fewer or more days. finally, our synthetic analysis (section 5.2.2.3, experiment 10) shows results are robust to various trajectories for f over the course of epidemic.we conducted six different set of sensitivity tests to assess the robustness of our findings to various assumptions and boundary conditions 1 . here is a summary of the results, before we go into the details: (1) in our main specification we used a delay of =20 days from exposure to resolution to calculate reproduction number r0. here we tested the robustness of our results over a spectrum of reasonable durations of delay from 15 to 25 days, finding no major impact on the results. (2) we tested outcomes under three additional exclusion criteria and specifications: exclusion of the last few days of data (for which true infection estimates may be less reliable), exclusions of top 1% r0 of our sample (which may be generated due to reporting issues), and inclusion of location fixed effects. results are qualitatively robust under all these specifications.(3) in our main specification we dropped the first 20 days since new infection exceeds 1 for each location to account for early-on changes in test coverage. here we tested the robustness of our results to other exclusion periods, ranging from first 10 days to 30 days, finding no major impact on the outcomes (4) to exclude the possibility that our results are driven by mechanical features of our variable construction and model specification, we used a set of placebo weather variables, which are randomly shifted across locations and over a specific number of days, and re-estimated our main models using these placebo weather variables. we found few significant effects under these placebo tests. (5) in our main specification we chose a linear spline effect of mean temperature with a knot at 25 degrees. here we tested how our results are sensitive to different choices of knots, finding the 25 degree provides the best balance. (6) finally, we reported analysis that includes moon illumination as an additional independent variable to our main specification. we found consistent and significant negative effect of moon illumination on reproduction number. however, lacking any theoretical justification for this effect, we did not include this factor in our preferred model specification. 1 same as in our main specification all models tested here used log(r0) as the outcome and included location specific linear-trends. all models excluded days with new infections <1 and first 20 days since new infection exceeds 1 for the first time in each location unless specified otherwise.. cc-by-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 8, 2020. table s2 presents the results using our main specification with r0 calculated from 15, 20 and 25 days of delay respectively. the coefficients and significance level for each weather variable are largely unchanged and consistent across different durations, especially for air pressure, mean temperature, and interaction effect between humidity and mean temperature. table s3 presents the results when we exclude top 1% r0, last 4 days of our data (19% of the total sample in our main specification), or when we include location fixed effects. the effect of wind speed, precipitation, air pressure, mean temperature and interaction between humidity and mean temperature are all robust to both exclusion criteria, while the positive effects of snow fall and diurnal temperature are no longer significant when we exclude the last 4 days of data. with the inclusion of location fixed effects, all of the weather effects become weaker, confirming our . cc-by-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 8, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.05.20092627 doi: medrxiv preprint intuition (from the synthetic experiments) that weather effects might be underestimated with the inclusion of location fixed effects. the main reason is that within region variation of temperature is less than cross-regional variation, and with fixed effect regressions, one loses the opportunity to fully utilize temperature variation in the data. however, even with fixed effect, the effect of wind speed, precipitation, mean temperature and interaction between humidity and temperature are still consistent and significant. table s4 and table s5 present the results when we exclude first 10, 15, 20, 25, and 30 days since new infection exceeds 1 for the first time in each location. overall our main results are consistent and insensitive to different exclusion criteria, except when we exclude first 30 days of data for each location, where we would lose more than half of our sample compared with the main specification (i.e., exclude first 20 days), the effect of wind speed, precipitation, temperature become weaker and are no longer significant. it is possible that by constraining our . cc-by-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 8, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.05.20092627 doi: medrxiv preprint estimation on later periods, we are focusing on periods when lockdown and social distancing are fully in effect and thus there are few variations left in r0 that can be explained by weather. however, the coefficients for these aforementioned effects are still consistent and have the same sign. for example, from column 5 we estimated that with one degree increase in mean temperature after 25 degrees, the estimated r0 will still decrease by ~2%. . cc-by-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 8, 2020. we first randomly permuted weather variables across locations in our data, and then shifted all weather variables in each location to earlier periods by a specific number of days, where the number is randomly drawn from a uniform distribution u(0,300). we then performed the statistical analysis using these "placebo" weather variables. as shown in table s6 , most of the weather effects are completely gone, especially in our main specification where first 20 days are excluded. the only exception is when we observe a positive and significant effect of humidity and temperature after 25 degrees when first 30 days are excluded, which have opposite signs from the results in our main conclusion. the results are likely to be purely driven by chance, but nevertheless we conclude that caution should be exercised when interpreting results from specifications dropping a large number of initial periods. is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 8, 2020. in the main specification we used a linear spline effect of mean temperature with a knot at 25 degrees as it provides better fit than linear or quadratic effect of temperature. here we test the sensitivity of our results to the choice of knots over a wide range of mean temperature from -15 degrees to 30 degrees. as shown in table s7 , the temperature effect after the knot is statistically significant and much larger at 25 degrees (-.0318, p<.001) than knots at other degrees. hence, we chose the knot at 25 degrees as our main specification. . cc-by-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 8, 2020. finally, as an exploratory analysis we included moon illumination (percentage; range: 0-100) as an additional independent variable in our model. while all of our previous conclusions regarding other weather variables remain unchanged, we observed a significant and unneglectable negative effect of moon illumination: 1 percent increase in moon illumination is associated with 0.25% decrease in estimated reproduction number. this effect is robust to looking at different subsets of locations with different start dates of epidemic, so it cannot be explained based on mechanical artifacts of the timing of majority of locations. overall, we lack a causal theory for why such an effect may exist. moreover, as moon illumination is constant across locations in each day and exhibit cyclic behavior over each lunar month, it is possible that the moon illumination is confounded with other cyclic behavioral patterns occurring globally in our data, and thus we decided not to include it in the main analysis. nevertheless, we reported it here to show other weather effects are robust to this additional inclusion and point to possible future avenues of investigation.. cc-by-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 8, 2020. . cc-by-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 8, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.05.20092627 doi: medrxiv preprintwe conducted extensive synthetic analyses to inform the selection of a reliable statistical method and to build confidence in our final estimation method. these analyses could be divided into those focused on specifying the estimation method (5.2), and those designed to validate our method in a study where analyst was blinded to the true specification (5.3). after providing an overview in 5.1 we explain these two sets of analyses. detailed codes are available at <https://github.com/marichig/weather-conditions-covid19/>.before going into the details of the analysis, we review the main objectives and approach of this test and the main findings. then in sections 5.2 and 5.3 we provide more details about the analysis. approach: to build and validate our method and examine its sensitivity to different assumptions, we created synthetic data from simulated epidemics with several different assumed temperature effects on infection. the true exposure, the exact detection delays, and the temperature functions were hidden from our estimation method to assess the method's success objectively. our objectives were two fold and we created a task allocation among researchers to meet those objectives: first researcher hr used the iterations of this process to improve our statistical estimation method and ensure that it was able to find temperature functions under various assumptions (section 5.2.2); second, we used a more realistic individual-level model of infection (stochastic agent-based model) built by two other investigators (ng and mg) not involved in the first synthetic data analysis (used for method design) to assess if our statistician (rx) who was unaware of true functional forms or the new model structure could identify correct effects in this different simulation environment (section 5.3). this design addressed the risk that a method fine tuned on synthetic data may perform well under the assumed simulation setting but fail in other environments. results:the key finding from these experiments which are elaborated in details include: 1) the model specification we use can accurately identify correct weather impacts if true infection was observable; 2) in the absence of data on true exposure (which is the case in covid-19 due to testing delays), however, estimation of weather impact becomes complicated, and many intuitive specifications, often used in other studies, fail to recover true impacts. this may be a serious challenge afflicting many attempts to identify the link between weather and covid-19 transmission; 3) our algorithm for uncovering the true exposure, and the specification we selected offer a potentially conservative but qualitatively informative view of the true underlying impacts; 4) our preferred specification is robust to a few key uncertainties that may vary between simulated numbers and the actual epidemic; and 5) a statistician blinded to true data generating process was able to use this method to identify true weather effects from synthetic data generated from a different, more detailed, agent-based model of covid-19 epidemics. given these results from the analysis of the synthetic data, we can have more confidence in the analysis using the actual data.our approach consists of building a simulation model of epidemic to generate synthetic data (with known weather impact functions) followed by estimating various statistical specification to assess their ability in identifying the true functional forms.. cc-by-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 8, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.05.20092627 doi: medrxiv preprintwe used a simple sir-based simulation model to generate synthetic epidemics. this model was applied across various locations (with different vectors of weather variables ( ( )) impacting epidemic curve based on ( ( ))) to generate the raw data going into alternative statistical methods to identify the function below. equations of the simulation model are presented in table s8 . table s8 . equations of the sir-based stochastic simulation model of epidemics iterations completed on a daily basis until epidemic ends or until t=50 is reached.( )new infections assumed poisson based on susceptible stock ( ), infectious stock ( ), force of infection ( ), and weather effect (g(w(t))), primarily focusing on mean temperature. adding to future daily recovery rates ( ) to incorporate the recovery of all those infected today using a multinomial distribution. is the recovery delay distribution, assumed poisson with mean of 20 days. the "+=" operator adds to the existing vector on the left-hand side values on the right hand. adding to future measurement of detected cases ( ) to incorporate fraction f of those infected today in future detection data. a multinomial distribution is used following the detection delay lag structure ( ; see section 2 of appendix). in our baseline model we use = 0.1, and test more complex functional forms where f increases over time from zero to a maximum of 0.3 in response to measured infections in 3 different scenarios.updating next period stock of infectious based on recovery and new infections. initial infectious population of 3 is assumed so that few epidemics die out due to stochasticity. we use different g functions, including quadratic and linear forms. we focus on temperature as the primary variable that is read from data and input into the synthetic data.in our main synthetic analysis, we use:. cc-by-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 8, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.05.20092627 doi: medrxiv preprint ( ) = 40 + ( (1: 50) ) 50this creates a positive correlation of 0.47 between temperature that affects transmission rates and the reproduction number for a specific location.we use mean daily temperature data from january 1 st 2020 for t=1 for all locations, and continue accordingly.using these specifications, we then conducted multiple experiments to identify a viable specification. in each experiment we simulated the model for 20 iterations (with different random realizations) for a sample of 1,000 locations randomly drawn from our 3,739 locations with their actual temperature data feeding into .we summarize the results from each experiment using a graph of the shape of the estimated relationship between temperature and natural logarithm of reproduction number, i.e., ( ( )) and compare that with the true relationship (the thick dashed line in figures below). the success measure for our method is to have the estimated relationship from our method close to the thick dashed line. effects falling between true curve and a horizontal line would be conservative, and those falling outside this range may be misleading. our actual temperature data in the simulation period is bounded to smaller ranges (90% of data falls between -10 and 20 degree celsius) than reported in these figures. therefore, extrapolations outside this range are not necessarily indicated by the data, rather, emerge from the estimated functional forms. nevertheless, we graph a much wider temperature range (-30 to 50) to highlight the risks of such extrapolation. we also report the means of estimated parameters for ( ( )), 95% confidence interval, coefficient of determination (r 2 ), and sample size for each experiment.in the rest of this section, unless specified in the top row of a figure, we focus on quadratic equations for ( ( )). the main specification uses ( ( )) = 0.01  0.002 2 . we also conduct sensitivity analysis to other functional forms for ( ( )). we summarize the results of these synthetic analyses under 10 experiments, which could be categorized in three subsets. experiments 1 to 3 (sections e1-e3 below) introduce the main challenges in correctly associating weather with reproduction number, concluding that while not an impossible task, the best one can expect from similar efforts may be to find estimates that are conservative but not misleading. next, in experiments e4 to e6 we show support for the chosen statistical specification against other plausible alternatives. finally, experiments e7 to e10 show the robustness of the preferred specification to a variety of assumptions.e1) endowed with true, deterministic infections, the method finds the correct impact of weather. relaxing either assumption deteriorates results.in figure s5 , we compare three different scenarios. in the first two (a and b), the estimation method is provided with the actual true infections (rather than those estimated using the method . cc-by-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 8, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.05.20092627 doi: medrxiv preprint discussed above). moreover, the first experiment (a) also assumed deterministic infection rate (that is, ( ) = ( ( )) in table s ). plot c shows results using our baseline specification: estimating true infections using quadratic programming, including location-specific trend lines but not any fixed effects, dropping days with estimated exposure below 1, as well as the first 20 days after the estimated exposure first reaches 1, and excluding the outlier estimated reproduction numbers (those above 95%). the two assumptions on using deterministic infection and true infections in the first two experiments are not realistic. instead, they inform the challenges to unbiased estimation of reproduction number due to stochasticity of infections (comparing plots a and b) and estimation of true infections from reported data (comparing plots b and c).inspection of these results reveals two major challenges to estimating reproduction number: i) randomness in infection rate leads to weaker identified effects. ii) the imperfect identification of true infections from reported cases significantly reduces the magnitude of estimated effects. both of these effects generate a bias towards null estimated effects, even when true effects are very significant. as the experiments reported in the following sections show, our baseline model, despite its conservative estimates, might be among the best available options to find estimates for the impact of weather on transmission rates.note that the true linear and square terms in ( ( )) are reported in the title for each panel in the following figures. figure s5 : impact of stochasticity in infections and imperfect estimation of true infections on quality of estimated parameters.before focusing on the main specification, we report another set of experiments that show the performance of estimation method with true infections under three other functional forms ( figure  s6 ). these experiments differ from the first set (e1) as they introduce location fixed effectsincluding location fixed effects, as expected, would add value if true infections were available.. cc-by-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 8, 2020. . https://doi.org /10.1101 /10. /2020 this is in contrast with the situation when we use estimated infections, which will be reported under section 5.2.2.2 below.the main observations in this set of experiments are: i) true infection rates, even including randomness in infection, would offer close estimates for the underlying impacts of temperature on reproduction number; ii) the effects are potentially closer to true values because of the use of fixed effects (this can be seen in comparing panel c in these experiments with panel b in figure s5 ); and iii) the effects remain slightly conservative, i.e., weaker than true effects (shown in the title for each panel). e3-using proposed estimation method provides conservative, but largely consistent, estimates.in the next set of experiments, we test the main estimation method, which uses estimated exposures, to find the effect of temperature under the different functional forms simulated above. in these experiments, we continue to use only a location-specific trend, but no fixed effects, and the same inclusion criteria used in experiment 1. overall, estimated effects, as shown in figure s7 , are qualitatively consistent with the true functional forms, but also show important deviations: i) the results include some biases in estimated parameters, including quadratic terms that are not in the main function; ii) results are somewhat conservative (pointing towards null effects) in the regions of the temperature actually covered by w data. based on these observations, the use of the estimation method should include appropriate caution: the results may under-value the true magnitudes of temperature effects, but may also include unknown biases depending on the true shape of the function.. cc-by-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 8, 2020. . figure s7 : performance of preferred estimation method with realistically available data in identifying different functional relationships between weather and reproduction number.our preferred specification uses the estimated infections based on the quadratic programming method discussed in section s3. here we compare those results against a simpler specification that shifts back detected infections each day by 10 days to infer the true infection rate on each day. results are shown in figure s8 . we assess this alternative under the same functional forms discussed in experiment 3 (e3) and thus results are directly comparable with that experiment. in short, the simple shift method offers results that are largely worse than those in the preferred specification and may include problematic biases. these results motivated the search for alternative estimation methods to more precisely identify the true infections. . cc-by-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 8, 2020. figure s8 : impact of using a simple shift of measured infections on performance of estimation under various functional forms.in this experiment, we compare three settings in which we exclude both fixed effects and trends ( figure s9 , panel a), exclude trends but include fixed effects (panel b), and include both fixed effects and trends (panel c). these experiments are directly comparable with our preferred specification where trends are included but fixed effects are not (panel c in figure s5 ).the overall performance is far from perfect in all cases. moreover, whereas fixed effects typically help with reducing the bias in regression, the combination of both fixed effects and location specific trends offers the most biased results (panel c). in that setting, two different location-specific parameters absorb much of the variations in weather between and within locations, and combined with errors in the identification of true infections from reported data, the estimates for weather function become unreliable. removing either of the fixed effects improves the correspondence between true functional forms and actual estimates, leading to conservative but not misleading results. this leaves us with a choice between three specifications that exclude at least one of the fixed effects and/or location specific trends.we decided to go with inclusion of trends as our main specification. this choice was made with two considerations. first, having collected population density data, we could use those to provide some control for potential correlations between temperature and basic reproduction number due to variations in population density with climate. second, while our w vector in simulations starts from early january, in practice the more positive trend in temperature during the spread of epidemic later in winter and early spring (when most of actual epidemic data is generated) is likely to correlate more strongly with behavioral and other responses that temper down the spread in each location. thus, we would be worried that excluding location trends would lead regression results to pick up that spurious correlation and inflate the impact of temperature, creating illusory and misleading results. we therefore opted to focus on the more conservative estimates coming from our preferred specification. in practice, however, the inclusion or exclusion of fixed effects had limited impact on our empirical results (see table s2 and section s4.2). this observation may suggest that our synthetic data generation process might have offered a more challenging setup for estimation than the empirical data generating process.. cc-by-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 8, 2020. . figure s9 : comparing the use of no fixed or trend effects (a), only fixed effects without trends (b), and both location specific fixed and trend effects.one potential issue in the current specification is that locations with larger outbreaks are weighted the same way as locations with smaller outbreaks. the data from larger outbreaks may well be more reliable, and the estimates of r calculated from that data thus more reliable. we assess if a correction for this issue can improve estimation results. to do so we use simulations to estimate how the variance in the dependent variable scales with the number of estimated daily true infections, and use that estimated variance to conduct weighted least square regressions. results, reported in figure s10 -panel a (panel b showing baseline replicated from experiment 1), show more bias and more dispersion compared to the unweighted regressions. hence, we do not pursue this correction in our main specification. . cc-by-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 8, 2020. in the baseline simulations, the location-specific population size, which partially controls the speed of spread and how fast the slow down in reported cases will be realized, is normally distributed with mean of 500,000 and standard deviation of 200,000 (floored at 1,000 population). in figure s11 , we compare that baseline (panel b) against standard deviation of 0 and 400,000. the impacts are small and largely negligible, suggesting that the variance in speed by which the spread slows down does not impact the findings much. in the baseline simulations (e1), the location-specific basic reproduction number had a mean of 3 and variance of 0.9 (normally distributed and floored at 0; but also positively correlated with average temperature in the location). in figure s12 , we compare that baseline (reproduced in panel b) against standard deviations of 0 (panel a) and 1.5 (panel c) across locations. the impacts are small and largely negligible, suggesting that the variance in speed by which the spread slows down does not impact the findings much. results suggest only minor sensitivity to this factor, with slightly better estimates in the absence of variance in basic reproduction number across locations. given the wide range of basic reproduction numbers explored in this analysis compared to actual numbers, we do not think this issue would pose a robustness challenge to the main findings.. cc-by-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 8, 2020. . another variant on distribution of basic reproduction number considers the correlation between that parameter and the temperatures informing the weather function. in the baseline specification and all the experiments so far, we used a correlated version of that relationship (with a correlation of 0.47 between basic reproduction number and average temperature; see simulation model specification; section 5.2.1). here we compare that setup (reproduced in figure s13 , panel b) with the uncorrelated version where basic reproduction number is independently drawn for each location with mean of 3 and standard deviation of 0.9 (panel a). results are hardly sensitive to this potential correlation. . cc-by-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 8, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.05.20092627 doi: medrxiv preprint figure s13 : impact of including correlation between basic reproduction number and average location-specific temperature (baseline; reproduced in panel b) vs. having no correlation (panel a).the simulation model so far assumed a constant test fraction of f=0.1, that is, in expectation only 10% of infections were detected. in practice this ratio may change over time as test capacity ramps up in response to infection measures. here, we explore results under three such ramp up scenarios. in figure s14 -panels a-c, the following ramp up scenarios are assumed: a) = (0.2,0.001 ); b) = (0.2,0.05log 10 ( + 1)); and c) = (0.2,0.01 ). overall, results are rather insensitive to these very different test fraction numbers, suggesting robustness to this consideration. the key finding from these experiments include: 1) the model specification we use could identify correct weather impacts if true infection was observable; 2) in the absence of that data however estimation of weather impact becomes complicated, and many intuitive specifications fail to recover true impacts. this may be a general challenge afflicting any attempt to identify the link between weather and covid-19 transmission;3) the specification we selected may offer a conservative but qualitatively informative view of the true underlying impacts. for example, in most estimations the quadratic term is estimated at about 20% of its true value; and 4) this specification is largely robust to a few key uncertainties that may vary between simulated numbers and the actual epidemic.. cc-by-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. (which was not certified by peer review)the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 8, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.05.20092627 doi: medrxiv preprintin this last step of synthetic data analysis, our objective was to use a more detailed individuallevel model of infection (stochastic agent-based model) of interacting individuals, to create synthetic data of reported cases, distort the outcome with a delay function to represent test/report, and examine if our statistical methods are still capable of finding our weather functions. synthetic data creation was done by two of our co-authors (ng and mg) who hided their assumed temperature effect functions from our statistician (rx) whose task was to discover the assumed temperature effect function.to that end, we created an agent-based simulation model of infection, and simulated the model for 100 hypothetical towns of different populations, different r0's (potentially due to different contact rates and population density), different start days of infection, and different temperatures. we started from the generic individual model of infection (available on the netlogo's library) that is consistent with the basic sir model at individual level. we modified the model using parameter values that are more consistent with covid-19, and included several features needed to import and export data to the model. we modified the infection function to include the temperature effect on the probability of infection. we used three major scenarios for temperature effect (inverse u-shaped effect, linear increasing effect, and no-effect (placebo)). the scenarios included actual temperature values coming from a sample of 100 regions from the real-world data. the abm model's output was generated using a detection delay with poisson distribution with mean of 10 days. this data was used to estimate true infections with the method discussed in section 3. the model codes are available at https://github.com/marichig/weather-conditions-covid19/. figure s12 shows an example of creating synthetic data (scenario 1, explained in the following) with panel a showing the true cumulative infections and panel b showing the reported values.a b figure s12 . an example of the process of generating synthetic data with an assumed temperature hidden from our statistician. true cumulative cases (a) and cumulative number of confirmed cases (b).the tests (scenarios) included quadratic (s1), no-effect (s2), and positive linear effect (s3). for all scenarios we tested models both including fixed effects (si1) and those without (si2). in non- cumulative confirmed -scenario 1 . cc-by-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. (which was not certified by peer review)the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 8, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.05.20092627 doi: medrxiv preprint fixed-effect tests, in order to make a control variable consistent with our main regression, we added one extra variable, a hypothetical variable of "population density", to represent variations in locations correlated with basic reproduction number. in this setup "population density" was correlated with the basic reproduction number excluding temperature-related factors ( = .8).our statistician did not know the true temperature function, so they used both linear and quadratic terms to map the predicted temperature effect in all cases, even when the effect was linear.results are graphically summarized in figure s13 ; for each scenario the results are compared with the "true" function of temperature (darker lines). overall our statistician was able to correctly estimate the sign and magnitude of temperature effect in all cases, while the effect was generally underestimated further supporting the proposition that the method offers conservative estimates (e.g., in figure s13 , left panel, compare s11, and s12 curves with the true effect of "s1-true effect"). . cc-by-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. (which was not certified by peer review)the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 8, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.05.20092627 doi: medrxiv preprintin this section we report graphs of projected covid-19 risk due to weather (crw) at 4 different time periods in the coming year. these projections use a 15-day moving window to average different weather variables in the previous year (2019-2020), and use those averages as the predictor for the coming year (2020-2021). daily projections year-round, both for these global locations and the largest 1072 cities across the world are available at: https://projects.iq.harvard.edu/covid19. . cc-by-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. (which was not certified by peer review)the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 8, 2020. . cc-by-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. (which was not certified by peer review)the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 8, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.05.20092627 doi: medrxiv preprintin the design and development of surfaces and interfaces of devices aimed at the investigation of biological systems and processes, many issues are of great concern. bio-and mechanical compatibility, biospecific recognition, signal transduction efficiency, chemical stability and topography have to be considered to achieve optimal integration with a biological environment. among possible materials to interface with the biological world, organic materials (mainly conjugated oligomers/polymers, hydrogels) emerge as candidates owing to their unique properties. their interfaces can be chemically tailored by simple synthetic approaches in order to meet the requirements of the biological environment; mechanical properties can be engineered so that hard vs. soft and gel materials can be obtained; incorporation of biomolecules easily builds up biological functionality into the organic (polymer) matrix and can tune properties such as biocompatibility and biorecognition. bonding of bioreceptors can endow the material surfaces with highly selective capabilities; electrosynthesis may be exploited in the case of conducting polymers (cps) in order to obtain films of controlled thickness coating electrodes of any shape and size. as to the class of cps, comprehensive critical reviews have been recently published which highlighted interesting applications in nanomedicine [1] , in specific biological experiments [2, 3] and in recording and eliciting signals in complex environments such as human neural systems [4] . in this last field very exciting investigations are demonstrating how polymer-coated microelectrodes can detect transmitter release from a single neural cell [5] . particularly interesting is the recent approach to combine the benefits of both cps and hydrogels in copolymers [6] to better meet the critical design requirements of neural interfaces.the goal of new biosensor generation is the development of an inexpensive, portable and fully integrated single platform with ultrasensitive detection level, high selectivity and miniaturized sizes. array configurations are often required for disease diagnosis and in general for the study of complex biological systems. in this respect, transducers that can be fabricated through standard integrated circuit production procedures as well as with complementary metal oxide semiconductor (cmos) technology offer particular advantages [7] .this paper aims to review some recent results concerning the development of biosensing devices based on microcantilevers (mcls) and organic transistors. these two apparently different classes of devices, besides having already shown quite a good level of performance as sensors [8] [9] [10] , also have two quite relevant common features: label-free detection capabilities and the possibility to be integrated into a circuit. as to the mcls, they can be readily fabricated from silicon wafers and other materials and integrated in sensing platforms known as micro-and nano-electromechanical systems (mems and nems). in particular, when referred to in biology or biomedical science, these devices are termed biomems [11] .on the other hand, organic-based transistors can be fabricated as n-and p-type transistors which can be processed into complementary integrated circuits by using a recent but already quite mature organic electronic technology [12] . this technology also offers the advantage of being implementable on flexible substrates, including plastics, paper and fabrics.mcls represent a recent evolution of nanomechanical biosensors, offering several advantages over the conventional analytical techniques in terms of a tiny sensor area, a label-less detection method and a low analyte requirement. mcl technology arises from the atomic force microscopy (afm) technique. afm, introduced in the mid 1980s, is one of the most important analytical techniques in nanoscience. today, afm has gained revived interest as a transducer for its numerous imaging modes, such as topographical, electric potential, magnetic and force imaging [13, 14] . as a natural succession to its application as a force transducer in afm, mcls were selected as a new platform for transduction in sensing technology more than a decade ago [15] .organic-based transistors (ofets and oects) have demonstrated great versatility in a wide range of applications including consumer electronics, photovoltaics and biotechnology [16] . moreover, they are well suited for the development of devices to be interfaced with biological systems for many properties, among which their "soft" nature is of primary importance. in fact, they offer a good mechanical compatibility with both cells and flexible substrates making them also interesting for skin or body implantable sensors. as an example, an organic electronic ion pump (oeip) was recently demonstrated to release neurotransmitters and stimulate cochlear cells in the inner ear of a guinea pig in vivo [17] . to achieve this aim the organic materials' biocompatibility and the preservation of the biological system's original function are of the utmost importance [18] . since biological systems are based on cell-cell interactions and the transduction of biosignals between cells, the possibility to interface cells to organic materials to be integrated in electronic devices will be here reviewed.moreover, recent efforts made in exploring and testing unusual materials suitable for organic-based electronics to be integrated within advanced implantable biomedical devices will be reported. in particular, the fabrication of transistors made from biodegradable, bioresorbable, natural and natureinspired materials will be described [19] [20] [21] [22] .ofets and oects differ both in the structure and in the operating mechanism. the structures are reported in figs. 1 and 2; more details can be found elsewhere [23, 24] . in ofets the transduction mechanism is based on electrostatic gating consisting on a capacitive coupling between the organic semiconductor and the gate electrode [23] . on the other hand, the oect operation relies on electrochemical doping/de-doping of an organic semiconductor film in contact with the electrolyte [24] . although these devices have been extensively studied as chemical [8, 25] and biological sensors [9, 26, 27] , the possibility of interfacing them with living cells requires that the organic electronic material establishes a stable interface with water and conducts not only electronic but also ionic carriers. life processes in fact take place in fig. 1 schematic of an ofet along with the relevant operating mechanism aqueous media in which ions are carriers of information. therefore, a material able to exchange ionic for electronic carriers, and vice versa, represents the ideal link between electronics and the world of biology.ofets are three-terminal electronic devices composed of an organic semiconducting active layer, an insulating layer which is the dielectric, and three conductive terminals namely the source (s), drain (d) and gate (g). the source and drain electrodes can be fabricated on the top of the insulating layer or on the top of organic semiconductor. in the first case the ofet has a bottom contact device configuration, whereas in the second case a top contact device configuration (fig. 1) . during operation the capacitive coupling between the semiconductor layer and the gate electrode allows the current to flow between the source and drain terminals. this current can be controlled by modulating the electrical potential of the gate electrode [23] .several examples of chemical and biological sensing [27, 28] by means of an ofet platform have been reported mainly addressing the possibility to perform a selective detection [29] [30] [31] . in this context a recent review [32] reports the many efforts spent on integrating bioactive transducing elements within the fet channel.on the other hand, only few works demonstrated the possibility of ofets operating in [33, 34] and detecting analytes in aqueous media [35, 36] because of organic material degradation and delamination when exposed to an aqueous environment [37, 38] . however, real-time detection of biological analytes requires stability for sensor operation in aqueous media. analogously, to promote cell growth, proliferation and adhesion to the substrate, the stability of the organic semiconductors in the aqueous media is a critical issue. besides this, the biocompatibility and biofunctionalization of organic semiconductors may be crucial points when organic materials interface with biological cells. several parameters influence the biocompatibility of organic materials. among these, one critical issue is that the solvents used to process organic materials (chloroform, xylene, toluene, chlorobenzene, or tetrahydrofuran) are usually toxic to living cells and the presence of their residues during the cell growth incubation step can affect their growth. other important factors involved in cell adhesion, growth and proliferation are surface topography of the substrate [39] [40] [41] , surface pattern and periodicity [42, 43] , roughness [44] [45] [46] , the oxidative state [47] etc.in this respect, recently biscarini and co-workers demonstrated that by controlling the layer morphology, the molecular orientation and the packing of the pentacene film it was possible to allow for the growth of neuronal networks on it [48] . the pentacene organic semiconductor was morphologically stable upon prolonged contact with physiological buffer and cell culture media thus allowing the adhesion of neural stem cells which remain viable on it for at least 15 days [48] . moreover the processing of pentacene by high-vacuum sublimation was highly compatible with sterility standards. the possibility to integrate living neural cells into pentacene organic semiconductor thin films is an important step towards the development of bio-organic electronic transducers of cellular signals from neural networks.analogously scarpa et al. demonstrated that by performing protein-based coatings and oxygen-plasma treatments on the surface of the spin-coated poly(3-hexylthiophene) (p3ht) organic semiconductor, the growth of mouse fibroblasts was enabled [49] . moreover, the p3ht-based ofets have been demonstrated to operate at low voltages [50] in water and complex media [51] , hence opening new possibilities in the realization of a testing platform useful for cell analysis.oects, described for the first time by wrighton in the 1980s [52] , consist of a conducting/semiconducting organic film in contact with an electrolyte (fig. 2) . the gate electrode is immersed in the electrolyte and controls the doping level of the conducting polymer. as a result of oxidative stability and increased conductivity, the poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene) (pedot) doped with polyanions like poly(styrene sulfonate) (pss) or p-toluenesulfonate (tos) has become very popular in various bioapplications. the large anions (pss or tos) in pedot-based oects compensate the hole in the p-type organic semiconductor. under the application of a positive gate bias, cations from the electrolyte enter the polymer film and compensate the large anions, thus decreasing the hole density in pedot. therefore, oects provide a means to convert an ionic current into an electronic one efficiently [53, 54] and are thus very promising for interfacing electronics to biological systems. in addition, doped pedot showed good stability in aqueous solutions over extended periods of time [55] and little or no toxicity to a broad array of cell types, including endothelial cells, epithelial cells, fibroblasts, t cells and neuronal cells [2, 18] . the pedot high biocompatibility also allowed the study of cell-cell interactions [56, 57] such as mechanisms involved in cell signalling [5, 58] .recently, berggren's group demonstrated that by integrating the pedot:tos in an oect it is possible to control the adhesion and the proliferation of cells by using the electrochemical gradient established along the transistor channel [59] . more interestingly yang's group reported a disposable cell-based biosensor oect for monitoring the cell activities in vitro [60] . as shown in fig. 3a , the oect device consists of a glass substrate covered with a pedot: pss active layer on whose surface cancer cell line kyse30 was grown directly in the culture medium. the oect was tested in the presence of retinoic acid, an anticancer drug, which causes the rupture of the cancer cells inducing a change of the cells' surface charge [61] . figure 3b reports the transfer characteristics of the oect device integrated with cancer cell lines measured before (curve a) and after the exposure to retinoic acid for 1 h (curve b) and 7 h (curve c). as can be observed, there is a pronounced horizontal shift of the transfer curves when retinoic acid is added. this effect was not observed when retinoic acid was added to the oect device without cells (fig. 3c) , thus demonstrating that the shift of the transfer curve is ascribable to the morphological and surface charge change of the adherent cells on the pedot:pss layer rather than a change in the oect capacitance.new materials for bio-organic electronics recent advancements and "cross-fertilization" between the biomaterials field and organic electronics were very promising for the development of electronic devices for potential use in biomedical and clinical applications. in this context stability of the materials may be an important issue to be addressed, depending on the device utilization. as mentioned above, many organic materials used as the active layer in ofets are susceptible to oxidation and loss of function if exposed to harsh conditions such as aqueous and high-salinity environments [33] . to overcome this drawback, new materials were found that are able to operate stably in hydrated or oxidative environments [36] , thus allowing to interface electronics to the world of biology for biosensing applications [32] as well as for rapid screening of biological samples and point-of-care diagnostics [26] . on the other hand, in the case of advanced implantable biomedical devices and drug-delivery systems, where resorbability in the body after a desired time is required, particular attention is devoted to the development of biodegradable materials. a first step towards a biodegradable and biocompatible electronic device was reported recently by bettinger and bao [22] for potential use in temporary, electrically active medical devices. they developed a fet having poly(l-lactide-co-glycolide) (plga) as a degradable substrate constituting 99.89% of the total mass of the device, the water-soluble polyvinyl alcohol (pva) as the gate dielectric and 5,5-bis-(7-dodecyl-9h-fluoren-2-yl)-2,2bithiophene (ddfttf) as the organic semiconductor. error bars show the standard error for several different samples [60] ddfttf is a small-molecule p-channel semiconductor which decomposes in a similar manner to melanin [62] , whereas plga and pva are commonly used for drugdelivery systems [63, 64] and biomedical applications [65] , respectively. in addition, the conducting metals for electric contacts (silver for gate electrode and gold for source and drain ones) were chosen as they exhibit biocompatible properties suitable for use in medical devices [66, 67] . these devices showed a stable operation after exposure to water and the unique property of being resorbable as demonstrated through in vitro degradation studies.recently bauer's group proposed new biodegradable, biocompatible, bioresorbable and even metabolizable materials for useful application in biomedical implants [19] [20] [21] . they described a bottom-gate, top-contact ofet realized using "exotic" materials based on natural materials or those inspired by nature (fig. 4a) . they used unusual metabolizable substrates like ecoflex (from potato and corn starch), hard gelatine capsules (from pork skin and bones) and caramelized glucose (fig. 4c ) whose surface is often coated with a smoothing layer, rosolic acid (fig. 4b) , widely employed in medical and pharmacological fields [68, 69] . [20] nucleobase (adenine, guanine, cytosine and thymine) and sugar (lactose, glucose) materials were chosen as the dielectric (fig. 4d) . compounds like beta-carotene and indigo (natural p-and n-type semiconductor), indanthrene yellow g and indanthrene brilliant orange rf deriving from natural anthraquinone and perylene diimide, a cosmetic colour (fig. 4e) , were employed as the semiconductor. all these semiconductors are characterized by ease of synthesis, low price, low toxicity [70] , biodegradability [71] and ability to be metabolized [72] . however, although these unusual materials appear to offer a promising route for fabrication of fully biodegradable organic electronics, extensive biocompatibility studies (including inflammation tests) should be performed to prove the feasibility of their use in implantable/ingestible devices. nevertheless, it is noteworthy that the potential utilization of resorbable materials inspired by nature, apart from their interest in biosensing applications, could ultimately provide the basis for "sustainable green electronics", which is of great interest for low-cost, large-volume, disposable or throwaway electronic applications, such as in food packaging, plastic bags and disposable dishware.the adsorption (physi-or chemi-, reversible or irreversible) or intercalation of an analyte onto the mcl changes its resonance frequency as well as its surface forces and results in a measurable mcl bending [73] . the detection of this bending can be divided in two different modes of operation: static and dynamic [10] , as depicted in fig. 5 .working in the static mode, the bending arises as a consequence of a surface stress change induced by any molecular reaction (i.e. physical adsorption or chemical bonding of the analytes) which takes places on only one of the cantilever surfaces, ad hoc modified in order to promote that reaction. in contrast to the static mode, in the dynamic mode the cantilever resonance frequency change depends on the total mass adsorbed on both sides.by monitoring changes in the bending response of a cantilever, surface stress changes induced by either adsorption or molecular recognition can be accurately recorded. for the detection of cantilever deflection, optical [74] , piezoresistive [75] , piezoelectric [76] and capacitive [77] methods have been employed.in order to enhance the sensitivity of the mcl sensor, the sensor surface can be modified through different surface modification methods, which can be both physical and chemical, as summarized by prakash et al. [78] . moreover, chiari et al. [79] reported the surface modification methods of sensing elements by using polymers, in particular for biospecific recognition.mcls have been proposed for biological/biomedical, physical/chemical and environmental sensing as summarized in fig. 6 .as far as the biomedical field is concerned, mcls have been specifically designed for the screening of diseases, detection of point mutations, blood glucose monitoring and detection of chemical and biological warfare agents. in the last decade, this sensing technique has become very popular in biosensing since the first mcl to detect prostate-specific antigen (psa), a prostate cancer marker, was proposed [80] . the authors coated the surface of the mcl with antibodies specific to psa, over a range of concentrations from 0.2 ng ml 1 to 60 g ml 1 . when the psa-coated mcl interacted with the blood sample of the patient, antigen-antibody complex was formed and the bending of the mcl occurred due to the adsorbed mass of the antigen molecules. kim's group [81] used a novel electrical detection mode to measure psa-antibody binding on the mcl surface, with a reported sensitivity of 10 ng ml 1 . subsequently, the same group fabricated the nanomechanical lead zirconate titanate (pzt) cantilever and carried out the detection of psa by a novel electrical measurement using a composite layer of ta/pt/pzt/pt/sio 2 on a sinx supporting layer, reaching a detection sensitivity as low as 10 pg ml 1 [82] .as a matter of fact, most disease biomarkers are not sufficiently selective and this implies that the detection of a single biomarker cannot be used for the positive identification of a disease, i.e. multiple tests are required. in the successive studies, mcls for biomedical applications have been used in an array format for the sensitive and simultaneous measurement of multiple unlabelled analytes. these mcl array sensors have attracted considerable attention over the last decade. the array approach was used, for example, for toxins or pathogens detection [83] , in investigations on dna hybridization [84] and as a sensing system for cancer diagnosis [85] .the new trend in mcl applications in the in vivo sensing, diseases detection, drug monitoring or delivery is to improve the biological specificity in recognition. this is typically achieved by properly modifying the mcl surface either by immobilizing selective receptors or probe molecules, or by stimuli-responsive polymer coatingssuch as films or brushes-or nanoparticles/nanotubes, able to entrap specific analytes as a consequence of a specific stimulus.these modified materials are considered outstanding candidates for assembling "smart" or "intelligent" active structures. different classes of polymers or inorganic materials could be classified as smart materials. among these, hydrogels are able to drastically change their volume due to water exposure (see fig. 7a ) [86] . moreover, amino-or carboxylterminated self-assembled monolayers (sams) can be employed to covalently bond proteins, using cross linkers such as glutaraldehyde or 1-ethyl-3-(3-dimethylaminopropyl)carbodiimide (edc) with n-hydroxysuccinimide (nhs) (see fig. 7b ) [86] . finally, amphiphilic block copolymers are able to orientate their blocks in response to the [86] hydrophilic or hydrophobic nature of the medium in which they are immersed.different thin films of homopolymers and copolymers [87] [88] [89] [90] , amphiphilic block copolymers [91] , polymer brushes [92] , nanotubes [93] and nanoparticles [94] have been proposed as potential smart materials both for novel biomaterials development and for biosensing applications.peppas and collaborators [95] reported a modified photolithography method to pattern ph-sensitive hydrogels onto silicon mcls for the development of ph microsensors; as a further step, different stimuli-responsive hydrogels were put on different cantilevers all within one chip, thus creating an implantable microdevice able to monitor a wide variety of biomolecules [96, 97] .yan et al. [98] reported a new approach of glucose measurement by using a multilayer modified mcl. glucose oxidase (gox)/polyethyleneimine (pei) multilayer modified mcl underwent bending when it was exposed to glucose solutions, with magnitudes of bending proportional to the concentrations of glucose. moreover, ph-responsive polymer brushes have been employed as glucose mclbased sensors [99] .as far as the genomics research is concerned, efforts have been made to detect point mutations for the early diagnosis of several diseases such as thalassemia, tay-sachs, and alzheimer's disease. mcls could represent an effective and reliable way of detecting such single-base pair mismatches, due to the specific biomolecular recognition interactions between the probe dna sequence and the target dna sequence. if the hybridization with the fully complementary target dna sequence causes the net positive deflection of the cantilever, a minor degree of deflection occurs as the number of base pair mismatches increases [74] . more recently, pzt-embedded mcls have been fabricated in order to detect how secondary structures in oligonucleotide monolayer change the surface properties of a dynamic mode mcl [100] .koev et al. [101] electrodeposited chitosan films onto the cantilever and biofunctionalized the film with an oligonucleotide probe, in order to detect target dna hybridization by cantilever bending. binding of either target dna to immobilized probe dna or of oxidized dopamine to chitosan amine groups causes bending of the cantilever beam which is measured using an optical probe (see fig. 8 ).moreover, the chitosan-coated cantilever was biased to electrochemically oxidize and thus selectively detect the neurotransmitter dopamine. the mechanism of interaction of dopamine with chitosan nanoparticles has been recently studied by quartz crystal microbalance with dissipation monitoring (qcm-d) technology [102] .as a result of their excellent performance mcls have recently emerged for the detection not only of small molecules, but also of nucleic acids, disease marker proteins [103] [104] [105] , cells [106] and different bacteria or viruses [107, 108] .in particular, mcls-based biosensors seem to be capable of rapid and ultrasensitive detection of bacteria, thus promising significant enhancements of microbiological research and diagnostics. for example, ilic et al. reported the detection of sixteen specifically bound e. coli cells, using an mcl array covered with specific antibodies [109] .moreover, pzt-stainless steel cantilevers were used by yi et al. as real-time in-water cell detectors using yeast cells fig. 8 cross-sectional scheme of an mcl surface modified with chitosan for detection of dna hybridization as a model system [110] . in particular, the yeast cells were immobilized on the cantilever tip as a result of their interaction with poly-l-lysine that precoated the tip.park et al. used "living cantilever arrays" for the mass characterization of single adherent cells, working under physiological conditions, by dividing the vibration spectrum from the cantilever by that of the non-moving substrate: the adherent cell was captured and cultured directly on the silicon cantilever [111] .another study revealed the ability of short peptide ligands to efficiently capture bacillus subtilis spores in liquids, immobilizing these ligands on an eight-cantilever array chip [112] . another example of cell detection was reported by sungkanak and co-workers, who designed an mcl-based vibrio cholerae o1 sensor by immobilizing a monoclonal antibody onto the gold-coated mcl tip by using a sam of mercaptopropionic acid. edc was used to activate the carboxylic groups of the acid in order to form the peptide bond with the amine groups of the antibody [113] . the detection limit of this sensor was about 1 10 3 cfu ml 1 .mcl technology was also employed to detect severe acute respiratory syndrome associated coronavirus (sars-cov), with detection limits of 0.1 g ml 1 [114] .a very interesting approach in detecting cancer cells could be measuring the cell stiffness: the cell stiffness here is itself the biomarker thus making it possible to differentiate cancer cells from normal healthy cells. darling at al. [115] extensively argued about the capability of afm to quantify the biophysical properties of single cells. in this respect, a possible future development of the mcl technology could be the ability to measure cell mechanical properties and to relate these features to cell differentiation, transformation and malignancy.recent advances and trends in the development of ofets, oects and mcls as biosensing devices have been reviewed. the increasing demand for sensitive, selective and miniaturized tools for the investigation of living systems and for the early diagnosis of disease are the main drivers for the development of advanced systems able to address complex biomedical issues and at the same time offering low-cost, rapid and reliable multiplex detection. label-free processes directly assessing biorecognition events are a challenging alternative to the currently available diagnostic biological assays (elisa, polymerase chain reactions) routinely used in clinical analysis [116] . although these methods are high-throughput and reliable, they provide results only after several incubations, washing and separation steps. in addition, the transduction of the biorecognition event requires the "labelling" of the bioanalyte, thus adding further sample handling before the analysis can be performed. therefore, smaller, faster and cheaper devices are highly desired for replacing these time-consuming laboratory analyses also allowing for analytical results available directly at the doctor's office or even the patient's house. in this respect, labelfree biosensors seem to be very promising. although optical [117, 118] , electrochemical and electronic [119, 120] label-free biosensors were reported extensively, most of these devices show several disadvantages especially in terms of cost fabrication, miniaturization, regeneration and reproducibility.both mcl and organic transistor technologies are able to overcome these drawbacks and improve the performance of devices currently on the market. these devices together with label-free detection capabilities hold advantages such as the possibility to be integrated into an electronic circuit and cost-effective mass production using large-area electronic technologies [121] [122] [123] . in this respect it must be underlined that mcls can be fabricated through standard integrated circuit production procedures based on silicon technology, a much more mature approach than organic electronics technology.organic electronics-based biosensors combine the specificity of a defined bioprobe with the label-free and high sensitivity of an organic transistor. these devices, compared to mcls, offer the unique advantages of a multi-parametric response and a gate enhanced sensitivity [30] . in addition to this, the ability to directly transduce the biological event into an electrical signal allows a direct treatment of the results thus avoiding expensive equipment used in optical systems. besides, they show quite a good selectivity, by properly functionalizing the semiconductor backbone [30, 124] , and can also be fabricated in an array configuration, often required for disease diagnosis and in general for the study of complex biological systems, on flexible plastic or paper substrates by low cost printing compatible procedures [125] . the flexibility holds additional advantages in the case of direct contact with soft tissues. one critical issue of organic transistors is their complex architecture: materials with different features such as an organic semiconductive layer and an insulating (dielectric) layer must be selected/ synthesised and assembled in a proper configuration in order to fabricate working devices. on the other hand mcl architecture is definitively simpler.mcl-based biosensors show several advantages over the conventional sensing systems, in terms of high sensitivity (based on the ability to detect cantilever deflection with subnanometre precision), label-free, quick response, low analyte requirement (on the order of few microliters), array capability and miniaturization, which make them particularly suitable for in vivo physiological monitoring.the main disadvantage of the mcls is the lack of specificity of their transduction mechanism; however, that can often be overcome by modifying the sensing surface in order to promote selective biochemical reactions (i.e. receptor-ligand, antibody-antigen or enzyme-substrate reactions etc.).in conclusion, both organic transistors and mcls possess the requisites necessary for devices of interest in life science applications and possess such a high sensitivity as to even be able to detect single cells; very recently, an interesting combination between an ofet and a polymer cantilever platform was proposed. this sensor was named "organic cantifet" [126] . such an integrated system could represent the next generation of biosensors, combining all the advantages of two different but similarly well-performing devices.the present review has been mainly focused on devices based on organic materials as the active layer. apart from their intrinsic mechanical, electrical and processing properties they ensure an intimate contact with biological tissues and can be easily engineered owing to their synthetic tailorability. in order to match the biocompatibility requirement research efforts are currently underway both in the manipulation and modification of well-established materials and in the search for new materials. in particular, recent results obtained in the fabrication of ofets by using "exotic" materials inspired by nature have been reviewed. as a future perspective, once the materials' biocompatibility has been proved, this approach could pave the way to the development of a completely new class of implantable/ingestible devices.the citizens live in the ambient conditions of temperature and humidity in his/her environment. this eliminates individual specific variation in temperature and humidity as a potential confounding factor. 5 . swift and coordinated national response. the first covid-19 case was con-20 firmed in colombia on march 6, 2020 [28] . nineteen days later, the government implemented a national quarantine, with tight cooperation at the local level and all testing orchestrated centrally through bogot, using uniform national guidelines [29] . this strong, centralized and swift action of the national government to the covid-19 pandemic greatly simplifies the analysis because the data neatly separates 25 in time into pre-quarantine and post-quarantine periods.we call the rate at which sars-cov-2 was introduced into a city the drip rate.while the drip rate among the various regions of colombia is unknown, the dominant port of entry (bogot) for international travel constrained the way the disease spread through the country. furthermore, the heavy use of public transportation for inter- 30 and intracity travel ensured that the disease spread quickly throughout the country, even to regions with low tourism.ostensibly, variations in the drip rate confound the analysis since cities with more tourism are likely to have received a higher influx of infected individuals.however, as we will show, the drip rate can be factored out of the analysis because 35 it does not affect the rate at which the disease spreads. in contrast to the detection rate, the drip rate does not affect the exponent of disease growth (see methods and d r a f t supplementary information for more discussion on the drip rate).our data model considers both dynamic detection rates and variations in the drip rate between cities (see section 3.1) . from this model, we derive a measure of disease transmission that is independent of both the drip rate and the overall detection rate (equation 5). by combining colombian city-data with our drip model, we have 5 largely mitigated the confounding factors (1-3) above and were able to identify a significant attenuation in transmission in hot cities with simultaneous moderate relative humidity.in this article, we do not consider the microscopic details of viral spread since there 10 are too many variables to consider (e.g. turbulent airflow on buses). however, we briefly review some features and findings of recent models as they pertain to our assumptions [30] first, we follow other researchers in using models of influenza to inform models of coronavirus, since seasonality is strongly correlated with infection rates in both the strong dependence of the probability of transmission on host-recipient distance underscores the need to separate the data into pre-quarantine and postquarantine segments since the degree of social distancing changed dramatically after quarantine was in place. without this division, we would have to consider a time-dependent transmission rate, which unnecessarily complicates the analysis. following herfts [38] , we divide the transmission process into four basic steps:(1) a potential infectee interacts with the environment of an infectious host (2) 30 the infectious host transmits an intact virus to the infectee (3) the virus infects the potential infectee (4) the virus replicates sufficiently for the infectee to become infectious.in step (1), interaction, it is not necessary that the recipient and donor are in the "infective region" at the same time. with influenza-like diseases, virus- 35 4 . cc-by 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. (which was not certified by peer review)the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 26, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.23.20111278 doi: medrxiv preprint d r a f t droplets can remain suspended in the air for several hours in a suitable environment.an infectious host can also deposit the virus onto some surface that the potential infectee later touches.in step (2) , transmission, there is a timescale of virus viability that depends upon the environment. influenza and sars-cov-2 are both enveloped by lipid-5 membranes derived from the budding host cell. the accumulation of damage to this membrane at higher temperatures may contribute to virus instability and decomposition.the probability of infection, step (3), depends upon the number of intact viruses that deposit on the potential infectee and the susceptibility of the infectee. suscep-10 tibility to infection depends on many factors, including age, medical history, obesity and even internal humidity, as a dry respiratory tract is more prone to infection [39] .in step (4), replication, both demographic and environmental factors play a role and temperature correlates with viral titer (hotter temperatures producing less titer) [33] . 15 the rates, or probabilities, of these steps are not independent. environmental factors influence the frequency and conditions under which people associate. likewise, they regulate virus decomposition rates, modulate host susceptibility and the severity of infections within hosts. finally, droplet settling times, droplet evaporation times, viral stability times, all depend on environmental factors such as 20 humidity, temperature, wind etc.to minimize the effects of these factors, it is essential to restrict the analysis to situations where the transmission occurs in environmental, social and economic steady-state conditions. the colombian data meets these conditions because of (1) the lack of seasonality, resulting in nearly constant weather patterns in each region;(2) the widespread daily use of transportation in densely packed buses and subways;(3) the high population density in cities and (4) the suddenness and totality of the imposed quarantine.since cities differ in many ways, identifying the key variables (e.g. weather) responsible for variations in infection rates among cities is complicated. however, 30 following research on influenza and coronavirus [37], we assume that averaging over populations sufficiently reduces the impact of all factors except population, public transportation usage, and weather. apart from these, we will assume that the cities have roughly the same average demographic, economic and social conditions so that these variables do not confound our results. consequently, we will assume 35 that although transmission rates in different regions may be different, the overall transmission rate within each city is constant.. cc-by 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. (which was not certified by peer review)the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 26, 2020. [14] . in addition, sars-cov-2 has a long incubation period of up to  15 days [15] . during this time, the disease host is infectious but asymptomatic. 5 in colombia, international travel was banned three days after the imposition of national quarantine [28], thus we approximate that the rate at which infectious travelers arrived in each city was roughly constant over the pre-quarantine period.we model the daily arrival of sars-cov-2 into each city as a poisson process with mean i. that is, we assume that each day prior to the quarantine, i[t] infected 10 travelers arrive into a city where they begin infecting locals. we assume that on average, an infectious person infects r people each day, who in turn become infective (able to infect others) in one day. that is, on day t there are i[t] new infectious arrivals, as well as the n [t  1] total infectious people from the day before, and thethis difference equation can easily be solved. we find that the expected number of infections on day t is:nequation (1) gives the expected number of infections in a given city on day t.in our analysis, we allow both i, the drip rate, and r, the transmission rate, to vary by city.while the disease is spreading, an infrastructure is being established to detect the disease which results in a dynamic disease detection rate. as a simple but useful case, consider a logistic increase in the detection rate. in supplementary information, we will consider more complicated models. we define the total probability of detecting an arbitrary infectious disease host on day t as:the detection rate increases from a small value (p(0) = p f /(1+e kh )) at rate k, to a final detection capacity of p f with half capacity reached on day h. the probability 6 . cc-by 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 26, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.23.20111278 doi: medrxiv preprint d r a f t of detecting c cases of sars-cov-2 on day t is distributed as a binomial distribution b(n [t], p(t), c(t)). the average (expected) number of infections detected on day t is then:cwhen r is small (which covers all cases of interest), the time-derivative of the log of the expected number of confirmed cases (the expected case log-velocity) is:note that the drip rate (i) and the overall detection rate (p f ) have fallen out.equation (5) is the basic equation that we use to fit the data. however, we do not restrict our analysis to a logistic form for the increase in the detection rate (see supplementary materials).we downloaded the case history for colombia from the instituto nacional de salud (https://www.ins.gov.co/noticias/paginas/coronavirus.aspx). next, we downloaded the weather for all of the cities in colombia from world weather online (https://www.worldweatheronline.com/). then we downloaded population data for colombia from city population dot de (https://citypopulation.de/). 15 in order to apply equation 5 to the data, we first approximated the expected count number from the daily count number by computing a weighted average over neighboring days. that is, we smoothed the raw case number data for each city with a seven day triangle function. next, we calculated the numerical derivative of logc[t].then we fit this log-velocity to the drip model by equation (5) as discussed in the supplementary information. this fit results in an error volume e(r, k, h) that measures the error between the model under (r, k, h) and the transformed data. since the computation of the log velocity is non-linear and our fit error function is nonlinear, we cannot compute standard statistics on the quality of the fit. this is the 25 price we pay for removing the drip rate and the overall detection rate from our model. instead, we quantify the variation in the quality of the fits by the percent 7 . cc-by 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 26, 2020. in order to divide the data into pre-quarantine and post-quarantine times, we analyzed the detection rate in bogot (see figure 2 ). by subtracting the infection logvelocity from the count log-velocity in equation (5) we obtained a free-form estimate 5 of the detection rate in bogot. since our model assumes a constant transmission rate, the decline in transmission of sars-cov-2 induced by the quarantine shows up as a decline in the detection rate, which we observe on april 3, 2020 (figure 2). from this date, we compute a threshold of april 7, 2020 for the remainder of cities throughout the country (bogot entered into quarantine 4 days prior[28]).research estimates that covid-19 can incubate for up to  15 days, with a mean incubation period from 5  7 days [15] . additionally a three day delay between clinical presentation and diagnostic confirmation of covid-19 was typical around this time.4 results and discussion 15 inferring the rate of disease spread from daily case numbers can be deceptive, since variations in the disease detection rate and the drip rate result in detection of significantly larger or smaller fractions of the disease population. to account for this and other factors, we developed the drip model which removes the overall 20 detection rate. since the data span about 30 days, exponential growth will only be manifest for cities with transmission rates significantly greater than 1/30  0.033.we consider 0.05 to be the minimum threshold on the transmission rate for observing exponential growth in a city. we associate transmission rates above this threshold with airborne transmission and transmission rates below this threshold with tourism 25 and direct transmission [40] .the data only show clear exponential growth in large cities with humidity over 80% and mean maximum daily temperatures below 30 degrees celsius (bogot, cali, and medelln). the humidity in these cities is roughly the same (82 %), and they have similar total populations and urban population densities (table 1). the 30 transmission rate declines among these cities with increasing temperature. since these cities had the largest number of confirmed cases of covid-19, these fits have the highest confidence.we note that none of the smaller cities at any temperature and humidity regis-8 . cc-by 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 26, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.23.20111278 doi: medrxiv preprint d r a f t tered significant transmission rates in the pre-quarantine data. for example, soacha and bucaramanga compare to bogot and medelln respectively. soacha shares climate with bogot but has one tenth the total population (soacha and bogot are neighboring cities and are connected by urban rail). soacha has a higher urban population density than bogot. bucaramanga has nearly one-fifth the population 5 of medelln (at similar temperature and humidity) and half the population density.bogot is more than 10 times larger than soacha and medelln more than twice as large as bucaramanga. moreover, bogot and medelln are regional transportation hubs. thus we conclude that the lack of transmission in soacha and bucaramanga is attributable to transportation factors as governed by total population and regional 10 importance.as we were preparing this manuscript, we observed an outbreak in cartagena de indias, a hot city in the caribbean coast that had exhibited low case numbers for over two months. this outbreak began about 50 days into the quarantine and showed a higher transmission rate than at any previous time in cartagena and thus 15 suggests that the outbreak could not be solely attributable to quarantine violations.since international travel had been banned and intercity travel highly restricted for nearly 50 days prior to the outbreak, we conclude that the outbreak must reflect a change in environment.while the weather in colombia is nearly constant, there are small temperature 20 and humidity shifts associated with rainy and dry seasons. this outbreak, and several other smaller outbreaks, exhibits a remarkable correlation with sustained humidity above about 78%. based upon the fact that (1) this outbreak occurred during quarantine and (2) international travel was banned and local travel highly restricted for 50 days prior to the outbreak and (3) temperature was nearly constant 25 prior to the outbreak and (4) there was no observable spike in testing around the outbreak, we conclude that this outbreak was driven by relative humidity (see figure   6 ).finally, we note that lack of rainfall appears to offer additional protection from covid-19 outbreaks. rainfall has been identified as a correlate of influenza outbreaks 30 in the tropics [41] [42] , likely due to increased crowding from sudden tropical storms [42] . additional weather variables such as hours per day of sunlight, uv, etc., also show some correlation with our data. a post-quarantine analysis, and likely an analysis with international data, will be needed to establish all of the weather factors on covid-19 outbreaks. 35 9 . cc-by 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 26, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.23.20111278 doi: medrxiv preprintour analysis focuses upon the pre-quarantine dynamics of covid-19 in colombia.during this time, the humidity and temperature was nearly constant by region and we assume social and economic steady state conditions. we observed a clear separation of the data according to three variables: total population, temperature, 5 and relative humidity. cities with populations significantly under 1 million did not exhibit any significant outbreak of covid-19. large cities with warm weather (maximum daily temperature above 30 degrees celsius) and simultaneous moderate humidity (below 78%) did not experience outbreaks and showed transmission rates consistent with tourism and direct contact. large cities with high humidity (above 10 80%) experienced significant outbreaks, with transmission rates that declined with increasing temperature.cartagena de indias, a hot caribbean city that showed very low transmission rates for march and april, experienced an outbreak in early may consistent with high transmission rates. this outbreak followed a sustained rise in daily mean 15 humidity above 80%, a threshold that has been previously identified as favorable to enveloped viruses.comodulation of viral infectivity by temperature and by humidity has been experimentally demonstrated in a variety of enveloped viruses [43] such as sars-cov [44] , influenza [ influenza of an order of magnitude between 5 and 30 degrees celsius in guinea pigs [33] . however, viral titer cannot explain the outbreak in cartagena which appears to be driven entirely by relative humidity; it is improbable that small variations 30 in ambient humidity could affect viral titer given that the air within the human respiratory system is saturated and unlikely to vary with small changes in ambient rh [52] .the timescale of temperature-only destabilization in solution appears to be on the order of minutes [45] [50] [49] , although direct measurements at shorter 35 timescales in conditions that mimic respiratory droplets are lacking [51] . droplet 10 . cc-by 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 26, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.23.20111278 doi: medrxiv preprint d r a f t settling timescales vary between minutes and hours depending upon droplet size [51] . given the dense packing on public transportation of cities with attenuated transmission, we reason that the mechanism behind this attenuation must act on the timescale of seconds [53] [33] and thus rule out droplet settling and temperatureonly viral destabilization. 5 airborne respiratory droplets evaporate down to half size in about one second [51] [46] . this evaporation is thought to influence viral stability through salt and protein concentrations, ph gradients, and surface sheering [46] . humidity and temperature both influence droplet evaporation, with temperature influencing the rate and relative humidity determining the final droplet size [33] . while the timescale 10 of droplet shrinkage has been studied, the timescale of viral inactivation within the shrunken and toxic respiratory droplets is, to our knowledge, unknown [51] . in conclusion, we analyzed the pre-quarantine dynamics of the spread of sars-cov-2 in colombia and found an attenuation in transmission for temperatures above 30 degrees celsius when the mean humidity was simultaneously below 75%. we ob- 35 . cc-by 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 26, 2020. .served an outbreak in cartagena that closely followed sustained humidity above 78%. given the over-crowded public transportation systems and high urban population densities of cities with highly attenuated transmission, we hypothesize that the attenuation is caused by rapid viral inactivation within the droplet matrix as mediated by evaporation through temperature and relative humidity, with direct 12 . cc-by 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 26, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.23.20111278 doi: medrxiv preprint . cc-by 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 26, 2020. 14 . cc-by 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 26, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.23.20111278 doi: medrxiv preprint d r a f t . cc-by 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 26, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.23.20111278 doi: medrxiv preprint d r a f t . cc-by 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 26, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.23.20111278 doi: medrxiv preprint d r a f t . cc-by 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 26, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.23.20111278 doi: medrxiv preprint d r a f t . cc-by 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 26, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.23.20111278 doi: medrxiv preprint d r a f t . cc-by 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. . cc-by 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. (which was not certified by peer review)the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 26, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.23.20111278 doi: medrxiv preprint d r a f t [29] c. ministerio de salud, "lineamientos para el uso de pruebas di-agnsticas de laboratorio durante la pandemia del sars-cov-2 (covid-19) 30 en colombia." https://www.minsalud.gov.co/ministerio/institucional/ procesos%20y%20procedimientos/gips21.pdf. accessed: 2020-05-12.. cc-by 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. (which was not certified by peer review)the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 26, 2020. . cc-by 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. (which was not certified by peer review)the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 26, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.23.20111278 doi: medrxiv preprintpaciente con epoc hacen que con frecuencia esta atencin sanitaria se vea reducida al telfono. el reto de atender a los pacientes con epoc por telfono supone una complejidad aadida a la atencin sanitaria. la entrevista se realizar sin la exploracin del paciente, sin nuevas pruebas complementarias y sin poder verificar la tcnica inhalatoria. por tanto, los sanitarios que realicen estas entrevistas deben estar entrenados para conseguir realizarla adecuadamente para permitir la toma de decisiones. este documento va dirigido a profesionales sanitarios que tengan que realizar algn tipo de atencin telefnica a pacientes con epoc durante la pandemia de sars-cov-2 y se basa en la experiencia de sus autores en entrevistas telefnicas mantenidas durante esta pandemia. en l se resumen aspectos esenciales sobre cmo debe afrontarse esta entrevista, cmo llevarla a cabo, qu aspectos se deben tener presentes, cmo organizarla y cmo informar a los pacientes. es muy probable que a partir de ahora este tipo de entrevista tenga que generalizarse para la atencin de nuestros pacientes, por lo que necesitamos aprender a estructurar muchas de las visitas clnicas que hasta ahora se hacan presenciales en un nuevo modelo de atencin sanitaria.palabras clave: epoc; atencin telefnica; telemedicina; sars-cov-2, covid-19abstract:the state of alarm declared by the spanish government as the main measure for preventing contagion has involved a change in the clinical management of chronic patients. although new communication technologies offer us many ways to establish direct but remote contact, the peculiarities of the copd patient often mean that their healthcare is reduced to telephone calls. the challenge of caring for copd patients is made even more complex when it has to be delivered over the phone. the interview must be conducted without examining the patient, without performing additional tests, and without checking their inhalation technique. therefore, healthcare providers who conduct these interviews must be trained to perform them properly in order to make the right decisions. this document is aimed at healthcare professionals who need to provide some form of telephone care to copd patients during the sars-cov-2 pandemic and is based on the authors' experience in telephone interviews conducted during this period. it summarizes essential aspects of how this interview should be introduccin la actual situacin de la pandemia por coronavirus ha supuesto un cambio en la organizacin sanitaria. si bien es cierto que la atencin al paciente agudo ha centrado gran parte de los recursos disponibles, no es menos cierto que, por un lado, las personas no infectadas por coronavirus siguen teniendo enfermedades crnicas sobre las que hay que realizar una correcta atencin sanitaria y que, por otro, los pacientes crnicos tienen sintomatologa respiratoria que obliga a descartar la infeccin por sars-cov-2 obligando a reorganizar la asistencia ambulatoria de los mismos (1) . en este sentido, la imposicin del estado de alarma por el gobierno espaol como principal medida de evitar el contagio ha supuesto un nuevo escenario asistencial que hace necesario redefinir la atencin de nuestros pacientes crnicos y que supone no slo a corto, sino a largo plazo un cambio en la aproximacin clnica al paciente con enfermedad respiratoria.siguiendo la filosofa y objetivo comn de evitar contagios, es importante buscar frmulas para que los pacientes con comorbilidad respiratoria no abandonen el confinamiento decretado para acudir al hospital o al centro de especialidades para una visita clnica reglada, exponindose a una fuente de contagio potencial (2) . esto ha llevado a buscar formas alternativas de atencin sanitaria (3) . afortunadamente, las nuevas tecnologas de la comunicacin, que desde hace un tiempo llevan buscando tener un protagonismo en la atencin sanitaria, nos ofrecen numerosas formas de establecer un contacto directo con los pacientes sin tener un contacto fsico con ellos y, adems, nos ofrecen una oportunidad para una gestin ms eficiente frente a una demanda asistencial progresiva en las enfermedades respiratorias crnicas relacionado con el envejecimiento de la poblacin espaola. una de ellas es la videollamada, que ofrece la posibilidad de que el mdico pueda tener una perspectiva ms objetiva del estado del paciente (frecuencia y patrn respiratorio, coloracin mucocutnea, valoracin de la expectoracin, comprobar tcnica inhalatoria, etc) y a la vez genera una percepcin de atencin ms personalizada en el paciente (4). a pesar de que durante el periodo de confinamiento se ha multiplicado el uso de plataformas de videollamadas, la realidad es que la mayora de los hospitales pblicos espaoles no est en condiciones an de estandarizarlo para la prctica asistencial con las garantas tcnicas y de seguridad suficiente en la proteccin de datos. otra herramienta de utilidad es la prescripcin electrnica, que permite a los facultativos iniciar tratamientos o realizar modificaciones sin necesidad de una visita presencial para recoger la receta farmacutica y que ya instaurada en la mayora de las comunidades autnomas.en el caso concreto de la epoc, sin embargo, esta atencin sanitaria a distancia tiene algunos matices (5) . a pesar de que la poblacin est concienciada con el confinamiento y que, por lo general, prefieren no acudir al centro sanitario, es importante recordar que la epoc es una enfermedad asociada con la edad. en el ao 2000, un 20% de los espaoles tena ms de 65 aos, pero se estima que para 2050 cerca del 35% de nuestra poblacin superar los 65 aos, segn el informe anual del sistema nacional de salud. esta poblacin, con mucha frecuencia, no manejan con soltura la mayora de las tecnologas actuales de la comunicacin. por tanto, en el manejo de la epoc, con frecuencia esta atencin sanitaria se ve reducida al contacto telefnico.tras la experiencia acumulada, hoy sabemos que la atencin telefnica al paciente con epoc tiene algunos matices diferenciadores que deben tenerse en cuenta para una mejor atencin sanitaria y que queremos resumir a continuacin. este documento se basa en la experiencia de entrevistas telefnicas durante esta pandemia y va dirigido a profesionales sanitarios que tengan que realizar algn tipo de atencin telefnica a pacientes con epoc durante la pandemia de sars-cov-2, pero tambin puede servir para replantear algunas de nuestras actuaciones con los pacientes crnicos respiratorios en un futuro prximo. en este documento hemos querido resumir cmo debe afrontarse esta aproximacin clnica en la distancia, cmo llevar a cabo esta entrevista clnica, qu aspectos se deben tener presentes durante la entrevista, cmo organizarla y cmo informar a los pacientes sobre las implicaciones de la epoc en los tiempos del covid19. aunque estas notas han sido obtenidas de la experiencia de sus autores con relacin a la atencin al paciente con epoc, bien es cierto que pueden ser fcilmente adaptadas a otras enfermedades.la implementacin de la consulta no presencial es un medio de comunicacin rpido, fcil y con un coste mnimo y que contribuye a aumentar la accesibilidad y a reforzar la relacin mdico-paciente. entre las utilidades de la atencin telefnica estn la valoracin de necesidades, que puede ir desde un consejo o tratamiento o prueba, o hasta generar una visita presencial o una atencin urgente. se caracteriza por no ser orientada al diagnstico formal de problemas de salud, aunque s a la accin teraputica, por complementar la asistencia presencial y tratar de ser resolutiva, por ser una consulta de acceso restringido a los pacientes que previamente son conocidos por el mdico y enfermera. la llamada telefnica es un buen recurso cuando el problema de salud est bien identificado y solo hay que hacer un seguimiento y ajuste de tratamiento, como puede ser en las enfermedades respiratorias crnica. donde el seguimiento telefnico nos permite valorar la evolucin y detectar nuevas necesidades. con una consulta telefnica podemos evitar desplazamientos de pacientes y profesionales, podemos resolver dudas, escuchar, tranquilizar, contener situaciones de miedo o incertidumbre, evitar visitas presenciales y ganar tiempo para el paciente y el profesional. en este contexto, los motivos ms frecuentes de consulta telefnica son los sntomas y dudas en conductas y tratamientos y consiguen una resolucin que se sita entre el 56 y el 84% de los casos, sea atendida por mdicos o por enfermeros (6, 7) .en tercer lugar, por este motivo, durante la entrevista clnica es necesario establecer unas normas al principio de la conversacin indicndole que necesitamos hacerle unas preguntas pero que luego tendr tiempo de preguntar lo que desee. puede ocurrir que el paciente pida autorizacin para grabar el audio de la consulta, para no olvidar nada. en este caso no existe obligacin legal de permitirlo, por lo que queda a criterio del sanitario otorgar o no la autorizacin. adems, es bueno advertir que el profesional sanitario est tecleando en el ordenador la entrevista clnica por lo que escuchar el teclado.en cuarto lugar, otra peculiaridad se deriva de la intimidad que produce una conversacin telefnica entre dos personas. con frecuencia, algunos pacientes tienden a sincerarse sobre aspectos que puede considerar ms polmicos como el consumo actual de tabaco u otras sustancias de lo que lo hara con familiares delante.en quinto lugar, una limitacin importante es que no podemos ver el inhalador que est tomando. en ocasiones, la prescripcin en receta electrnica no siempre se corresponde con lo que tiene el paciente y, en este caso, no podemos decirle que nos muestre el inhalador. en este sentido otro problema puede ser saber la dosis. con algunos inhaladores es sencillo puesto que slo tienen una dosificacin; otros, sin embargo, pueden tener distintas dosis. en todo caso, podemos pedirle que el paciente o un cuidador nos lea el nombre del inhalador y la dosis que viene reflejada.finalmente, el espacio entre preguntas debe ser adaptado a la persona que escucha. algunas personas tardan un poco en asimilar lo que se les dice y es posible que haya que dejar un breve espacio de tiempo para hacer la siguiente pregunta. es importante tener presente que, con frecuencia, algunas personas no pueden escuchar y hablar al mismo tiempo, por lo que tendremos que esperar a que termine su respuesta antes de hacer la siguiente pregunta. en este contexto, es necesario que tengamos las preguntas pensadas y estructuradas de manera que sean lo ms concretas posible, buscando respuestas cortas.a la hora de hacer una entrevista clnica por telfono de pacientes con epoc, es importante tener presente los objetivos de la misma. estos objetivos pueden resumirse en los siguientes: 5. realizar una anamnesis dirigida hacia los sntomas y exposiciones de riesgo de infeccin por coronavirus, as como informar al paciente y su familia sobre los sntomas de alarma, medidas a tomar, circuitos asistenciales. para esto, el sanitario que hace la entrevista debe estar previamente bien formado en relacin a la infeccin por coronavirus en el mbito de sus competencias.cuando este tipo de entrevista sea posible, se deben tener en cuenta una serie de recomendaciones para intentar garantizar la calidad y la seguridad en esta modalidad asistencial, al tiempo que se pretende homogeneizar la asistencia prestada, la seguridad y aumentar la satisfaccin por parte de los ciudadanos. uno de los principales factores que influyen en el xito en este modelo de atencin es si las personas que van a comunicarse (sanitario y paciente o familiares) se conocen de visitas previas; esto es, si se conocen fsicamente y si el sanitario conoce las caractersticas de su enfermedad y su contexto social, ya que esto condiciona enormemente la entrevista. debido a la alta prevalencia de la epoc, lo ms probable es que en la mayora de los casos ste no sea el escenario al que nos enfrentemos. as que debemos identificar siempre con quin estamos hablando y extremar las medidas de respeto a la intimidad y la confidencialidad. nuestras llamadas a pacientes deben tener presentes tambin estos principios y los de buena conducta profesional que incluyen nuestra identificacin y no dejar mensajes con informacin sensible.otro condicionante importante es la edad y la situacin clnica del paciente. en casos de edades avanzadas o con determinadas comorbilidades es posible que tenga algunas limitaciones para hacer una entrevista telefnica. para llevar a cabo esta entrevista son necesarios algunos requisitos previos tcnicos y personales. es necesario que el paciente tenga buena audicin, que no tenga problemas de fonacin (por ejemplo, traqueostomas, secuelas de ictus o algn grado de deterioro cognitivo), que tenga una buena cobertura telefnica si utiliza un dispositivo mvil y tenga una situacin socio-cultural que le permita entablar una conversacin de temas de salud con un profesional sanitario por telfono. desafortunadamente, con frecuencia, alguna de estas premisas no se cumple. para solventarlas es bueno tener delante a un cuidador que facilite la conversacin. en estos casos habr que solicitarle permiso al paciente para que active la opcin de manos libres de su telfono, si se dispone de esta opcin. en ocasiones, algunos domicilios tienen dos terminarles telefnicos fijos asociados a una misma lnea, que pueden compartir. en caso de no ser posible, la entrevista tendr que ser a travs de un cuidador. al inicio de la entrevista tendremos que consensuar la mejor manera de llevarla a cabo, directamente con el paciente de manera individual, con la conversacin compartida con un cuidador o a travs de un familiar o cuidador por completo. la duracin de la entrevista telefnica debera ser lo suficientemente extensa para que el paciente se sienta correctamente atendido, pero a la vez lo razonablemente concisa para que el facultativo pueda ser eficiente en la atencin de un mayor nmero de pacientes.antes de concertar la entrevista, el primer paso necesario es evaluar si sta es posible por la situacin del paciente o el objetivo de la misma. existen experiencias previas sobre el papel del contacto por parte de enfermera para establecer la mejor localizacin para la visita clnica (9) . otras experiencias has buscado el empoderamiento del paciente evaluando su propia capacidad para decidir cmo hacer esta entrevista durante la pandemia (10, 11) . cuando la situacin clnica del paciente permita esta entrevista telefnica, previamente ser necesario informar al paciente. a pesar de que los servicios de informacin de los centros sanitarios tienen informacin de contacto de los usuarios, con frecuencia es posible encontrar que el contacto telefnico no es el correcto, bien porque ese nmero corresponda a un telfono mvil que ahora ya no pertenezca al paciente o bien porque la persona se haya mudado de domicilio o por diversas situaciones. por este motivo, segn las caractersticas del centro y del soporte administrativo disponible, puede ser necesario que, desde el cuerpo administrativo del centro se contacte con el paciente. es importante que este tipo de contactos los realice el profesional habitual siempre que sea posible porque su efectividad depender del grado de confianza previa. los equipos deben organizar la consulta telefnica de manera eficiente en el conjunto de sus tareas, planificar con el personal administrativo y sanitario el qu, el cmo y el cundo. la puesta en marcha de nuevos sistemas de comunicacin con los pacientes debe basarse en criterios de efectividad y satisfaccin. en este contacto con anterioridad a la visita los mensajes que deben transmitirse incluyen: 1) decirle que no acuda fsicamente a la consulta programada, 2) informarle de que el responsable de la consulta le llamar por telfono indicando el da y la hora, 3) informarle de que recibir la llamara de un nmero de telfono con una numeracin determinada, poco habitual u oculta y 4) confirmar el nmero de telfono y un horario en el que deber estar disponible para la consulta.en la tabla 1 se resume cmo debe estructurarse una entrevista clnica telefnica a un paciente con epoc. adems, es importante tener en cuenta los siguientes consejos.utiliza un tono tranquilizador. el tono empleado debe ser cercano, amable y cordial a la vez que respetuoso. se debe marcar lo que son normas principales frente a las recomendaciones ms suaves. el tono que se emplee es una de las principales herramientas que tenemos para matizar mensajes importantes. adapta el ritmo de la conversacin. habr pacientes que aporten la informacin de manera ms rpida y directa que otros. por lo que, tendremos que adaptarnos a las caractersticas del paciente. en ocasiones habr que repetir los mensajes clave ms de una vez. es importante tener presente que las personas mayores se quedan ms fcilmente con lo ltimo que se dice, por lo que hay que dejar los mensajes importantes para recordarlos al final.utilizar un lenguaje accesible. los pacientes no son sanitarios y no tienen por qu entender muchos de los trminos mdicos. uno de los grandes retos de una buena historia clnica consiste en un ejercicio de traduccin desde el lenguaje comn al lenguaje mdico y viceversa.utiliza adems frases cortas y directas para preguntar lo que necesitas saber del paciente. si al final el paciente no se ha enterado, no habr servido para mucho la entrevista.las personas pueden responder a las preguntas de una en una. si se formulan ms de una pregunta, estaremos generando confusin y tensin en la conversacin y la respuesta ser difcil de interpretar. la entrevista debe seguir el esquema general: una pregunta, una respuesta y siguiente.recordatorio final. finalizar la entrevista con un resumen de las acciones clave que se han decidido durante la entrevista en relacin con su enfermedad (dieta, actividad fsica, tratamiento, etc). estas decisiones deben transmitirse a algn familiar o cuidador que est a cargo del paciente y quedar reflejadas en su historia clnica para poder ser consultadas por todos los profesionales implicados en los cuidados del paciente. en algunos casos se podra tambin plantear un seguimiento telefnico por enfermera con objeto de evaluar la implementacin de las medidas acordadas. se podra, igualmente, indicar dnde encontrar informacin relevante y fidedigna de su enfermedad.como toda actividad humana, la comunicacin por telfono est matizada por la personalidad de la persona que entrevista y la entrevistada. es importante tener presente que la personalidad del paciente condiciona a la manera en la que percibe y manifiesta sus sntomas, por lo que esta personalidad matizar la entrevista. durante nuestra experiencia hemos podido identificar algunos pacientes tipo cuya descripcin y recomendaciones resumimos a continuacin.-colaborador. se trata de un sujeto que sabe escuchar la pregunta y la responde de manera escueta. este tipo de paciente responde puntualmente a lo que se le pregunta y quiere obtener indicaciones escuetas y clara del proceder. la entrevista suele ser muy fluida. su potencial problema es que pueden quedarse algunos aspectos que abordar. en estos casos es importante preguntarle al final de la entrevista si hay algn aspecto que quiera comentar antes de finalizar.-despreocupado. se trata de una persona que no considera relevante hacer una consulta telefnica, por lo que contesta de forma escueta o imprecisa a la anamnesis, y transmite desconfianza en esta forma de entrevista clnica. en estos casos es importante transmitirle la utilidad de la informacin y las medidas que se le estn recomendando. a este paciente debera poder ofrecerse una opcin de videollamada o presencial, si la patologa subyacente es de gravedad suficiente a juicio del facultativo.-ansioso. se trata de una persona con alto grado de preocupacin por su enfermedad y las posibles consecuencias para su persona y su familia de la infeccin. suelen ser personas que les cuesta trabajo tomar decisiones clnicas personales por muy simples que sean y quieren que todo est refrendado por un profesional. durante la entrevista suelen ir de una pregunta a otra a veces sin conexin entre ellas. en estos casos es importante informar con calma para dar la informacin que le permita afrontar posibles situaciones clnicas sobrevenidas.-expansivo. generalmente son personas de edad que quieren dar toda una cantidad de detalles de su proceso clnico, aunque estos detalles no tengan relevancia para sus cuidados. son personas que est ms preocupadas por contar lo que le pasa que por escuchar la solucin. en definitiva, son personas que necesitan hablar, especialmente durante el confinamiento. como el tiempo de que disponemos es limitado, tendremos que guardar un delicado equilibrio entre la entrevista clnica educada y el tiempo disponible. una posible estrategia es introducir una frase para cambiar la conversacin del tipo "perdone que le interrumpa, entonces" que cuando haga una pequea pausa.para finalizar, resumimos algunas de las preguntas ms frecuentes que hacen los pacientes durante estas entrevistas en relacin al covid19.puedo contagiarme ms fcilmente del coronavirus por tener epoc? qu puedo hacer para no contagiarme? actualmente, todas las personas expuestas tienen riesgo de contaer la infeccin independientemente de sus caractersticas. por el momento no tenemos datos de si algunas personas son ms propensas a contagiarse o a contagiar a otros, por lo que las medidas de evitacin deben aplicarse a toda la poblacin. es importante que tengamos presente que, si no hay contacto, no hay contagio. por lo que, es importante mantener las medidas de aislamiento.si me contagio por coronavirus tendr una enfermedad ms grave? la mayora de las personas infectadas desarrollan una enfermedad leve. sin embargo, es posible tener una infeccin muy grave. actualmente no es posible predecir de antemano con seguridad qu personas desarrollarn la enfermedad grave. bien es cierto que el tener una enfermedad respiratoria crnica como la epoc podra ser un factor de riesgo para tener una enfermedad ms grave. por este motivo, es especialmente importante en los pacientes con epoc mantener las medidas de aislamiento. tengo que dejar de trabajar? los principales grupos vulnerables son los mayores de 60 aos, aquellos con hipertensin arterial, diabetes, enfermedades cardiovasculares, enfermedades pulmonares crnicas, cncer, inmunodeficiencias, as como en el embarazo por el principio de precaucin. segn lo recogido por el ministerio de sanidad, a travs del centro de coordinacin de alertas y emergencias sanitarias, y se recomiendan las incapacidades temporales o cambios a la modalidad de teletrabajo a modo de prevencin por ser pacientes con un mayor riesgo potencial. existe alguna relacin entre coronavirus y tabaco? el tabaco es perjudicial para la salud y el principal factor de riesgo para desarrollar epoc. adems, el tabaco es perjudicial para el sistema inmunolgico y para su capacidad de respuesta a las infecciones. de esta manera, los fumadores son ms vulnerables a las infecciones respiratorias. sabemos que fumadores tienen ms probabilidades de contraer la gripe y tienen sntomas ms graves. sobre otros coronavirus sabemos que los fumadores tienen una mayor probabilidad de complicaciones. sobre coivd19, aunque an no disponemos informacin completa parece que el tabaquismo probablemente se asocie con la progresin negativa y los resultados adversos de covid-19. por este motivo, la recomendacin general de dejar de fumar. los pacientes pueden aprovechar este periodo de confinamiento para disminuir o incluso dejar el consumo de tabaco.tengo que cambiar mi tratamiento en algo? el principal documento internacional sobre el diagnstico y tratamiento de la epoc especifica que, en el momento actual, no se tiene conocimiento de ninguna evidencia cientfica que respalde que se deban evitar o cambiar de dosis ninguno de los medicamentos inhalados su orales para la epoc durante la epidemia de covid-19. por tanto, los pacientes con epoc deben mantener su terapia regular. en este punto, es importante que los pacientes cumplan con su tratamiento al completo para mantener el pulmn en el mejor estado de salud posible. para adquirir los medicamentos en la farmacia, es mejor si tiene algn familiar que vaya a recogrselos o comprobar en las autoridades sanitarias locales si en su zona existe algn tipo de dispensacin farmacutica a domicilio, especialmente si necesita productos farmacuticos de dispensacin hospitalaria. qu sntomas deben hacerme sospechar que puedo tener una covid-19? el problema con la epoc es que con frecuencia un paciente puede sufrir empeoramientos o "catarros de pecho" como parte de la presentacin clnica de su enfermedad sin que tenga que ver con la infeccin por coronavirus. estos episodios pueden tener sntomas en comn con la infeccin por coronavirus. los sntomas principales de la infeccin por coronavirus son fiebre, tos y aumento de la sensacin de falta de aire. ante estos sntomas, no se puede descartar que el coronavirus est presente. qu hago si tengo estos sntomas? salvo que la situacin clnica sea de gravedad, lo correcto es permanecer en casa, aislado, y llamar a los servicios sanitarios. cada comunidad autnoma tiene un telfono de contacto donde le darn instrucciones sobre cmo proceder en cada caso.qu hago si un familiar mo tiene sntomas? las personas que presenten fiebre o tos debern quedarse en su domicilio y contactar con los servicios de salud telefnicamente llamando al telfono habilitado de su comunidad autnoma, desde donde recibirn instrucciones sobre cmo proceder. como primera medida mientras recibe instrucciones ser necesario recomendar medidas de distanciamiento en la medida de lo posible. cundo podr normalizar mi vida sin tener riesgo de contagio? las autoridades sanitarias estn llevando a cabo un seguimiento constante de la infeccin por coronavirus en nuestro pas. con estos datos conocen la progresin de la infeccin y sabrn indicarnos cuando ha bajado el riesgo como para permitir volver a la vida normal. hasta entonces, es importante cumplir con todas las recomendaciones sanitarias en trminos de prevencin.si tengo que salir obligatoriamente, qu medidas debo emplear? parece que la transmisin se produce por contacto estrecho con las secreciones respiratorias que se generan con la tos o el estornudo o el habla de una persona enferma. parece poco probable la transmisin por el aire a distancias mayores de 1-2 metros. por tanto, si tienes que salir a la calle, ten en cuenta que debes mantenerte a un metro y medio de distancia de cualquier persona, que debes evitar tocarte la cara y lavarte las manos inmediatamente al llegar a casa. en caso de no estar seguro de poder adoptar estas medidas, ser necesario llevar una mascarilla de proteccin que cubra boca y nariz.el telfono como herramienta asistencial se ha incorporado en la atencin sanitaria de manera significativa hace unos pocos aos, de manera ms destacada en el mbito de la atencin urgente y de la atencin primaria (12) . sin embargo, todava hoy, la atencin especializada y hospitalaria siguen de espaldas al telfono para la comunicacin con los pacientes, salvo para trmites administrativos, pese a que la atencin telefnica asistencial puede ser una forma que facilite el acceso y la resolucin de las consultas. para esto, se debern cambiar algunas estructuras de nuestros centros sanitarios para poder prestar atencin telefnica de salud con cierta garanta. es preciso un entrenamiento especfico del personal que participe en la prestacin de la atencin. adems, es necesario disponer de unas guas y protocolos estandarizados, concretos y simples que ayuden a dar respuesta adecuada a los problemas planteados telefnicamente. para prestar una mejor atencin telefnica en nuestra consulta telefnica debera existir una consulta sistematizada, contar con la historia clnica cuando se atiende al paciente, registrar todo su proceso la atencin, valorar si es necesario grabar la conversacin, y consensuar la manera de resolver los problemas a travs del telfono. igualmente, sera conveniente una poltica hospitalaria que facilite la prestacin de este tipo de asistencia, estableciendo el registro de la llamada y su respuesta en la historia clnica del paciente, e incluso un mecanismo de transcripcin que grabe en soporte fsico la llamada para poder ser revisada. finalmente, la disponibilidad de aplicaciones mviles especializadas en este tipo de asistencia y conectadas con la historia clnica electrnica debera ser un desarrollo del futuro inmediato. con todo, en el futuro deber establecerse el tipo de paciente al que hacer un seguimiento telefnico, as como diversos aspectos prcticos, como la periodicidad de estas visitas no presenciales y su intercalacin con las presenciales y su duracin como valoracin reglada peridica en el tiempo.el presente documento ha querido poner de manifiesto las peculiaridades de la entrevista clnica a un paciente con epoc en la distancia durante el confinamiento por la pandemia de coronavirus por el sars-cov-2. no obstante, este nuevo microorganismo forma ya parte de los posibles patgenos que afectan al aparato respiratorio y por tanto es muy probable que a partir de ahora cambie nuestras estructuras asistenciales y formas de prestar esta asistencia sanitaria. la visita no presencial ya era una necesidad para mejorar la accesibilidad de determinados colectivos. la consulta telefnica en la atencin sanitaria ha sido utilizada y constituye un recurso vlido de mejora de la accesibilidad. esta herramienta de consulta ha demostrado en el mbito de la atencin primaria y consultas monogrficas solucionar dudas de medicacin, y los problemas referentes a problemas mdicos crnicos. la implantacin de las consultas telefnicas en el mbito de la atencin de la epoc es una solucin viable y de utilidad en este contexto, siempre que esta consulta pueda resolverse sin mediacin de actos que requieran una visita presencial como la exploracin o la realizacin de nuevas pruebas complementarias. para alcanzar el objetivo de mantener una adecuada actividad asistencial y de la mayor calidad, a los pacientes con epoc durante la pandemia de sars-cov-2 deberemos aprovechar todos los recursos disponibles. somos conscientes del reto que supone para todos, tanto profesionales como pacientes el cambio en la forma de relacionarnos y de controlar la enfermedad. asumiendo que todo es susceptible de mejorar, sabemos que algunas de las reflexiones aqu reflejadas pueden pasar a formar parte de nuestra asistencia habitual, mientras que otras puede que sean tiles a corto y medio plazo y pueden no serlo ms adelante. la situacin actual que es lo que sustenta este cambio nos coloca en otro lugar y nos obliga a la bsqueda de nuevas formas de abordar la asistencia de los pacientes crnicos. es importante, evaluar los beneficios esperados y los riesgos que asumimos tanto los profesionales sanitarios como los pacientes que han de afrontar el reto de tener una actitud ms proactiva y participativa en el control de su enfermedad. tabla 1. pasos y consideraciones a tener en cuenta en una entrevista telefnica estndar.flujo de la conversacin notas presentacin de identificacin del caso -"buenos das, soy [identificacin], le llamo de la consulta de neumologa del hospital [nombre hospital]. recordar que hoy tenamos cita con ud. para hacer una revisin de su enfermedad pulmonar" -dejar tiempo para una respuesta breve presentarse como el mdico la o el enfermero con nombre y apellidos, en lugar del apellido solo. el dar el nombre hace la conversacin algo ms cercana dentro de la formalidad.-"como sabe, debido a la situacin de confinamiento actual estamos llamando a los pacientes para que no tengan que venir a la consulta y hacer la entrevista clnica por telfono ahora. le parece bien?" -dejar tiempo para una respuesta breve marcar claramente el objetivo de la llamada, permitiendo responder al paciente -"para poder tener una conversacin fluida, lo que haremos es que yo le har unas preguntas concretas sobre su salud respiratoria y despus le dejar tiempo para que pregunte lo que desee, de acuerdo?" -dejar tiempo para una respuesta breve se dan algunas instrucciones bsicas para que el paciente sepa cmo se va a proceder.notas -"lo primero, es ud [nombre y apellidos paciente] que vive en la calle [direccin] es correcto?" -dejar tiempo para una respuesta breve lo primero es identificar inequvocamente al paciente. habitualmente esto se debe hacer empleando dos identificadores vlidos, de los que uno es el nombre y apellidos y otro puede ser la direccin, el telfono o la fecha de nacimiento. en este caso, tenemos el nombre y apellidos y el telfono al que le hemos llamado con lo que sera suficiente. no obstante, es bueno adems confirmar la direccin. principalmente porque ser a esta direccin donde le enviaremos informes y citas.-"quiere ud que hablemos nosotros o prefiere poner el telfono en manos libres o pasar el telfono a otra persona?" -dejar tiempo para una respuesta breve en este momento se debe identificar si solicitar que ponga el sistema de manos libres o que le pase con un familiar, si es necesario.flujo de la conversacin notas comenzaremos con tres preguntas generales para consolidar la entrevista y empatizar con el paciente:-cmo est llevando el confinamiento?tiene ud familiares enfermos por el coronavirus?-"desde la ltima visita ha tenido ud algn problema de salud nuevo, de cualquier tipo?"tras una primera pregunta general sobre el confinamiento que nos puede aportar informacin de su situacin personal y ayuda a empatizar con el paciente. lo siguiente es revisar los antecedentes personales, por si ha habido algn acontecimiento clnico nuevo que tenga que ser actualizado -"cmo se encuentra ud en relacin a la respiracin"habitualmente es bueno al principio hacer una pregunta abierta preguntndole cmo se encuentra. esto nos dar la situacin general del paciente y hace ms cercana la conversacin. con frecuencia es bueno acotarlo a si se encuentra igual, mejor o peor. a continuacin, entraremos en la entrevista clnica pormenorizada. es importante tener presente que el objetivo de la conversacin es obtener informacin clnica sobre su epoc. por tanto, debemos preguntarle, al menos:flujo de la conversacin notas sntomas en fase estable:-disnea medida por la escala mmrc -utilizacin de medicacin de rescate -tos y expectoracin -coloracin del esputoen una entrevista telefnica se deberan al menos obtener esta informacin. adems, se puede preguntar por sntomas nocturnos, astenia u otros aspectos de la epoc. tambin pueden ser de utilidad el uso de cuestionarios breves de control de sntomas, como el copd assessment test (cat), aunque es necesario tener un buen entrenamiento para administrar cuestionarios por telfono.-nmero -gravedad -tiempo desde la ltima agudizacin la gravedad de las agudizaciones ser difcil de evaluar, por lo que puede ser suficiente con preguntar si ha tenido que ingresar, acudir a un servicio de urgencias o ser atendido por urgencias en su domicilio.flujo de la conversacin notas cumplimentacin del tratamiento no farmacolgico:-sigue fumando, qu cantidad -hace ejercicio -vacunacin gripe y neumococo -tiempo de paseo diario, por dentro del domicilio importante, constatar que el paciente sigue sin fumar. tratar de evaluar la actividad fsica. en ocasiones la situacin familiar puede ser complicada y el entorno puede no ser de ayuda para afrontar el confinamiento y la situacin de pandemia. en estas situaciones de confinamiento es necesario preguntar por las caractersticas de la vivienda para dar alguna recomendacin sobre ejercicio. el domicilio del paciente condiciona enormemente la actividad fsica del paciente, ya de por si reducida. no obstante, es importante determinar este aspecto para luego poder dar recomendaciones especficas. cumplimentacin del tratamiento farmacolgico:-qu frmacos est tomando, en qu dispositivo de inhalacin y a qu dosis -adhesin al tratamiento -efectos adversos -satisfaccin con el inhalador dependiendo del frmaco, algunos slo tienen una dosis y posologa posible, otros no. en este punto es bueno tener la receta electrnica del paciente delante para comprobar que est tomando lo que tiene prescrito, su adhesin al tratamiento y los posibles efectos adversos.en noviembre de 2002, en varias ciudades de la regin china de guandong se inici un brote epidmico de neumona atpica de etiologa desconocida caracterizado por su alta prevalencia en el personal sanitario y los contactos familiares. se comunic su existencia a la organizacin mundial de la salud (oms) el 11 de febrero, cuando ya haba afectado a 305 personas y ocasionado cinco muertes 1 . la epidemia se extendi a hong kong durante la segunda quincena de febrero, desde donde al parecer se difundi por diversos pases, sobre todo vietnam, singapur y canad. la preocupacin inherente a la difusin de la epidemia hizo que el 13 de marzo la oms lanzara una alerta global, con medidas comunes de vigilancia para evitar la expansin del sndrome respiratorio agudo severo (sras), trmino propuesto por el centro de control y prevencin de enfermedades de atlanta (cdc) a finales de febrero, responsable asimismo, junto con la oms, de la definicin de caso clnico "sospechoso" y "probable" 2,3 . en espaa, los medios de comunicacin han sustituido, creo que con fortuna, la expresin "sndrome respiratorio agudo severo" -a mi entender muy inespecfica y demasiado semejante en nuestro idioma al de "sndrome de distrs respiratorio agudo" (sdra)-por la de "neumona asitica" (na), que hace clara referencia al origen de la epidemia.un caso sospechoso de na deba cumplir los siguientes requisitos: a) fiebre superior a 38 c, b) uno o ms sntomas respiratorios (tos, disnea), c) haber tenido contacto estrecho con personas diagnosticadas de neumona asitica o haber viajado a alguna de las reas que sean focos de la epidemia en los 10 das previos al inicio de los sntomas. un caso probable se define como un caso sospechoso al que se suman: a) hallazgos radiolgicos de neumona o sdra, o bien b) necropsia con hallazgos anatomopatolgicos de sdra sin causa identificable.asimismo, la oms emiti una serie de recomendaciones de control y vigilancia, sobre todo en aeropuertos, para evitar la expansin de esta enfermedad, y el da 1 de abril, ante la continuidad de casos durante el mes de marzo, aconsej no viajar a guandong, hong kong, hanoi o singapur, zonas en las que han tenido lugar escenas que indican cierto grado de alarma social, como la proliferacin del uso de mascarillas protectoras, el cierre de la universidad de beijing y la anulacin de las largas vacaciones del 1 de mayo para evitar la exposicin de millones de viajeros chinos al contagio, sobre todo en china y hong kong 4 , donde se han dado 1.512 y 1.358 casos de los 3.547 censados hasta hoy (20-04-03). tambin ha tenido repercusiones polticas en el pas ms poblado del mundo: el cese del ministro de sanidad y del alcalde de su capital, beijing, probablemente motivados por el avance de la epidemia y la escasa notificacin de pacientes afectados.la identificacin de casos de na en diversos continentes en escasas semanas nos da una idea de la facilidad y rapidez con la que se pueden transmitir los agentes infecciosos gracias a los vuelos areos internacionales, por lo que una persona puede contagiarse en un pas y presentar los sntomas en otro, a miles de kilmetros 5 . pero esta globalizacin tambin nos ofrece herramientas muy eficaces para luchar contra la epidemia. as, bajo los auspicios de la oms y sobre todo gracias al intercambio de hallazgos, informacin e imgenes al minuto conseguidos por internet 6 , trece laboratorios de diez estados diferentes han colaborado estrechamente para identificar el probable virus responsable de la epidemia, un coronavirus no detectado previamente en seres humanos. del mismo modo, las circunstancias variables de la enfermedad han provocado la utilizacin de pginas electrnicas en las revistas cientficas para comunicar las informaciones relevantes sin la servidumbre temporal ocasionada por las publicaciones que siguen los criterios habituales 5 .tras un perodo de incubacin variable (2-11 das) la na comienza con fiebre superior a 38 c, acompaada frecuentemente de escalofros, cefalea, astenia, mialgias y, en algunos casos, diarrea. llama la atencin la ausencia de sntomas de vas areas superiores. la afectacin respiratoria (tos seca y disnea) comienza entre tres y siete das ms tarde, acompaada por imgenes radiolgicas perifricas de condensacin, linfopenia absoluta, trombopenia y elevacin de la lacticodeshidrogenasa, las transaminasas y la creatincinasa. la enfermedad progresa a sdra en un 10% de los casos, requiere el ingreso en uci y provoca la muerte de un 5% de los pacientes. as pues, nos encontramos ante una neumona "atpica", con mayor afectacin radiolgica de la esperada por los sntomas y la semiologa, que en hong kong, canad y hanoi ha tenido una elevada tasa de afectacin entre personal sanitario y contactos familiares 7-11 , y de la que se han comunicado factores de riesgo de mala evolucin: edad avanzada, ldh elevada, neutrofilia, linfopenia, aumento de las transaminasas y comienzo tardo del tratamiento con ribavirina y corticoides 10, 11 .la ausencia de respuesta a los antibiticos, as como la negatividad de cultivos bacterianos y de la reaccin en cadena de la polimerasa (pcr) para los agentes productores de neumona atpica en los pacientes con na hizo pensar en su probable origen viral, teora que se refuerza por la deteccin de una nueva especie de coronavirus en especmenes de pacientes, en ocasiones acompaada de un metaneumovirus, cuyo papel como copatgeno ha sido discutido. tras haber sido identificado y cultivado en clulas vero e6 en varios de los trece laboratorios de la red internacional, se ha considerado que el nuevo coronavirus cumple los postulados de koch, por lo que el 16 de abril la oms lo consider responsable de la na, dedicando la caracterizacin del virus al dr. carlo urbani, cientfico que advirti de la epidemia de na en hanoi y falleci a consecuencia de esta enfermedad en bangkok el 29 de marzo [11] [12] [13] [14] [15] . la alta concentracin de coronavirus detectada en esputo de pacientes con na sugiere que la exhalacin del virus puede ser el principal modo de transmisin. su presencia en heces durante la fase de convalecencia, comn a otros coronavirus, hizo pensar en la posibilidad de una transmisin ambiental con exposiciones ms largas. esto cobr ms fuerza para la oms el 18 de abril al encontrar que las aguas residuales de los apartamentos amoy gardens de hong kong estaban contaminadas por el nuevo coronavirus; los vecinos de este rea se sometieron a cuarentena tras aparecer un brote de 321 casos 16 . esta rpida caracterizacin del agente etiolgico en menos de dos meses ha abierto el camino para desentraar la informacin gentica del virus de la na y ha permitido el desarrollo de diversas pruebas diagnsticas: a) anticuerpos sricos, tanto por elisa (igm e iga) como por inmunofluorescencia, que aparecen tras 10 das del comienzo de la enfermedad; b) tcnicas moleculares: deteccin de material gentico del coronavirus (pcr) en diversas muestras; c) cultivos virales celulares. el requerimiento de un diagnstico exacto que permita desarrollar medidas de control de la infeccin y potenciales tratamientos hace necesarios mtodos rpidos, sensibles y especficos, como la pcr, que debera abaratarse para su uso rutinario 12, 17 .al no existir un tratamiento anticoronavirus especfico de eficacia contrastada, la lucha contra la epidemia se sigue centrando en medidas de control de la infeccin: a) evitar viajes a las zonas ms afectadas, as nuestro ministerio de sanidad desaconseja viajar en este momento a diversas zonas de china(incluyendo beijing), singapur, vietnam, hong kong y toronto; b) la adopcin voluntaria de perodos de cuarentena por ciudadanos expuestos al contagio en hong kong, toronto y singapur ha sido til, aunque no se ha contrastado la eficacia de llevar mascarilla quirrgica protectora al salir a la calle en zonas epidmicas; c) los pacientes hospitalizados deben estar aislados en habitaciones con presin negativa, y tanto el personal sanitario como quien los visite debe llevar mscaras n-95 para prevenir el contagio por va respiratoria, y utilizar otras medidas de aislamiento de contacto (guantes, bata estril) y de proteccin ocular 9, 18 .diversos autores han recomendado el tratamiento precoz con ribavirina (basado en las mutaciones letales que induce en el genoma de los coronavirus) y altas dosis de corticoides (por la similitud radiolgica de na con la bronquiolitis obliterante, as como por los hallazgos necrpsicos de la na, propios de sdra, y por su efecto inmunomodulador), pero la falta de un grupo control impide sacar conclusiones firmes acerca del beneficio de esta asociacin 8,10-12 , mientras que otros autores no la creen beneficiosa y alertan de los posibles efectos iatrognicos de la ribavirina: anemia hemoltica grave e incluso teratgenos 18 . en cuanto a los pacientes con na que evolucionan a sdra, requieren tratamiento de soporte con ventilacin mecnica, para mejorar la oxigenacin y disminuir el trabajo respiratorio, por lo que parece razonable adoptar una estrategia ventilatoria protectora del pulmn, para evitar el volotrauma y la liberacin de citocinas que provoquen un sndrome de disfuncin multiorgnica 8, 19, 20 .the meteorological data were obtained from six monitoring centers of the national shapiro wilk's test was applied to evaluate the normality of the data. the data on daily 88 cases of the covid-19 showed non-normal distribution, so the relationship between weather 89 and covid-19 incidence was studied using the spearman rank correlation test. a descriptive 90 study of the data was performed using the median and quartiles represented by a box-plot graph.the arithmetic mean was used to obtain a single and representative data set for the six the correlation coefficients are shown in table 2 . between nine climatic factors studied, 117 five were significant (temperature maximum, minimum and average, radiation and wind speed).in addition, all significative variables show a negative correlation with the number of cases. however, it was not significant (p > 0.05). in the present study, the relationship between these 132 two variables was inverse and significative (p < 0.01). a non-linear correlation tool (spearman 133 rank correlation) was used to analyze the data from rio de janeiro. therefore, although iran (an according ibge (2020) and shgrj (2020). the lockdown response to covid-19 has caused an unprecedented reduction in global economic 25 activity. we test the hypothesis that this has reduced tropospheric and ground-level air pollution 26 concentrations using satellite data and a network of >10,000 air quality stations. after accounting 27for the effects of meteorological variability, we find remarkable declines in ground-level nitrogen 28 dioxide (no2: -29 % with 95% confidence interval -44% to -13%), ozone (o3: -11%; -20% to -2%) 29 and fine particulate matter (pm2.5: -9%; -28% to 10%) during the first two weeks of lockdown (n = 30 27 countries). these results are largely mirrored by satellite measures of the troposphere 31 although long-distance transport of pm2.5 resulted in more heterogeneous changes relative to 32 no2. pollutant anomalies were related to short-term health outcomes using empirical exposure-33 response functions. we estimate that there was a net total of 7400 (340 to 14600) premature 34 deaths and 6600 (4900 to 7900) pediatric asthma cases avoided during two weeks post-35lockdown. in china and india alone, the pm2.5-related avoided premature mortality was 1400 36(1100 to 1700) and 5300 (1000 to 11700), respectively. assuming that the lockdown-induced 37 deviations in pollutant concentrations are maintained for the duration of 2020, we estimate 0.78 38 (0.09 to 1.5) million premature deaths and 1.6 (0.8 to 2) million pediatric asthma cases could be 39 avoided globally. while the state of global lockdown is not sustainable, these findings illustrate 40 the potential health benefits gained from reducing "business as usual" air pollutant emissions from 41 economic activities. explore trends here: www.covid-19-pollution.zsv.co.za 42 significance statement 43 the global response to the covid-19 pandemic has resulted in unprecedented reductions in 44 economic activity. we find that lockdown events have reduced air pollution levels by 45 approximately 20% across 27 countries. the reduced air pollution levels come with a substantial 46 health co-benefit in terms of avoided premature deaths and pediatric asthma cases that 47 accompanied the covid-19 containment measures. 48 introduction: 49 in many developing nations economic growth has exacerbated air pollutant emissions with severe 50 consequences for the environment and human health. long-term exposure to air pollution 51 including fine particulate matter with a diameter less than 2.5m (pm2.5) and ozone (o3) are 52 estimated to cause ~8.8 million excess deaths annually (1, 2), while nitrogen dioxide (no2) results 53 in 4 million new paediatric asthma cases annually (3). despite the apparent global air pollution 54 "pandemic", anthropogenic emissions remain on positive trajectories for most developing and 55 some developed nations (4-6). 56 57the major ambient (outdoor) air pollution sources include power generation, industry, traffic, and 58 residential energy use (4, 7). with the rapid emergence of the novel coronavirus (covid-19), and 59in particular the government enforced lockdown measures aimed at containment, economic 60 activity has come to a near-complete standstill in many countries (8). lockdown measures have 61 included partial or complete closure of international borders, schools, non-essential business and 62 in some cases restricted citizen mobility (9). the associated reduction in traffic and industry has 63 both socio-economic and environmental impacts which are yet to be quantified. in parallel to the 64 societal consequences of the global response to covid-19, there is an unprecedented 65 opportunity to estimate the short-term effects of economic activity counterfactual to "business as 66usual" on global air pollution and its relation to human health. 67 68here we test the hypothesis that reduced air pollution levels during feb/mar 2020 were related to 69 the covid-19 lockdown events. to test the hypothesis, satellite data are used to provide a global 70 perspective over feb/mar, but to estimate exposure levels relevant to public health, we derive 71 ground-level measurements from >10,000 air quality stations after accounting for meteorological 72variations. the air pollution anomalies during covid-19 lockdown are then used to quantify 73 mortality and pediatric asthma incidence that have been potentially avoided (fig. s1 ). similarly, aerosol optical depth (aod: a proxy for pm2.5) has also increased slightly (+13.2% iqr: 97 35%), although local declines are evident over parts of china ( fig. 1e; fig. s2 ). while the 98 lockdown impacts on no2 and on ground-level o3 in inhabited regions are largely due to local 99 emissions, pm2.5 is less locally controlled as it has an atmospheric lifetime of several days or 100 longer in the absence of rain. for instance, european aod levels during march 2020 were 101 strongly influenced by dry weather with easterly winds, which carried mineral dust from west asia, 102which explains some of the positive anomalies in this period. since much of the long-distance 103 dust transport takes place above the boundary layer (10), these aod anomalies do not 104 necessarily represent ground-level pm2.5 trends. the same is true for satellite-measured o3, 105 which is strongly influenced by its generally increasing abundance above the boundary layer, 106 especially during winter. 107 108ground-level country-specific trends 109while satellites provide global data coverage, they do not necessarily reflect pollutant 110concentrations at ground-level that are relevant to human exposure and health. therefore we 111supplemented satellite data with ground-level pollutant concentrations collected by over 10,000 112 air quality stations. in contrast to the satellite data we used, station data allowed us to calculate a 113 more robust 3-year baseline measure of expected pollution levels for feb/mar. these data largely 114 corroborate the satellite data in that we found the same spatial patterns and net directions of 115feb/mar 2020 pollutant anomalies ( fig. 1 focusing on the ground-level trends is illustrative of the change at both global ( fig with the rapid lockdown response in wuhan province at the outset of covid-19. thereafter, the 127 spread of covid-19 led to lockdowns in various countries, associated with a greater negative 128 deviation in no2 and pm2.5 from 3-yr baseline values (fig. 2) . some notable outliers include 129australia and mexico. australia exhibited drastic declines in pm2.5 from january onward likely 130 reflecting the tail-end of the recent wildfires (11). the rapid decline in no2 over mexican stations 131 is more difficult to explain, particularly given that mexico, along with taiwan, slovakia and 132sweden, was one of the few countries not to enforce any national lockdown measures. 133 134the trends for o3 and pm2.5 are more heterogeneous over space (fig. 1d , f) and time (fig. 2e , 135 f) relative to the ubiquitous declines in no2. for instance, increases in o3 over southern china 136 differ significantly from the decreases observed over the wuhan province, the epicenter of 137 covid-19 (fig. 1d ). we expect this to be a consequence of synoptic redistribution of o3 by 138 atmospheric circulations. similarly, the local decreases over parts of spain are in contrast to 139 increases observed over eastern europe. this is not surprising given that o3 is affected by long-140 distance transport as well as non-linear chemical interactions with volatile organic compounds 141 (vocs) and nox, mediated by mesoscale and urban canopy weather patterns (12). 142 143direct links to covid-19 lockdown and health outcomes 144to test our primary hypothesis that pollution anomalies were directly associated with covid-19 145 lockdown events, we calculated average ground-level concentrations for each country separately. 146instead of averaging over feb/mar, we focus on the two weeks after lockdowns were announced 147 in each country. we first corrected for the effects of local and meso-scale weather patterns 148 (temperature, humidity, precipitation and wind speed) which can significantly affect ground-level 149 . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.is the (which was not peer-reviewed) the copyright holder for this preprint . pollutant concentrations (13, 14) and thereby compromise any observable effect of covid-19 150 lockdowns. using regression models, we estimated the lockdown-attributable anomaly (fig. s1 ) 151as the difference between observed and expected pollutant concentrations given weather during 152 lockdown. 153 154 we found a net decline of about 20% (5% to 35% -95% confidence interval) across all three 155 pollutants in countries where significant anomalies were detected. there were significant declines 156 in no2 (29 %; 13% to 44%) and o3 (11%; 2% to 20%), however our model estimates were not 157 able to control for the confounding effects of weather enough to detect significant declines in pm2.5 158 (9% decline; -10 to 28%; fig. s5 ). indeed, our meteorological-control models were able to explain 159 less of the variance in pm2.5 (r 2 = 0.45) compared to no2 (r 2 = 0.54) and o3 (r 2 = 0.72; table  160 s1). this suggests pm2.5 has a weaker coupling to land-transportation and small business activity 161 declines during lockdown compared to no2 and o3. in many countries pm2.5 is more strongly 162 linked to residential energy use, power generation and agriculture (7). in addition, pm2.5 is 163 significantly influenced by long-distance atmospheric transport of mineral dust and therefore the 164 local effects of economic activity may be diluted or even overwhelmed (15). 165 166using the two week post-lockdown anomalies in combination with published exposure-response 167 functions for no2 (16, 17), o3 (17, 18) and pm2.5 (17, 19), we estimated changes in daily all-cause 168 mortality burden and pediatric asthma incidence. during the two weeks post-lockdown, there were 169 a total of 7400 (340 to 14600) deaths and 6600 (4900 to 7900) pediatric asthma cases avoided 170 across 27 countries with recorded covid-19 mitigation measures ( fig. 3 ; table s2 ). the number 171 of pm2.5-related deaths avoided (6800; 60 to 13700) exceeded those related to no2 (540; 300 to 172 800) and o3 (50; 10 to 80). while for pediatric asthma incidence, no2 reductions contributed to 173 more avoided cases (5700; 4500 to 6800) compared to o3 (50; 40 to 60) and pm2.5 (850; 300 to 174 1000). in china and india alone, the pm2.5-related reductions in mortality burden were 1400 (1100 175to 1700) and 5300 (1000 to 11700), respectively (fig. 3c ). these are countries with both the 176 highest baseline pollution levels and population densities, and therefore have the most to gain 177 from pollutant declines. 178 179furthermore, we performed a counterfactual projection of reduced health burden assuming 180 ground-level air pollution deviations experienced during lockdown ( fig. s5 ) are maintained for the 181 remainder of 2020 (apr-dec). the cumulative effect of the reduction in no2, o3 and pm2.5 over 182 the remainder of 2020 is that 0.78 (0.09 to 1.5) million deaths and 1.6 (0.8 to 2) million pediatric 183 asthma cases could be avoided ( fig. 4 ; table s3 ). our findings suggest that, in spite of the 184 modest response of pm2.5, countries would have much to gain in maintaining pm2.5 lockdown 185 levels because that would prevent 0.6 (0.01 to 1.3) million deaths and 1.1 (0.4 to 1.4) million 186pediatric asthma cases which is 3-and 5-fold higher than those from no2 and 5-and 30-fold 187 higher than those from o3 (fig. 4) . the bulk of the benefit gained would take place during the 188 latter half of the year when air pollution levels are at their highest over countries with the largest 189 air pollution health burden (i.e. india and china). 190 191limitations and perspectives 192 . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.is the (which was not peer-reviewed) the copyright holder for this preprint .making explicit links between ambient air pollution and human health burden relies on several 193 assumptions that are difficult to verify apriori. first, using relative risk rates from select meta-194 analysis (17) and multi-city (n>406) short-term time-series association studies (18, 19) to make 195 inference over entire countries rests on the assumption that city-or cohort-specific response rates 196 are generalizable to broader populations. while this is likely to introduce uncertainty, the dearth 197 of representative data necessities these generalizations, and this approach has been used by 198numerous studies at the global scale (2, 3). further, we acknowledge that our results are affected 199 by harvesting effects, where premature deaths attributed to air pollution might have occurred in 200 the immediate future (20). note that this also applies to death counts attributed to covid-19. we 201 also acknowledge that we do not account for indoor sources of pm2.5 pollution which are unlikely 202 to be reduced by lockdown measures. as smoke from household stoves add substantially to 203 population exposure for people dependent on solid fuels, accounting for ambient air pollution only 204 could imply a misclassification of exposure and biased health burden estimates (21). finally, the 205 baseline mortality rates we use are from 2017 (22) and therefore may be prone to ignoring before 206 and after covid-19 onset differences in baseline mortality incidence. 207 208despite these assumptions and the associated uncertainty, the analysis and results presented 209here can provide useful insights to raise awareness and orientate interventions regarding the 210 global effects of air pollution on human health. they should be interpreted as preliminary lessons 211 from the corona crisis. as the science evolves, and the covid-19 pandemic plays out, empirical 212 data will emerge to fill in the knowledge gaps and uncertainties associated with air pollution health 213 burden attribution. it is expected that the two-week lockdown effects calculated here will be an 214 underestimate of the full effect because most lockdowns will likely last much longer than two 215weeks. however, we suggest the current situation is a useful lens through which to view the global air 229 pollution "pandemic". time will tell how significant the change in health burden has actually been. 230nevertheless, the early evidence presented here suggests it is likely significant. reduced 231 premature mortality from air pollution thus appears as a co-benefit of the minimized number of 232 deaths from the lockdown measures, although more accurate, quantitative assessments must 233 await termination of the crisis. finding economically and socially sustainable alternatives to fossil 234 . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.is the (which was not peer-reviewed) the copyright holder for this preprint necessarily reflect pollutant levels experienced on the ground. therefore, we also collected no2, 275 o3 and pm2.5 data from >10,000 in-situ air quality monitoring stations to supplement the satellite 276 . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.is the (which was not peer-reviewed) the copyright holder for this preprint .data. these data were accessed from the openaq platform and originate from government-and 277research-grade sources. see www.openaq.org for a list of sources. despite the reliability of the 278 sources, we inspected pollutant time series for each country and removed spurious outliers in the 279 data with z-scores exceeding an absolute value of 3. following quality control, we were left with 280 data representing 30 countries. 281 282quantifying air pollution anomalies 283 we used two approaches to quantify air pollution anomalies coincident with covid-19 during 284feb/mar 2020. we refer to these as (1) the feb/mar differential, and (2) the lockdown differential 285 (fig. s1 ). for the feb/mar differential we calculated average pollutant levels for feb/mar each 286year between 2017 and 2020. the differential was defined as the difference between 2020 values 287 and the average of those for a 3-year baseline (2017-2019 involved partial or full closure of borders and flights, government advisories for citizens to work 300 from home, closure of schools, and limiting gathering sizes. severe lockdowns included 301 government-enforced movement restrictions or curfews and closure of all non-essential 302businesses. this resulted in a sample of 27 countries that reported lockdown measures and which 303we had ground-level air pollution data for. 304 305air pollution anomalies measured during two weeks post-lockdown are not necessarily 306 attributable to reduced economic activity, but may be an artifact of meteorological variability 307 coincident with the onset of covid-19. therefore we adopted a modelled differential approach to 308 correct for the effect of meteorological parameters on air pollution trends. this involved 309 developing a model based on historical data to estimate what the expected air pollution levels for 310 2020 lockdown dates should have been given the prevailing weather conditions and time of year. 311we performed multiple linear regression of weekly pollutant concentrations on temperature, 312 humidity, precipitation and wind speed derived from the global forecast system (gfs) of the 313 national centers for environmental prediction (ncep) between jan 2017 and apr 2020. we 314accounted for the effect of seasonal fluctuations and long-term trends by including month and 315year as fixed effects in the model. we calculated the sin and cos component of the month variable 316to account for its cyclical nature. using models trained on historical data, we predicted the 317 expected pollutant levels for the two lockdown weeks. the modelled differential is then the 318 difference between this predicted value and the observed pollutant concentrations during 319 . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.is the (which was not peer-reviewed) the copyright holder for this preprint . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.10.20060673 doi: medrxiv preprint lockdown (fig. s1 ). this differential has been attributed to covid-19 mitigation measures with 320 greater confidence than simple comparisons with 3-yr baseline values. 321 322linking air pollution anomalies to public health burden 323to relate covid-19 lockdown air pollution anomalies to all-cause mortality and pediatric asthma 324incidence we applied short-term (daily) exposure-response relationships reported in recent 325 literature. we obtained relative risks from recent studies on the relationship between daily 326 mortality and o3 (18) and pm2.5 (19) resulting from the multi-city multi-country (mcc) 327collaborative research network (35). for no2-mortality responses, we used relative risks 328reported in a meta-analysis which controlled for the effect of particulate matter to extract excess 329 mortality solely attributable to no2 (16). pediatric (< 18 years) short-term relative risks for asthma 330 incidence in response to no2, o3 and pm2.5 were derived from a global meta-analysis of 87 331 studies (17). these data are not country-specific and we therefore applied the same relative risk 332 rate to all countries in our study. 333daily health burden (premature mortality and asthma incidence) for each country was derived 334 with the formula: 335 336 where inc is the baseline mortality or asthma incidence rate and pop is the total population. inc 337 for mortality and asthma were obtained from the institute for health metrics and evaluation (ihme) 338for the 27 countries in our study (22) where  is the relative risk reported in the literature and  is the concentration increment used. all 351 three studies reported results relative to a of 10 g m -3 . 352the air pollution health burden anomaly coincident with covid-19 lockdown was defined as: 353 . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.is the (which was not peer-reviewed) the copyright holder for this preprint . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.10.20060673 doi: medrxiv preprintwhere doy is the days-of-year equivalent for each country's two weeks lockdown dates. we use 355 95% confidence intervals reported in the literature to derive error margins around our change 356estimates. health burden estimates are made for each day during lockdown events during 2020 357 and the past three years for comparison. we also perform a counterfactual forecasting 358 assessment for 2020 where we assume the lockdown reductions in no2, o3, pm2.5 are sustained 359for the remainder of the year. using the resulting daily forecasts we calculated the total avoidable 360 air pollution related mortalities and new asthma incidence. cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.is the (which was not peer-reviewed) the copyright holder for this preprint . . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.is the (which was not peer-reviewed) the copyright holder for this preprint . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.10.20060673 doi: medrxiv preprint . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.is the (which was not peer-reviewed) the copyright holder for this preprint . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.10.20060673 doi: medrxiv preprint calculated including feb/mar differential and lockdown differential. the first is the difference 500 between the feb/mar 2020 and the average for the same days during the previous three years 501 (2017-2019; ground-station data) or one year (satellite data). the lockdown differential is the 502 difference between observed and predicted pollutant levels for two weeks post-lockdown. 503predictions are made to account for the confounding effects of weather variability using a 504 regression model. these differentials are used to calculate the change in mortality or asthma 505 burden (hb) as a result of covid-19 induced pollution anomalies. relative risk rate functions 506 are extracted from the literature outlined with dashed lines (refer to reference list in main 507 manuscript for full references). 508 509 . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.is the (which was not peer-reviewed) the copyright holder for this preprint . . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.is the (which was not peer-reviewed) the copyright holder for this preprint . . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.is the (which was not peer-reviewed) the copyright holder for this preprint . . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.is the (which was not peer-reviewed) the copyright holder for this preprint . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.is the (which was not peer-reviewed) the copyright holder for this preprint . australi ahypothetical scenarios of lifting the restrictions can therefore be estimated after seir is parameterized. these methods are, however, difficulty to applied globally because: 1) human travel records obtained from a personal tracking system do not exist in most countries, 2) the announcement of control policies and the practical implementation and public compliance can be inconsistent, and 3) a process model like seir requires many regionally heterogeneous epidemic parameters 11, 12 which are unavailable globally. furthermore, validating the model only by the records from a strictly controlled region or country (e.g. wuhan or china) might bias the estimation of an extreme scenario with no controls. without using the global data, it is also difficult to assess the seasonal effects.we build a panel regression model (methods) to quantify contribution of sa, climate, and moc to the transmissibility of covid-19 over the globe during the community spread period. we estimate the daily reproductive number, r0 , of covid-19, following a widely adopted statistical approach 8, 16 which only requires the daily confirmed number of infectees 1 . r0 is an indicator of the transmissibility of a virus, representing average number of secondary infectees generated by a primary infector 17 . for r0 > 1, the number infected is likely to multiply, and for r0 < 1, transmission is likely to die out 18 . we proxy daily sa by the satellite concentration of no2 (sentinel-5p level-2 pollutant product) 19 because it is significanlty negatively associated with sa and available globally. the weather data are from the meteorologcial reanalysis 20 . we quantify moc through regionalized time fixed effects. depening on the infectee records availability, we estimate 6,386 daily r0 values from 3,315,748 confirmed cases of 213 countries or provinces/states from late january to mid april. besides the overall contribution, we also compare the regional difference of the contribution, and the moc evolvement. we finally estimate that compared to a hypothetical scenario with no restriction of sa, the global r0 reduction contributed by the limiting sa from late january to mid april, and the consequent spared number of infectees.quantifying the overall contribution of sa and climateusing all global records, we find that sa, ultraviolet (uv), temperature (t), windspeed (u), and relative humidity (rh) significant affect r0 (r 2 =0.51 and all p<0.001, table 2 , extended data). esimated by the product of the dependent-variable coefficient and value range over the response-variable value range, table 1 (a) shows strongly positive contribution of sa, moderately positive and negative contribution of temperature and uv, and weakly negative contribution of windspeed and rh. therefore, sa restriction, uv illumination, high wind and high humidity could reduce the transmission. sa has a leading contribution of 18.3%2.0% (95% confidence interval, ci). sunlight kills the virus directly, increases cell cytotoxicity and modulates the biosynthesis of vitamin d which are essential to promote immune responses 21 . higher relative humidity prevents viral particles traveling as far as it could in drier air 22 .we further control the regions to only include data in china and developed countries to confirm the contribution of sa and weather. the r 2 is increased to 0.61 and the sa contribution is increased to 23.2%3.0% (95% ci), 4.9% higher than the global scale, whereas uv, wind, and rh become insignificant ( table 3 , extended data). the result might be explained by the fact that in more developed areas, people tend to stay indoors with a controlled climate most of the time 21 . this suggests that simply depending on favorable weather conditions, such as warm weather and high uv, has strong limitations in stopping the virus transmission in these areas.we suspect a nonmonotonic contribution of temperature by restricting temperature to low or high (t<25c or t25c) in the regresion because the coefficient of temperature changes from weakly positive to strongly negative ( table 4 vs. table 5 , extended data). we hypothesize that the virus might have a viable temperature range. this finding agrees with a few previous studies on coronavirus 23 and covid-19 24, 25 , but disagrees with most studies claiming temperature has a decreasing 26, 27 , increasing 22 or no effect 28 on the transmissibility. however, we note that the sample size, with only 747 samples, is relatively small when restricting tempeture to high (t25). more data in the incoming season are needed to confirm the temperature effects because most regions in the globe have not experienced a covid-19 pandemic with high temperature.we estimate the global decrease of r0 due to the sa restriction as half monthly mean in figure 1 . because china has the earliest outbreak since late january, earlier than the rest of the world, we provide the r0 reduction from late january to feburary only in china in figure 1 (a)-(c) and the r0 reduction of the world from march to mid april in figure 1 (d)-(f). china imposed the strongest policy on restricting sa at an early stage, from feburary to the first half of march, and saw the largest reduction of r0. the major outbreak provinces of china had a r0 reduction from 0.08 to 0.18 in the first half of feburary, and from 0.02 to 0.12 in the latter half of feburary and first half of march. china graduately lifted the restriction of sa since the latter half of march ( figure 1 e and f) . the sa restriction in europe came in the latter half of march, and the r0 reduction was from 0.02 to 0.06 in the latter half of march and from 0.04 to 0.06 in the first half of april. the western us started sa strictions in the latter half of march, earlier than the rest of the us. the western us saw a reduction of r0 from 0.02 to 0.08 from later march to april, and the eastern saw r0 reduction from 0.04 to 0.10 in april.consequently, compared to a hypothetical scenario with no sa restriction during the community spread, we estimate in figure 1 the number of spared infectees is a compound result of r0 reduction and timing. athough the r0 reduction in europe and us is significantly smaller than that in china, it spared significantly more infectees because of their higher number of infectors when the restriction of sa started. error! reference source not found. shows the regional spared infectees through sa restrictions in half-month intevals. only china mainland, taiwan, south korea, and australia show a diminshed trend, as a result of early restrictions of sa, whereas the europe and the us continue to see large number of spared infectees growing exponentially by the end of this analysis. the rest of the world, though having fewer number of spared infectees than europe and us, show rapid growth. maintaining restricted sa might still be a safer option for them. we suspect the lifting of sa restritions to reopen the economy in these countries might pose great risk.in figure 3 , the moc is descreased the fastest in australia and china to a value lower than or close to -1 eventually, indicating a resillient medical system or more effective control policy. the effectivness of the moc in australia might be explained by the adoption of additional control measures including mandatory quarantine of overseas arrivals and travel bans outside of australia, and the relative small number of infectors in the beginning of the outbreak 29 . although china was hit much harder in the begining, it survived the stress by imposing more strict control policies including the lockdown of the hubei province, large-scale demobilization and mandatory quarantine of returning migrants (domestic) workers 29 , and by promptly increasing medical facilities including temporary hospitals 30 and reinforced medical crews from other provinces to the outbreak center 31 . the moc of europe, us, and arctic countries starts from a high value and decreases rapidly, but has not reached a low value at the end of our analyses (above or close to zero), indicating that their medical facility capacity and control polices (other than restricting sa) is evolving rapidly while still under stress of the large number of infectees accumlated during an earlier phase of the outbreak. the moc of africa and latin america, though started with a low number, does not decrease as rapidly as the rest of the world.our study has the following limitations. first, r0 , the reproductive number, is estimated from confirmed infectee records which can be inaccurate due to the lack of tested cases especially in the beginning of the outbreak and in regions with less testing capacity. without globally distributed epidemic parameters of covid-19 other than the confirmed cases, the adopted statistical estimation seems to be the only practical global solution (method). second, although the weather impacts are significant and are within expectation, the contribution of temperature, is subjected to revisitation after more countries experience the warmer weather. finally, because the moc is not parameterized but merely quantified, we cannot project moc into the future. therefore, our result should only be used to assess the contribution of each predictor, especially the restriction of socioeconomic activities, instead of predicting the total number of infectees in the future climate, or the end of the covid-19 pandemic. since except for the number of infectees and deaths, epidemic parameters of covid-19 are not globally available, we employ the stochastic approach by 8, 16 to estimate the reproductive number, r0. r0 of a given country or state/province at day t, r0t, can be estimated from daily confirmed number of infectees (c), via an intermediate variable, daily number of new infectors (i). the conversion from to is given by equation (1),where is probability of an infectee to get clinical confirmation t days since being infected 16 . the conversion from to 0 is given by equation (2),where is the probability of an infector to infect other people after t days since being infected 8 .we fit a panel regression model with region-by-time fixed effects 3 (moc) to quantify the contribution of sa and weather conditions to r0, using the reghdfe module in stata software 4,32 , 0 , = + 1 ln( 2 ) , + 2 t , + 3 ln( ) , + 4 , + 5 , + ,where 2 t, , , stand for the total column of nitrogen dioxide concentration(mol/m 2 ), air temperature (c ), ultraviolet intensity (w/m 2 ), relative humidity (%), and windspeed (m/s), and , is the region-by-time fixed effects, with subscripts i and r standing for the response unit and region. a response unit is either a country or a province/state depending on the availability of covid-19 records. for example, records are available in china, us, canada, and australia at province/state level while only available at country level in most other regions. t stands for the days after community spread (ct>30). the world is divided into 10 regions depending on the geographic proximity and data availability. they are, china, united states, europe, africa, latin america, australia (australia and new zealand), west asia, south asia, east asia and arctic (canada and russia).the reduction of 0 , by restricting sa can be estimated by the product of 1 and the difference of between the ln( 2 ) , under restriction and the ln( 2 ) with no restriction which is averaged from the same period of the last year, i.e., 2019. note that we only averaged the same period using the year of 2019 because sentinel-5p data is only available after june 2018. substituting the hypothetical 0 , back to equation (2), we can estimate the number of infectees with no restricted sa.r0 is estimated from daily clinical confirmation of covid-19 infectees assembled at johns hopkins university 1 in excel tables. the 2 concentration is retrieved from sentinel-5p level 2 product 19 at daily intervals of 3.5 km 7.5 km nadir resolution in netcdf4 format. climate predictors are extracted from the era 5 atmospheric reanalyses 20 at hourly intervals and 0.25 0.25 grids in grib format. all climate predictors are averaged to daily mean and then averaged to the country or state/province weighted by population density from gridded population of the world (gpw) 33 in geotiff format. the 2 concentration is first spatially averaged to sub-level administrative areas of the response unit then weighted averaged by population density to the response unit.in this section, we provide the regression results mentioned in the main text to show the significance and value range each predictor. the aim of this paper is to study epidemiological features of asthma based on admissions to the royal children's hospital, brisbane, and from them to endeavour to draw conclusions about the etiology. the conclusions may be compared with those of a similar study of asthma at ages 12 years and over (derrick, 1972) .in the 20 years july 1949 to june 1969, there were 3,645 admissions to the royal children's hospital, brisbane, for asthma and asthmatic bronchitis (table i) . these comprised 2.37% of the total admissions for the period. cases in which the diagnosis indicated inflammation in the bronchi or lungs as well as asthma, were included with asthmatic bronchitis.asthma and asthmatic bronchitis. in infancy the distinction between asthma and bronchitis or bronchiolitis may be difficult. at this age infection and wheezing are frequently associated. it is common for the earliest episodes in a patient to be designated asthmatic bronchitis, and after repeated recurrences the diagnosis of asthma becomes definite. this sequence is exemplified in the present series by leanne, who was admitted 15 times between the ages of 2 and 5 years. at the first 7 admissions and 2 of the next 4, the diagnosis was asthmatic bronchitis; with the other 6 it was asthma.over the whole period the proportion of "asthmatic bronchitis" to "asthma" admissions was 1:2. in individual years it varied considerably.age. admissions for "asthmatic bronchitis" were most numirous in infancy (figure 1) and at this age exceeded those for "asthma"'. with increasing age they steadily declined. "asthma" admissions, relatively few in infancy, showed one peak at 4 years of age and another at 8-10 years. when the 2 conditions were added, the greatist number of admissions was at 3-4 years. the second peak, both in the "asthma" and combined curves, was due to multiple admissions of a number of severe cases, and the peak disappears when each individual is counted not more than once in any year. it is likely that the lower curve in figure 1c approximates more closely than the upper to the age distribution of the disease. multiple admissions of particular patients, more frequent since 1965, did not necessarily indicate a series of relapses of their asthma. some chronic sufferers were from time to time discharged to their homes for week-ends and then readmitted. this potential distortion of 19% 1955 figure 2 . annual a d d d o n s for asthma (includhg asthmatic broochitis) accodng to age-groups, to quarterly totals (ages 1-11 years) and to the perrentage of dl admissions to the hospital (ages 0-11 years). in these graphs no patient has been counted more than once in any quarter.the index of prevalence has been reduced by not counting any patient more than once in annual, quarterly, monthly or weekly totals. sex. male admissions exceeded female at each age, but the difference became quite small at ages 10 and 11 years ( figure 1 ). similar sex ratios applied to both "asthmatic bronchitis" and "asthma", except that in infancy the male proportion of "asthmatic bronchitis" was above the average.onset. an analysis of 50 cases showed that 41 were admitted within 2 days of the onset of wheezing. the median interval between onset and admission was one day. 18 had a cough or cold for one or more days before wheezing started.the annual admissions for asthma (including asthmatic bronchitis) varied considerably-from 101 to 279, and the curve is undulating (figure 2 ). in general, admissions increased until 1958-59, decreased until 1961-62, and then increased again. on the whole there was a highly significant increase over the 20 years of the study, both in the number of admissions and in their proportion of total admissions to the hospital. as is apparent in figure 2 and table 11 , the increase involved mainly older children. the increase in the 6-1 1 years group was highly significant (p < 0.001); the slight increase in the 1-5 years group was not significant ( p > 0.1). both sexes and all seasons participated in the increase.the annual admissions to the hospital for all disorders varied from 7,730 in 1949-50 to 8,856 in 1955-56 . the significant increase in the proportion of these admissions which were for asthma shows that the increase cannot be ascribed to differing availability of beds in different years.the overall increase in admissions of the older children since 1949 may therefore be accepted as definite. it suggests strongly that there has been an increase, in brisbane, in the number of severe cases of asthma in this age-group. cases which are admitted are, of course, drawn from those with the more severe grades of asthma in the community. , percentage of all admissions 0.74*** 'the measure of time used for determining the coefficients of correlation with the admissions for the corresponding year was 1 for 1949-50, 2 for 1950-51 and so on. no child was counted more than once in any quarter. **p < 0.01 ***p < 0.001the annual variation in brisbane may be compared with that in two overseas reports.in the los angeles children's hospital richards et al. (1967) concluded that there had not been a statistically significant increase in the proportion of total admissions due to asthma over the 35 years 1937 to 1964. it varied from 0.66 to 2.21% with an average of 1.13%. although it had been high in the last 4 years of the study, it had also been high from 1940 to 1943.in a survey of school children in birmingham, england, smith et al. (1971) found that the prevalence of definitely diagnosed asthma increased from 1.8% in 1956-57 to 2.3% in 1968-69.many factors probably contributed to the annual variation. the significant increase in admissions over the 20 years suggesting an increase in severity has been mentioned above. otherwise little evidence of the factors has emerged.one to be considered is the advance in therapy in recent years. this would be expected to reduce the number of admissions. corticosteroids have been used increasingly since about 1952 and aerosol bronchodilators since 1958, with a considerable increase since 1963. however, it is difficult to relate these to the undulations in figure 2 .sodium cromoglycate, introduced in 1967, did not come into general use in queensland it is noted below that infection, like asthmatic bronchitis, is more frequent in younger children. the increase in the number of admissions from 1954-55 to 1958-59 was more evident in younger children (figure 2 ) and included a higher proportion of "asthmatic bronchitis". this suggests that infection made a greater contribution than usual in those years.it seems likely, from the studies of seasonal variation described below, that some of the annual variations depicted in figure 2 were related to the weather, but no significant correlation of them with weather elements could be demonstrated: in time to influence-the graphs. years. of urti cases 76% were 0-5 years, of bronchitis 77%. also admissions for asthma to royal brisbane hospital, ages 12 years and over.in figures 5 and 6 the curves have been smoothed by plottting a running total of three weeks. february 29 and august 31 have been omitted so that snccessive seven-day periods fall on the same dates each year.the curves were similar for males and females and also for those diagnosed as "asthma" and as "asthmatic bronchitis". the latter similarity and the sequence of the diagnoses in such cases as leanne noted above, is in accord with the conclusion of williams and mcnicol (1969) that cases of "asthma" and "wheezy bronchitis" belong to a single population with the same defect. the two diagnostic groups, as well as the two sexes, have therefore been combined for further analyses.spring and autumn waves were present in each year of age except the first (figure 4) .those under one year showed only one wave, which was in winter and peaked in june; this type of curve reflects the close association noted above between asthma and respiratory infection in the first year. the high admissions in march for children 2 and 3 years old are noteworthy.there was considerable variation from year to year in the seasonal pattern. asthma was very prevalent in december, 1958 ( figure 5 ) . this month had the highest number of admissions for any month in the 20 years, even surpassing any autumn month. 1960-61 ( figure 6 ) was notable for a series of minor attendances for asthma at the casualty department at the royal brisbane hospital (rbh) (derrick, 1972) . a comparable study of c 0 childhood asthma has been made over the same 10 years, 1959-1968. figure 7 shows that the seasonal distribution of admissions at ages 1-5 and 6-1 1 yearsthat is, of pre-school and school childrenwas similar throughout the average year except for occasional weeks. there was also a general similarity to the r b h attendances, except much more asthma in the children. figure 7 shows also the two-fold relation of asthma to temperature. asthma is minimal both when the temperature is high in summer and low in winter, and maximal when it is was therefore divided, according to prevailing temperature, into 2 equal sections for correlation studies. the age-groups 1-5 years and 6-1 1 years were dealt with separately. certain relationships to the weather have been reported in the seasonal variation of night other weather elements analysed are included in tables 111 and iv. the dew point, a measure of absolute humidity, shows little diurnal variation. its curve is almost parallel to that of the temperature. the relative humidity at 3 p.m. is close to the daily minimum. the rainfall varied consideraly, and in the average year it was greater than the weekly mean of 2.2 cpl in most weeks from november to march, and less than the mean in most. weeks from april to october. the weekly totals were adapted for calculation as in derrick (1972) . soil moisture was estimated as in derrick ( 1966) . 'these columns show the lag at which y was highest and, in brackets, the range for which p < 0.001 ( r at least 0.61).?p < 0.01. 2. warm humid weather may be a factor in promoting asthma after a short lag. there were highly significant correlations ( p < 0.001 ) between the weekly prevalence of asthma in the children and the temperature, dew point and relative humidity a few weeks earlier (table 111 ). there were also highly significant correlations with rainfall and soil moisture some months earlier; their relevance is more remote. as there was very little difference in the weather relations of the 2 children's age-groups, they were combined in the table.3. factors unrelated to weather may contribute more to asthma in childhood than in adults. the weather correlations with the children showed in general a similar pattern to those for the adults, but with somewhat lower coefficients. with temperature and dew point, the coefficients were significantly lower. 4. asthma is maximal a few weeks after the mean temperature is about 20-21c and decreases as the temperature varies either up or down. in the children the highest prevalence of asthma in autumn was in the 7 weeks, april 2 3 to june 10. for this period the average temperature was 18.3"c. in spring the highest prevalence was in the 8 weeks, september 25 to november 19, when the average temperature was 21.3"c. as the temperature is falling in autumn and rising in spring, the mean temperature would have been 20c about 2.5 weeks before the midpoint of each period. with the rbh attendances, the weeks of highest prevalence were not quite the same as with the children, and a similar calculation gave 21c as the mean temperature 2.5 weeks before the midpoints. as noted above, the highest correlation of asthma with temperature was with a lag of some weeks. the dew point that corresponds to maximal esthma is about 12.5-13.5"c.asihma in the 26 warmer weeks. this period (october 2 3 to april 22) includes february and march when, as shown in figure 7 , there was much more asthma in children than in adults. the main conclusions were:1. the seasonal pattern was similar in the 2 children's age-groups; for the weekly admissions, r = 0.45 ( p < 0.05). the 2 agegroups were combined for further studies; separately they gave closely similar results.with the children's admissions was greater, but not significantly so, when the 8 weeks, february 5 to april 1, were omitted (r = 0.77, p < 0.001) than over the whole 26 weeks (r = 0.43, p < 0.05). in the warmer and wetter half of the year, both child and adult asthma decreased significantly, with no lag, as warmth and wetness increased (table iv) .the higher prevalence of asthma in children than in adults in february and march was not apparently related to the weather. over the 26 weeks, the correlations with temperature, dew point, relative humidity and rainfall were lower with children than with adults; with the first 2 the differences were significant. when the 8 weeks were omitted the differences mostly disappeared.the two-fold relation of asthma to temperature, based on the correlations in the cooler and warmer weeks, is illustrated in figure 8 .the significance of 23c. the ending of the spring wave and the beginning of the autumn wave occurred at times when the mean temperature was approximately 23c. this relationship is shown in figures 7, 9 and 10 .in the autumn it is partly obscured by the february-march asthma in the children, but is clearly defined in the rbh attendances. some of the asthma increases in the warmer months corresponded with a temporary fall in the mean temperature below 23c; an example is the increase in mid-march 1961 shown in figure 6 . other increases did not correspond figure 9 . weekly asthma admissions in relation to mean temperature and rainfall, 1956-57. it is noteworthy that a. the spring wave appears unrelated to rainfall: there was no substantial rain for months before it, during or immediately after it. b. its abrupt ending early in november coincided with a sham and sustxined rise in mean temperature above 23c. c. in this respect the "school-opening" wave of asthma in february-march was different; this occurred while the temperature remained above 23c. d. in eeneral the autumn wave occurred after the temperature fell below 23c. e. the high asthma in may coincided with a sharp fall in temperature. figure 9 ) the temperature did not rise above 23" until near the end of december; the spring asthma wave was correspondingly prolonged. b. also in contrast with 1956, the spring wave occurred during a period of ample rain. c. in 1964 there was little "school-opening" asthma and the autumn wave began in march at about the time when the temperature fell below 23". d. from late december until february when grass pollens in the air were maximal, asthma was minimal (pollen counts by courtesy of miss janice moss).-those in december 1958 ( figure 5 ) and in february 1961 february , 1965 february and 1968 (figure 6 ) . it is conceivable that sensitivity to a temperature above about 23c limits the production of some important allergen; this could be a clue to its recognition.the 23c level does not sharply divide two distinctive temperature regions. they merge gradually. on a day when the mean temperature is 23"c, the temperature would be lower than this for 12 hours and higher for 12. even in an average midsummer day the temperature would be below 23" for eight hours. one would therefore expect the influence, if any, of a rising temperature on the prevalence of asthma to be manifest gradually. as a rule the ending of the spring wave is gradual. only . in' the occasional year, when the temperature rises sharply and the high le<el is sustained, is the decrease in asthma sudden.it was noted above that the higher prevalence of asthma in children than in adults in february-march was not apparently related to the weather. the likely explanation (derrick, 1968 ) is the spread of infection in families after the opening of the school year. the spread of respiratory infections in schools is well recognised. lidwell and sommerville ( 195 1 ) concluded that, in the wiltshire village they studied, the school was the principal source of infection with colds and school children had a major role in introducing infection into their households. jackson ( 1971 ) recorded that one of the three waves of common colds usual each year in u.s.a. occurred in the autumn a few weeks after the opening of schools; the others were in midwinter and spring.this outbreak invites analysis because of its size and unseasonal occurrence. it began gradually about november 16, reached its peak from december 14 to 22 and subsided irregularly to end about january 19, 1959 ( figure 5 ) .it involved 67 children aged 1-1 1 years, with 76 admissions. the sex distribution (41 boys, 26 girls) was similar to that in the rest of the year. the proportion of children 1-5 years of age in the outbreak ( 6 9 % ) was significantly higher than in the rest of the year ( 5 4 % ) ( p < 0.05). an increase in admissions for asthma to the royal brisbane hospital occurred in december-january; it was later and smaller than the increase in children's admissions.there was no increase in admissions for asthma in december 1958 to the royal alexandra hospital for children, sydney, or to the adelaide children's hospital (data by courtesy of the medical superintendents of these hospitals).etiological factors were sought in weather associations and evidence of infection.on all but 2 days in december 1958, the mean temperature exceeded 23c; and it was mostly over 24c. this suggests that the etiology of the cases then was different from that of the autumn and spring asthma waves.october and november 1958 were abnormally dry. in december the rainfall totalled 28 cm ( i 1.07 inches) -the highest december total in the 20 years (normal 13.6 cm-5.37 inches). it is possible, but unlikely, that the absence of the usual asthma wave peaking early in november and the high december asthma may have been related to the abnormal rainfall pattern. in 1968 there was a brisk spring wave in october in spite of 2 previous dry months.another unlikely possibility is that the december outbreak was induced by a wet-air type of fungal spore. these have not been shown to be important allergens in brisbane (derrick, 1972) . however, in other years there were occasional clusters of admissions during warm wet periods.the unusually high proportion of younger children in the outbreak suggests, as noted later, an infective etiology. this is supported by the high proportion of admissions in which a diagnosis of "asthmatic bronchitis" was made (40 of 76). the simultaneous increase in admissions for upper respiratory tract infections and bronchitis, although slight, indicates that some infective agents were circulating then ( figure 5 ) . a similar correspondence is noticeable in the preceding september. however, infections were more prevalent at other seasons without corresponding increases in asthma.the epidemic of measles which peaked in october 1958 seems too remote to have precipitated asthma in december.in a discussion of the etiology of asthma, age, sex and seasonal distribution call for consideration. salient factors include respiratory infections, allergens and cold changes.although the increase of asthma in autumn has been on record since the time of hippocrates (aphorisms 111, 19, 22) , it has not been explained. it is noteworthy that the characteristic seasonal pattern of asthma with waves in autumn and spring is already established by the second year of life. it continues to be manifest throughout childhood and youth and to at least middle age.the age and sex distributions of respiratory infections and asthma have much in common. in 2 australian surveys the maximum incidence of respiratory infections was found at about one year (bridges-webb, 1972) . they are usually more common in boys than girls, in adult females than adult males.infection is a frequent precipitating cause of childhood asthma, particularly in the younger ages. (it may also supervene as a complication when an attack persists.) ford (1963) observed that the first attack of wheezing usually appeared together with or after a frank infection. infection was the dominant precipitating cause in 65% of attacks in those who developed asthma in the first year, in 43% at [1] [2] [3] [4] years, 33% at 5-9 years and 23% at 1 0-1 4 years. williams and mcnicol (1969) noted that respiratory catarrhal symptoms were commonly associated with earlier wheezing episodes, but with increasing age other factorsemotional disturbances, seasonal change, inhalant allergensbecame important precipitants. halpern (1972) found that infection was responsible for 90% of attacks at two years, the proportion falling to about 20% at ten years. wittig et al. (1959) found that 32% of children, mostly infants, who had had bronchiolitis subsequently developed asthma. with the infants of zweiman et al. (1966, 1971) , the proportion was about half. an infection in infancy had apparently precipitated the first episode of asthma in those with an allergic diathesis. as the children grew older infection continued to be a common precipitant, but attacks were also set off by non-specific stimuli such as exertion, sudden weather changes and, later again, by inhalantsdust, danders and pollens. the proportion of the children that displayed sensitivity to extrinsic allergens by skin tests increased progressively with age.the decreasing role of infection with increasing age is in accord with the decrease in the relative frequency in brisbane of a diagnosis of asthmatic bronchitis.as infection precipitates asthma frequently in younger, but infrequently in older children, it seems unlikely that it can explain the seasonal waves, which are similar in both agegroups. it is noted, however, that rhinoviruses may become very prevalent in autumn and that cold changes in autumn may perhaps reactivate latent respiratory infections (andrewes, 1967) . for asthma to beginand to respiratory syncytial virus (rsv) -the commonest cause of lower respiratory illness at this age (jackson, 197 1 ) . characteristic features of rsv infection are bronchiolitis, fever, dyspnoea, cough and wheezing; there may be pneumonia. the occurrence of expiratory wheezing in bronchiolitis makes its differentiation from asthma difficult. before 12 months of age, 35% of children in u s a . have been infected by rsv, by 5 years 95%. stuart-harris in britain ( 1971 ) defines the age-range of rsv disease as 2-18 months. rooney and williams (1971 ) followed up 62 melbourne children who had had bron-epidemics of infection., .chiolitis in infancy and from whom rsv had been isolated. of them, 56% had subsequent attacks of wheezing, 43% on more than 5 occasions. significantly more of those who subsequently wheezed than those who did not had an allergic diathesis, as shown by the concurrence of other allergies and by asthma in first degree relatives.in denver, mcintosh et al. (1972) carried out viral, bacterial, and serological studies on 32 asthmatic children, aged 18 months to 5 years, hospitalized for prolonged observation. of 137 wheezing episodes, 42% were associated with identifiable virus infections. rsy was the most virulent; it was associated with 13 episodes of pneumonia and with wheezing in 23 of 24 infections. next came parainfluenza virus and coronavirus. positive cultures of bacteria from 'nasopharynx or throat were not statistically associated with wheezing.there is evidence that an allergic mechanism contributes to rsv bronchiolitis. chanock (1970) pointed out that in the first 6-8 months of life, when rsv most often causes severe disease, infants possess maternally-derived serum antibodies against it, but they lack protective amounts of secretory antibody in the respiratory mucosa. he postulated an interaction of viral antigens and serum antibodies in the lungs, that is, a type 111 allergic reaction. gardner et al. (1970) suggested that the bronchiolitis is the result of a second invasion of the infant by rsv, and that a type i allergic reaction follows between the virus and reagins produced by the first attack. the eosinophilia in many young asthmatics (wright, 1973) points to an allergic mechanism, although there may be no convincing evidence of an external allergen. gregg (1972) has isolated rhinoviruses more frequently than any other type of virus in episodes of both upper and lower respiratory illness. in the majority of subjects liable to wheeze -that is those who have inherited or acquired bronchial hyperreactivity-rhinoviral infection was associated with an acute onset of wheeze or an exacerbation of chronic wheeze.the high correlation in the cooler months between the weekly prevalence of asthma and the temperature and humidity several weeks earlier would accord with the development of airborne allergens. a further point is that there is little if any seasonal variation in the "intrinsic" asthma (for which such allergens are not responsible) of those past middle life. however, the seasonal prevalence of asthma does not conform with the seasonal prevalence of the commonly recognised allergenshouse mites (domrow, 1970) , fungi (rees, 1964 (rees, , 1966 , pollens (moss, 1965 (moss, , 1967 ) -review (derrick, 1972) . the nonconformity with grass pollens is illustrated in figure 10 . further, in very young children, only a small proportion of asthma is caused by airborne allergens. in adelaide, ford ( 1963, 1969) found that extrinsic causes were dominant in 29% of those with the onset at 0-4 years (foods accounted for most of the extrinsic cases in infancy), in 56% at 5-14 years and 83% at 15-29 years. he noted that extrinsic causes were less common in hospital than in private patients. in brisbane, wright ( 1973) found that 26% of asthmatic children under 5 years of age had evidence of sensitivity to house dust by skin prick tests plus clinical confirmation, and 55% of those between 5 and 9 years. in french children, halpern (1971 ) found the proportion caused by exogenous allergens was very low at 2 years and steadily rose to about 50% at 10 years.these observations suggest that the definite seasonal variation in admissions for asthma of quite young children in the present study can only in small part be attributed to airborne allergens. nor would the food allergy of infants be likely to contribute to the seasonal variation.many asthmatics are unduly sensitive to cold. they appear to over-react to a normal reflex. broncho-constriction is a protection against the penetration of cold air or other irritant into the lungs. with some patients it seems to be the application of cold to the skin which initiates the reflex.in the average year in brisbane, the autumn wave begins when the enivoronmental temperature starts to fall and it peaks when the temperature is falling most rapidly (derrick, 1972) . but the response to cold is not a major factor. if it were, attacks would largely be concentrated on days with cold changes. indeed the spring wave occurs while the temperature is rising, and not every asthmatic is sensitive to cold.on the evidence presented here, the seasonal distribution cannot be explained by infections, allergens or cold changes. it could perhaps depend on a combination of them, and of other factors not yet identified. williams and mcnicol (1969) found it impossible to isolate groups of children who had one sole precipitating cause for their wheezy episodes. this did not support a simple division of asthma into infective, allergic, emotional or other types.from his observations on perth children, hobday (1966) concluded that the high incidence of asthma in autumn and spring was not associated with increased incidence of respiratory infection. infection was present in 22% of those admitted in april-june and in 14% of those in october-december. in the latter period he considered the main precipitating factor was airborne allergens.in los angeles, richards et al. (1 967) were unable to explain the seasonal distribution of asthma. hospital admissions of children showed in the average year a major increase in autumn (october-november) and a minor increase in spring-summer (may-june). in individual years there was much variation from the average. the period of the autumn increase did not correspond fully with that of any environmental factor. it corresponded partly with the end of the peak weedpollinating season (august-november), with decreasing temperature and humidity (october-january) and with the incidence of parainfluenza (october-december). there was little relation to absences due to respiratory infections in schools, which peaked in december-february, and to the incidence of rsv infections ( february-april) .further investigations are obviously needed to explain the seasonal variation. these include viral studies of asthmatic attacks with the newer techniques and a search for as yet unidentified allergens the production of which is favoured by the brisbane type of climate. a clue to their recognition, if they exist, would be the temperature relations noted above.in the 20 years, 1949-1969, admissions for asthma (including asthmatic bronchitis) to the royal children's hospital, brisbane, comprised 2.37% of all admissions.over this period the annual admissions significantly increased. the increase involved both sexes, all seasons and particularly older children.admissions for asthma in children under oneyear of age peaked in winter. in those aged one year and over, as in adults, there was a major wave in autumn and a minor wave in spring. this two-fold seasonal pattern, unexplained at present, may depend on a combination of respiratory infections, allergens, cold changes and other factors not yet recognised. an increase in asthma in february-march is attributed to the spread of infection in young families after the opening of the school year.the associafion of infection with asthmatic attacks is greatest in infancy and decreases with age. conversely, that of allergens is least in infancy and increases with age.asthma is maximal in autumn and spring several weeks after the mean temperature is about 20-21c and minimal both when it exceeds about 23c in summer or reaches about 15c in winter. it is suggested that this temperature range is related to allergen production.the impact of the epidemics of coronavirus 2019 (covid-19) in a globalized world and with more communication tools allows instantaneous communication and in many cases without verification of the source of the information that it shows may have contraventions for society [1] .for another place, the infoveillance for through the use twitter (www.twitter.com) can be useful for longitudinal text mining and analysis to allow the analysis of some conditions of the epidemiology in real time as previously described in 2009 by chew in the h1n1 pandemic [2] meanwhile, public health professionals have a increasingly need to establish a feedback loop and monitor real-time online public response and insights during emergency situations to examine the effectiveness of knowledge translation strategies and adapt future communications and educational campaigns to help the population face this pandemic [3] .the dissemination of information can strongly influence people's behavior and alter the effectiveness of countermeasures implemented by governments. in this regard, models to predict the spread of the virus are beginning to monitor the behavioral response of the population with respect to public health interventions and the communication dynamics behind content consumption [4] .during the last weeks, a big interest about coronavirus started because of one infection located in wu-han city in china,the epidemic scale of the recently emerged novel coronavirus in wuhan, china, has increased rapidly, with cases arising across china and other countries and regions. using a transmission model, it was estimate of 81008 cases and the wuhan city have 21022 (11090-33490) total infections in 1 to 22 january [5] .in relation to colombia, the first case was registered in bogota, colombia. a girl of 19-year-old who returned to bogota 26 february from milan, italy. the woman was recovering at her place of residence. before this, the young woman was placed in quarantine at her place of residence, with constant medical supervision, and after approximately 10 days it was confirmed that she had overcome the virus and was no longer infected with covid-19. the mayor pointed out that "contagion to her relatives was also avoided" [6] . regarding the incidence of covid-19, it is estimated that by march 18, 2020 in colombia there are 93 and 2 died according to the record of the colombian secretary of health [7] .the objective of this article is to describe the epidemiological impact of covid-19 on press publications for 7 days before describing the first case of covid-19 in bogota, colombia. with this, it is intended to describe the publications on twitter associated with the signs of the coronavirus with the advance of the pandemic and the persistence of the people of bogota in this regard. this paper follows the next organization: section 2 explains the methodology for the experiments, section 3 presents results and analysis. section 4 states the conclusions and section 5 introduces recommendations for studies related.the present work performs experiments with source data from twitter with natural language processing and data mining(text mining) following the next steps: gather the relevant terms to search on twitter  build the query for twitter and collect data  pre-processing data to eliminate words with no relevance(stopwords)  visualization arxiv:2003.11159v1 [cs.si] 25 mar 2020following the next papers [8] , [9] were extracted the next terms and translated to spanish: 'fiebre','tos','gripe','estornudar','contagio','garganta'  'dolor cabeza','dificultad respirar','congestion nasal','mialgia'  'produccion esputo', 'hipoxemia', 'fatiga'the extraction of tweets is through twitter api, with the next parameters: date: from 29-12-2019 to 14-03-2020  terms: the words about symptoms in the previous subsection  geolocalization: the capital of colombia is bogota(4.6,-74.083333)  language: spanish  radius: around 50 km change format of datatime to year-month-day  eliminate alphanumeric symbols  uppercase to lowercase  eliminate words with size less or equal than 3  add some exceptions the date of user account creation  tweets per day to analyze the increasing number of posts  cloud of words to analyze the most frequent terms involved per daythe next graphics present the results of the experiments and answer many questions to understand the phenomenon over the population.a. what about the veracity of the posts?nowadays, many users are posting their ideas using social networks and there is no control over the veracity of the information. for this reason, one field related to this is the date of the creation of the accounts, this information is presented in fig. 1 analyzing the previous, a concentration of the dates is around 2010, 2011 then the age of this account is greater than 6 years. so, if fake users wants to post false information, usually the age of the account could be less than 1 year.b. how often people post and where did they start?considering the window for this analysis was from 29-12-2019 to 14-03-2020, there was an expectation of recovering posts for every day but people was not posting about it during the previous date of 08-03-2020. the graphic fig. 2 shows an increasing number of post during the last days. after preprocessing tweets and remove stopwords, the predominant words from 2020-03-08 to 2020-03-14 are: dolor, cabeza, ivanduque, coronavirus, uribi, fiebre, contagio, manos, gripe, evitar, estornudar taken from the cloud of words in fig.3 .then then most frequent words introduces topics related symptoms(health), besides the graphic shows interest on politics.finally, the image 4 shows the actual increase of infection in colombia from the start of march, and there is a natural correlation between the increasing number of post per day and the number of infections. this preliminar analysis helps to understand what is happening in the population in bogota and this data can be useful to analyze others aspects, phenomenon from different approaches: economy, sociology, etc. v. recommendations api twitter has a limitation of seven days then if you need to collect data, you must set the range of time. preprocessing step is necessary because the people posts with any rule on mind.la epidemia de sars-cov-2 representa un riesgo especial para los pacientes renales por su condicin de personas con comorbilidades y edad avanzada, y por la realizacin del tratamiento de hemodilisis en salas colectivas. la informacin especfica en el momento actual al respecto es muy limitada. el presente manuscrito recoge una propuesta de actuacin para prevenir la infeccin en los servicios de nefrologa, y en particular en las unidades de hemodilisis, con el objetivo de identificar precozmente aquellos pacientes que cumplan con la definicin de caso sospechoso de infeccin por el sars-cov-2 y proponer circuitos y mecanismos para administrarles el tratamiento con hemodilisis. son recomendaciones en continua revisin y podrn ser modificadas si la situacin epidemiolgica y las opciones diagnstico-teraputicas as lo requieren.the current outbreak of sars-cov-2 represents a special risk for renal patients due to their comorbidities and advanced age. the usual performance of hemodialysis treatments in collective rooms increases the risk. the specific information at this time in this regard is very limited. this manuscript includes a proposal for action to prevent infection in the nephrology services, and in particular in hemodialysis units, with the objective of early identification of patients who meet the definition of a suspected case of infection by sars-cov-2 and propose circuits and mechanisms to carry out hemodialysis treatments. they are recommendations in continuous review and can be modified if the epidemiological situation, the diagnostic and therapeutic options so require.el 31 de enero de 2020, la organizacin mundial de la salud declar que el brote de sars-cov-2 en china era una emergencia sanitaria pblica de importancia internacional (1) . segn la informacin proporcionada por el centro de control de enfermedades de china y en recientes publicaciones, la mayora de los casos notificados provienen de la provincia de hubei y el 80% ha presentado un grado leve de la enfermedad. la proporcin de muertes entre los casos confirmados ha fluctuado entre el 2 y el 3%, siendo superior en hubei que en el resto del pas, que ha notificado una proporcin del 0,4%. la mayora de los casos detectados en china son pacientes mayores de 30 aos, y entre los casos graves y fallecidos existe una alta proporcin de pacientes con comorbilidades y edad avanzada (2, 3) . los casos en hemodilisis reportados hasta la fecha proceden de una publicacin de una unidad de hubei, en la cual de 230 pacientes dializados, 37 dan positivo a covid-19 y 4 de 33 del personal sanitario. 6 pacientes con covid -19 fallecen (16,8%) por causas fundamentalmente cardiovasculares, con menor probabilidad de desarrollar neumona que la poblacin general(4).hasta ese momento, se desconoce la fuente de infeccin y hay incertidumbre con respecto a la gravedad de la enfermedad y la capacidad de transmisin del virus. por similitud con otros coronavirus conocidos, se cree que el sars-cov-2 se transmite principalmente por las gotas respiratorias de ms de 5 micras y por contacto directo con las secreciones de las personas infectadas. se estn valorando otras posibles rutas de transmisin. el perodo de incubacin de la enfermedad de los primeros casos se ha estimado en 2 a 14 das (5).a nivel general, el ministerio de sanidad del gobierno de espaa publica peridicamente un informe tcnico de actuacin, que en este momento no recoge ninguna indicacin especial para las unidades de dilisis (6) . la sociedad americana de nefrologa ha emitido una nota con preguntas frecuentes y algunas directrices (7) muy similares a los center for diseases control en europa y usa (8,9) y hay recomendaciones realizadas por las sociedades nefrolgicas de taiwan y china. el presente manuscrito recoge una propuesta de actuacin para prevenir la infeccin en los servicios de nefrologa, y en particular en las unidades de hemodilisis. estas unidades son dispositivos asistenciales especialmente proclives a la transmisin y que atienden adems a poblacin de alto riesgo por comorbilidades asociadas (2, 4) .la propuesta es la que consideramos pertinente en el momento de su redaccin, por lo que ante una epidemia actualmente en desarrollo, y tan cambiante, algunos de sus planteamientos podran quedar a corto plazo muy superados por la propia realidad. las recomendaciones incluidas en el presente documento estn alineadas con el protocolo general de deteccin y manejo de la infeccin por sar-cov-2 en el hospital del mar de barcelona (10), estn en continua revisin y podrn ser modificadas si la situacin epidemiolgica y las opciones teraputicas as lo requieren. los objetivos son: identificar precozmente en el servicio de nefrologa aquellos pacientes sospechosos (que incluyen aquellos casos considerados por el ministerio de sanidad como casos en investigacin, probables o contactos estrechos) o pacientes confirmados de estar infectados por el sars-cov-2, y proponer circuitos y mecanismos para administrarles el tratamiento con hemodilisis, con el fin de minimizar el riesgo de contagio a otros pacientes de hemodilisis y al personal.es esencial la adecuada formacin de todos los profesionales de la unidad de hemodilisis sobre las medidas de prevencin e identificacin de covid-19.es muy aconsejable disponer de una de las siguientes dos opciones, o ambas: 1) un monitor de hemodilisis ambulatoria porttil con bolsas para poder dializar en cualquier punto del hospital sin tener que trasladar al paciente y mantener el aislamiento, 2) un box para la adecuada hemodilisis en condiciones de aislamiento de contacto y gotas.como cualquier profesional sanitario en cualquier dispositivo asistencial, el personal de enfermera y mdico que asiste a las salas de dilisis debe lavarse las manos con agua y jabn y aplicarse en las manos soluciones alcohlicas sistemticamente. adminstrese anualmente en el ambulatorio la vacuna contra gripe estacional (h. influenza). lvese las manos con frecuencia con agua y jabn durante al menos 20segundos, e idealmente 60 segundos. si no hay agua y jabn disponibles, use un desinfectante para manos a base de alcohol. evite tocarse los ojos, la nariz y la boca con las manos sin lavar. evite el contacto cercano con personas enfermas con sntomas respiratorios. qudese en casa cuando est enfermo. avise telefnicamente al centro de dilisis que le darn las recomendaciones oportunas. si tras avisar se le autoriza a acudir a la unidad de hemodilisis, evite utilizar el transporte colectivo (avise a una ambulancia individual para ser trasladado al servicio de urgencias del hospital) y, si utiliza medios propios, no espere junto a otros pacientes en la sala de espera general. si tose o estornuda, cbrase la boca y nariz con la manga o con un pauelo desechable, luego trelo a la basura. limpie y desinfecte objetos y superficies que se tocan con frecuencia con agua y leja o cualquier desinfectante domstico. si presenta cualquier sntoma respiratorio o febrcula, si ha tenido contacto estrecho (menos de 2 metros) con un caso probable o confirmado, o si usted o alguien de su entorno cercano ha estado de viaje recientemente, comunquelo inmediatamente al personal sanitario de la unidad de hemodilisis. estas zonas cambian a medida que la epidemia evoluciona, as que es necesario consultar peridicamente su actualizacin.  lvese las manos con agua y jabn durante al menos 20 segundos antes de entrar en la ambulancia y antes de entrar en la unidad. si no hay agua y jabn disponibles, use un desinfectante para manos a base de alcohol.los pacientes pueden tener un espectro de sntomas, desde infeccin asintomtica hasta cuadros graves de fiebre, tos y dificultad para respirar, aunque la mayora de los casos se limitan a fiebre y tos leves. los sntomas pueden aparecer en tan solo 1 da o hasta 14 das despus de la exposicin, aunque el periodo medio de incubacin es de 5 a 6 das (5).para identificar a los pacientes susceptibles de poder estar infectados por sar-cov-2 antes de su entrada en la unidad, se tomarn las siguientes medidas: 1) el personal de enfermera, provisto de guantes y mascarilla, interrogar a todos los pacientes acerca de: -inicio repentino de cualquiera de los siguientes sntomas: tos, fiebre y/o, disnea, de cualquier gravedad.-cumplimiento en los 14 das previos al inicio de los sntomas alguno de los siguientes criterios epidemiolgicos:o historia de viaje a reas con evidencia de transmisin comunitaria, como se ha comentado previamente.o historia de contacto estrecho (menos de 2 metros) con un caso probable o confirmado.2) ser sospechosa cualquier persona que requiera hospitalizacin por una infeccin respiratoria aguda grave (neumona, sndrome de distrs respiratorio agudo, fallo multiorgnico, choque sptico, ingreso en uci, o muerte) en las que se hayan descartado otras posibles etiologas infecciosas que puedan justificar el cuadro.3) en la unidad de hemodilisis: 7  colocar un cartel en la entrada (en diferentes idiomas, segn las necesidades de cada unidad) dirigido a los usuarios con los criterios clnicos y epidemiolgicos de posible infeccin por sars-cov-2 (ejemplo en la figura 1), para que puedan alertar al personal del establecimiento y se puedan implementar las precauciones necesarias. colocar dispositivos de solucin hidroalcohlica en la sala de espera de los pacientes e instruirlos en su utilizacin. los pacientes deben ser alertados de que deben avisar con anticipacin (va telefnica) y, antes de su entrada en el transporte colectivo, si presentan fiebre o sntomas respiratorios, con el fin de que el personal de la unidad pueda estar preparado para su llegada o clasificarlos en un entorno ms apropiado (va de entrada diseada segn protocolo del hospital).  si no se identifica ningn caso sospechoso se pueden retirar las mascarillas durante la hemodilisis a quien as lo desee. se ha de proporcionar al personal y a los pacientes informacin y material para la higiene respiratoria: higiene de manos (solucin hidroalcohlica accesible), cubrirse la nariz y la boca al toser y estornudar con pauelos desechables, con acceso a recipientes para estos desechos. es aconsejable que cada enfermera atienda siempre a los mismos pacientes para la conexin, desconexin, atencin durante la hemodilisis, administracin de medicacin etc., registrndose los pacientes atendidos por cada profesional en cada turno, para una mejor trazabilidad en caso de que aparezca un paciente. se recomienda seguir las recomendaciones descritas en este procedimiento para los pacientes de la unidad hospitalaria (punto 3) ante cualquier duda, contactar con los responsables de hemodilisis de la unidad hospitalaria.en la unidad de hemodilisis hospitalaria:  en caso de identificar algn caso sospechoso a su llegada a la unidad se le separar de otros pacientes, se le dar guantes y una mascarilla quirrgica y ser conducido de forma inmediata a la sala o box de aislamiento previamente acondicionado (contacto y gotas). en caso de identificar algn caso sospechoso dentro de la unidad, una vez iniciada la dilisis, se valorar la urgencia dialtica, y si no existe urgencia, se desconectar y se le separar de otros pacientes, se le dar guantes y una mascarilla quirrgica y ser conducido de forma inmediata a la sala o box de aislamiento previamente acondicionado. se continuar la dilisis en otro momento. el personal que acompae al paciente hasta la sala de aislamiento llevar tambin guantes y mascarilla quirrgica, mantenindose a una distancia de 2 metros del paciente. hay que intentar que el paciente no toque objetos (manijas, puertas, mobiliario en general, etc.) ni personas. a la mayor brevedad, se le practicar el frotis respiratorio para deteccin del virus por pcr, segn el protocolo previsto en cada hospital para la deteccin, diagnstico y manejo de casos sospechosos. identificar una habitacin individual en la instalacin que pueda usarse para aislar a un paciente con sospecha de infeccin por sars-cov-2 (aislamiento de contacto y gotas) para una evaluacin adicional y mientras espera el traslado. si no se dispone de una habitacin de aislamiento, se ha de mantener al paciente con mascarilla quirrgica y guantes, y separado 2 metros del resto de pacientes. notificar siempre a los responsables mdico y de enfermera de la unidad de hemodilisis del hospital de referencia antes de derivar a un paciente que cumpla con los criterios de sospecha de infeccin por sars-cov-2. los pacientes que hayan compartido transporte sanitario, hayan estado a menos de 2 metros en la sala de espera, o se hayan dializado en puestos o camas adyacentes (< de 2 metros o 2 asientos) a los de un paciente en el que se ha demostrado la infeccin, sern considerados contactos estrechos y la agencia de vigilancia epidemiolgica deber actuar para el despistaje de la infeccin por sars-cov-2. dado que el periodo de incubacin es de 14 das, debern tratarse como potencialmente infecciosos y, durante el periodo de "cuarentena" (vigilancia de sntomas con aislamiento en domicilio) sern trasladados en ambulancia individual con mascarilla quirrgica y guantes, y se dializarn en un turno independiente del resto de pacientes, preferiblemente en el ltimo turno del da (si es necesario con turnos nocturnos), extremando las medidas de desinfeccin y limpieza posterior de la sala de hemodilisis. si durante este periodo aparecen sntomas (fiebre o tos o existe alta sospecha clnica segn el facultativo que lo atiende), se les practicar el frotis respiratorio para deteccin del virus por pcr, segn el protocolo previsto en cada hospital para la deteccin, diagnstico y manejo de casos sospechosos. no est indicada la realizacin de frotis si el paciente se mantiene asintomtico, salvo que la sospecha clnica sea muy elevada. la pcr no est recomendada en los contactos asintomticos porque no es sensible para diagnosticar una infeccin latente. por tanto, si saliera negativa, no slo no aportara informacin, sino que adems este resultado podra hacer que se retiraran las medidas de aislamiento por una "falsa seguridad ", poniendo en riesgo al resto de pacientes/personal, y si aparecen sntomas se tendra que repetir. no existe ningn test para descartar una infeccin latente, por lo que lo nico que se puede hacer en estos casos es esperar los 14 das desde el contacto de riesgo con las medidas de aislamiento bsicas ( guantes y mascarillas para todos los pacientes), y solo si aparecen sntomas, hacer la prueba.  las medidas de aislamiento de estos pacientes son las mismas que si tuvieran la infeccin diagnosticada: aislamiento de contacto y gotas, por lo que pueden estar en la misma sala que los infectados, siempre intentando respetar 2 metros de distancia entre un paciente y otro, y todos con guantes y mascarilla quirrgica. en el caso de que el centro no disponga de esta posibilidad, esto pacientes sern dializados en el hospital de referencia.1. los pacientes que no requieran ingreso hospitalario se dializarn en la habitacin individual destinada a tal efecto. existe la opcin de que aquellos que ingresen en el hospital realicen la sesin de hemodilisis en la habitacin que le haya sido asignada mediante un monitor de hemodilisis porttil, siempre que sea habitacin individual y en condiciones de aislamiento de contacto y gotas, con el personal utilizando el epi recomendado para el covid-19. si hay ms de un paciente afecto de covid-19, pueden compartir la habitacin de hemodilisis.2. las salas de aislamiento de hepatitis b utilizadas para dializar pacientes con antgeno de superficie positivo para hepatitis b solo deben usarse para pacientes con sospecha de tener covid-19 si el paciente con sospecha o confirmacin de covid-19 es antgeno de superficie positivo para hepatitis b.3. es necesario mantener una lista de todo el personal de atencin mdica y pacientes que hayan estado en contacto con dicho paciente. es importante identificar a todo el personal sanitario que atiende a los casos en investigacin, probables o confirmados de infeccin por nuevo coronavirus. el riesgo deber ser valorado de forma individualizada por salud laboral y el servicio de urgencias de vigilancia epidemiolgica. si no se han cumplido las medidas de precaucin, sern considerados contactos estrechos y se manejarn como tales. para facilitar esta tarea, es conveniente, como ya se ha  slo cuando se considere que se van a generar aerosoles (administracin de nebulizaciones, ventilacin mecnica, fibrobroncoscopia, iot, aspiracin de secreciones), se requiere mscara ffp3 (con vlvula de exhalacin) y gafas integrales de proteccin completa (figura 3). las gafas personales y las lentes de contacto no se consideran proteccin ocular adecuada. la proteccin ocular reutilizable (p. ej., gafas) debe limpiarse y desinfectarse de acuerdo con las instrucciones de reprocesamiento del fabricante antes de su reutilizacin. sin embargo, se recomienda utilizar material deshechable y de un solo uso en todo el epi.se debe cumplir una estricta higiene de manos antes y despus del contacto con el paciente y de la retirada del epi.desinfeccin ambiental: se deben seguir los protocolos de descontaminacin, mantenimiento y eliminacin de residuos (ropa incluida) utilizados habitualmente para otro tipo de microorganismos con riesgo de propagacin por contacto y gotas.-los residuos se consideran residuos de clase iii o residuos biosanitarios especiales (del grupo 3, similar a la tuberculosis).-se dispondr de contenedores de 60 litros dentro del box / habitacin con medidas de precaucin, para todos los residuos del paciente, incluidos los epi utilizados por los profesionales asistenciales. una vez lleno se avisar inmediatamente al personal de limpieza para su retirada y sustitucin.-para evitar la manipulacin de orina y heces del paciente es necesario utilizar bolsas absorbentes que se colocarn en la cua y / o en la botella de orina. posteriormente se cerrarn y se tirarn en el contenedor de residuos del grupo iii.-se realizar la limpieza y desinfeccin de las superficies con las que ha estado en contacto el paciente y / o sus secreciones (incluyendo la silla o camilla, la sala de espera y el ascensor que se ha utilizado para el traslado; paredes, botoneras y suelo del ascensor) segn protocolo de cada hospital. la limpieza y desinfeccin se realizar con un desinfectante con una solucin de hipoclorito sdico que contenga 1.000 ppm de cloro activo. estos virus se inactivan despus de 5 minutos de contacto con desinfectantes normales como la leja domstica.-el personal de limpieza debe ir protegido adecuadamente con el epi con mascarilla ffp2. los utensilios y materiales utilizados en la sesin de dilisis deben estar dedicados a un nico paciente y deben ser limpiados y desinfectados en un rea limpia comn, antes de ser guardados o utilizados para otro paciente. los materiales y medicacin que se encuentren en los puestos de hemodilisis, solo se deben usar con ese paciente y nunca deben regresar a la zona de limpio comn o usada con otros pacientes, sin haber sido desinfectado previamente. no deben usarse carros comunes para llevar la medicacin a los pacientes. si se usan bandejas para llevar medicacin a pacientes individuales, deben limpiarse entre paciente y paciente. las reas limpias deben estar claramente separadas de las reas contaminadas donde se manipula el material contaminado. medidas adicionales de prevencin realizadas en china y taiwan han sido no dar alimentos a los pacientes durante la sesin de hemodilisis. deben limpiarse y desinfectarse las superficies externas (sillones, camas, mesas, monitores) entre pacientes. las superficies externas de los monitores son la fuente ms probable de contaminacin. al terminar de conectar y siempre que se atienda algn paciente, se limpiar la superficie de los monitores con agua y jabn y seguidamente se aplicar un desinfectante con una solucin de hipoclorito sdico que contenga 1.000 ppm de cloro activo. estos virus se inactivan despus de 5 minutos de contacto con desinfectantes normales como la leja domstica.  debe ponerse especial atencin a los paneles de control de los monitores de dilisis y a otras superficies que se tocan frecuentemente y son potenciales contaminantes. la identificacin precoz de individuos en riesgo, preferiblemente antes de ser transportados a la unidad, es fundamental para la prevencin de la transmisin en la ambulancia, salas de espera y unidades de hemodilisis. la formacin adecuada sobre las medidas de prevencin e identificacin de covid-19 a los pacientes y a todo el personal implicado en las diferentes etapas de la hemodilisis, (incluido el traslado desde el domicilio), es prioritaria. es aconsejable disponer de sistemas que permitan realizar el tratamiento de hemodilisis en condiciones de aislamiento de contacto y gotas mediante distintas opciones (habitacin individual, monitores de hemodilisis ambulatoria porttil). el cumplimiento estricto de las precauciones estndar, de contacto y de gotas con una adecuada proteccin (epi) es una responsabilidad del personal sanitario que atiende a casos sospechosos o diagnosticados de covid-19.equipo protector individual para coronavirus (epi), que consta de un par de guantes de nitrilo de manga larga sin polvo, bata larga impermeable, mscara ffp2 y mscara quirrgica con pantalla completa. esta lista de equipos de proteccin individuales se encuentra en revisin permanente dependiendo de la evolucin y la nueva informacin disponible de la enfermedad de sars-cov-2. figura 3. slo en caso de que se vayan a producir aerosoles (administracin de nebulizaciones, ventilacin mecnica, fibrobroncoscopia, intubacin orotraqueal, aspiracin de sercreciones, etc) se requiere mscara ffp3 (con vlvula de exhalacin) y gafas de proteccin completa. se recomienda que todo el material sea desechable.si no se dispone de manga larga, utilizar la bata de aislamiento (verde) y aadir un delantal de plstico.knowledge on lower respiratory-tract infections in infants, especially bronchiolitis, has changed over the years mainly owing to recent etiological, clinical and prognostic findings (turunen et al., 2014; midulla et al., 2010) . viral bronchiolitis is a common disease whose epidemiology is linked to seasonal changes in respiratory viruses. the possible link between climate factors, air pollution and increased childhood morbidity and mortality from respiratory diseases is therefore of interest (darrow et al., 2014) .previous studies have reported associations between air pollution and reduced lung function, increased hospital admissions, increased respiratory symptoms, and asthma medication use (simoni et al., 2015; jalaludin et al., 2004) . although many consider the first years of life an especially vulnerable period, few studies have focused on the effect of meteorology and air pollution on acute viral respiratory infections in this age group (sgala et al., 2008; vandini et al., 2013) .in this prospective study, we sought to assess the association between acute viral bronchiolitis, weather conditions and air pollution in infants hospitalized for bronchiolitis over 10 years in rome, italy. to achieve this, we analyzed epidemiological data for 14 respiratory viruses detected in nasal washing samples and mean weekly data for weather conditions (temperature, relative humidity and wind velocity) along with air pollutant concentrations from the regional agency for environmental protection (arpa) network (http://www.arpalazio.net/ main/aria/doc/pubblicazioni).we reviewed the clinical records of prospectively enrolled consecutive full-term young infants with a diagnosis of acute viral moderate-severe bronchiolitis, hospitalized in the pediatric emergency department, "sapienza" university, rome, italy during 10 annual seasonal epidemics (october-may) from 2004 to 2014 (cangiano et al., 2016) . the university hospital of the "sapienza" university is a tertiary care and teaching center and is the second major pediatric hospital in rome, italy. it covers about 1/3 of roman children, in particular those who live in the center-and northern-east areas of the city.bronchiolitis was defined as the first acute lower-airway infection in children < 1 year old, with a history of upper respiratory tract infection followed by acute onset respiratory distress with cough, tachypnea, chest retractions and diffuse crackles on auscultation (midulla et al., 2010) . exclusion criteria were underlying chronic diseases (including cystic fibrosis, chronic pulmonary diseases, congenital heart diseases and immunodeficiency) and prematurity. patients' demographic and clinical data were collected through the clinical records and from a structured questionnaire filled in by parents on enrollment.the research and ethics committee of the hospital policlinico "umberto i" approved the study protocol and the written informed consent that was acquired from parents of each child at admission in the study.as part of our routine, from 1 to 3 days after hospitalization, all infants underwent nasal washing obtained by injecting a 3-ml sterile saline solution into each nostril and collecting the respiratory specimen with a syringe. all samples were delivered on ice within 1-2 h to the virology laboratory and on arrival, if needed, were vortexed with beads to dissolve mucus. a 200 l aliquot for each respiratory specimen was subjected to nucleic acid extraction with the total nucleic acid isolation kit (roche diagnostics, mannheim, germany), and eluted with 50 l of the supplied elution buffer. a panel of either reverse transcriptase (rt)-pcr or nested pcr assays was developed for detecting 14 respiratory viruses, including rsv, influenza virus (iv) a and b, human coronavirus (hcov) oc43, 229e, nl-63 and huk1, adenovirus, rhinovirus (rv), parainfluenza virus (piv) 1-3, human bocavirus (hbov) and human metapneumovirus (hmpv), as previously described (pierangeli et al., 2008) .meteorological data for the geographic area of rome (temperature,c ; relative humidity, % and wind velocity, km/h) were recorded from rome meteorological stations. data were analyzed by year of recruitment, based on the date of admission and on each patient's residential address; data were summarized as mean values for each week during the 10-year study. the air quality network, owned and operated by arpa lazio (http://www.arpalazio.net/main/aria/doc/pubblicazioni), currently has 41 chemical measuring stations, some also equipped with meteorological sensors, distributed across five provinces with 21 municipalities. the arpa network routinely measured air pollutants. we retained data from the urban background monitoring sites only. these sites are representative of ambient air pollution in the rome area. we obtained mean weekly concentration data for the day of admission, from the urban background monitoring sites nearest to each child's home address. we chose "a priori" to use mean exposure during the week before admission since the incubation period of bronchiolitis is very short (less than 5 days).the following air pollution data were recorded: sulfur dioxide (so 2 ) concentration (measured using ultraviolet fluorescence); nitrogen dioxide (no 2 ) concentration (measured using chemiluminescence); carbon monoxide (co) concentrations (measured using a continuous analyzer based on the spectrophotometric technique of non-dispersive absorption of infrared radiation around 4600 nm according to the law of lambert-beer) levels of suspended particles with an aerodynamic diameter less than 10 and 2.5 m (pm 10 , pm 2.5 , measured by absorption of beta radiation); ozone (o 3 ) concentrations (measured using spectrophotometric technique of absorption, by ozone molecules, of ultraviolet radiation of 254 nm wavelengths); benzene (bz) concentrations (measured using gas chromatography technique).continuous variables are expressed as arithmetic means  sd or median (iqr) depending on their distribution and as the number and percentages for categorical variables.pearson's correlation was used to correlate the number of rsv-or rv-positive cases with meteorological variables and mean air pollutant concentrations.overdispersed poisson regression model was fitted to evaluate the impact of individual characteristics and environmental factors on the probability of a being positive rsv (fig. 1 ). in this model the dependent variable was the monthly count of positive rsv and independent variables were the air pollutants no 2 , pm 10 , so 2 , bz and o 3 . in order to adjust for seasonality of the rsv infection, time trend was modelled by introducing the effect of month. as recommended by cameron and trivedi (cameron and trivedi, 2009 ) we used robust standard errors for the parameter estimates to control for mild violation of the distribution assumption that the variance equals the mean. robust standard errors and p-values were calculated accordingly.in order to evaluate if the proposed model captures the seasonality of the phenomenon we analyzed the residuals of the model according to the autocorrelation plot and the partial autocorrelation-the ljung-box test applied to the residuals of the model has been involved in order to reveal significant autocorrelations. we test the goodness of fit of the overall model using the residuals deviance. the residual deviance is the difference between the deviance of the current model and the maximum deviance of the ideal model where the predicted values are identical to the observed. therefore, if the residual difference is small enough, the goodness of fit test will not be significant, indicating that the model fits the data.all computations were done using r statistical software (http:// www.r-project.org/).the viral peak was determined as the 3 months with the highest r. nenna et al. environmental research 158 (2017) 188-193 number of virus detections.during the 10 years of the study (2004) (2005) (2006) (2007) (2008) (2009) (2010) (2011) (2012) (2013) (2014) , 190,950 children referred to the pediatric emergency department of policlinico umberto i of rome, with a mean of 19095 children/years and the mean of 1.6% children/years were admitted to hospital for bronchiolitis. we enrolled 723 consecutive infants hospitalized for bronchiolitis. their mean age was 78.5  58.1 days (range 7-359 days), 16% of the infants were < 1 month old, 77.5% between 2 and 6 months, and 6.5% between 6 and 12 months. fifty-five percent were male. the mean weight at hospital admission was 5.2  1.4 kg. of the 723 infants, 74% had siblings, 3.2% of infants and 59.2% of siblings were attending school. a total 76.5% infants were breastfed and in 18% parents' questionnaire answers mentioned maternal smoke exposure.the nasal wash specimens tested positive for respiratory viruses in 351/723 infants enrolled. among the 351 virus positive infants, pcr detected alone rsv in 234 (66.8%) infants, rv in 44 (12.5%), hbov in 11 (3.1%), and hmpv in 12 (3.4%). in 3.1% of infants, pcr detected other viruses: piv-1 in 1 children, piv-3 in 4 children, hcov in 2 children, and iva in 4 children. specimens from 39 recruited infants (11.1%), contained more than one virus: rsv plus hbov in 13 children, rsv plus rv in 13 infants, rv and hmpv in 4 infants, rsv and hmpv in 2 infants, rsv and iva in 2 infants, rsv and piv-3 in 1 infant, hbov and hmpv in 1 infant, hbov and piv-1 in 1 infant and rv plus piv-3 in 1 infant. specimens from only one infant contained 3 viruses: rsv plus rv and hmpv.the most frequently detected pathogen was rsv. in all 10 years studied, rsv-bronchiolitis epidemics had a winter trend and activity peaked from december to february. the second most frequently detected pathogen was rv, detected throughout from october to may with no peak activity (cangiano et al., 2016) .data comparing weather conditions in the 10 annual epidemics showed that median (iqr) temperature and relative humidity differed during the months when rsv activity peaked (december-february) and during the other months (october-november and march-may) [tem-peraturec = 8.4 (7.2-9.4)vs 11.2 (8.7-14.4), p < 0.001; relative humidity % = 81.0 (77.8-86.0) vs 77.0 (74.3-83.0); p < 0.001). wind velocity remained unchanged (km/h = 8.1 (7.3-10.0) vs 9.2 (7.0-10.0). the number of rsv-positive infants correlated negatively with temperature (r = 0.46, p < 0.001), and positively with relative humidity (r = 0.36, p < 0.001). no correlation was found with wind velocity.of the 723 infants enrolled, data for 556 were included in the rome arpa network weekly pollution analysis and data for 167 were excluded: 118 children not included because they came from the rome province and 49 children who lacked address data. thus for air pollution analysis we used data from 556 infants.as expected, there was a high correction between temperature and most air pollutants. the trend of the pm 10 remarkably resemble the trend of the temperature, with higher level of pm 10 corresponding to the lower level of temperature. a similar behavior can be noticed for all the other air pollutants (see fig. 3 ) with the exception of benzene (fig. 2 ) whose level is not so clearly related with other factors.air pollutant concentrations differed significantly during the peak rsv months and the other months. except for o 3 , many air pollutants increased more during the months when rsv activity peaked than during the other months (october-november and march-may, table 1 ).the only significant predictors are the month, the total number of patients (considered as all the infants enrolled in the study) and benzene level (fig. 2) . table 2 shows the parameter estimates, the robust standard error, the corresponding 95% confidence intervals and the p values.the seasonality component, accounted by the effect of the month, was strongly significant: indeed, the model highlights that the number of rsv positive infants significantly increase in january, february, march, april and december. for example, the expected log count increases by approximately 2 in january and in december and 1.5 in the other months. fig. 2 shows the 95% confidence intervals of the month effect on the expected log count: as expected, a decreasing trend is evident with a significant decrease of the rsv positive patient in spring and in autumn. with respect to the pollutant, table 1 shows a significant association between the number of rsv positive infants and benzene concentration: the expected log count of rsv positive patient for a one-unit increase in the benzene level is 0.17, i.e. with a benzene level of 2.5, the expected count of rsv positive patient would increase of about 54% ((exp(0.17365 * 2.5)  1.) * 100) = 54%. another important factor for the number of rsv positive patient is the total number of patient: for number of patient equal to 10, the expected number of rsv positive patient would increase of about 50% ((exp (0.04083 * 10)  1) * 100) = 50%.in order to evaluate if the proposed model captures the seasonality of the phenomenon (the association between pollution and rsv), we analyzed the residuals of the model. the autocorrelation plot and the partial autocorrelation were not significant. the ljung-box test applied to the residuals of the model revealed that these autocorrelations were not significant (p value = 0.9507) (see fig. 4 ). insofar as, the goodness of fit test of the model has been evaluated according to the residual deviance criterion. therefore, if the residual difference is small enough, the goodness of fit test will not be significant, indicating that the model fits the data. when applied to the proposed model, the test leads to a pvalue = 0.11 allowing us to conclude that the model fits the data reasonably.in this prospective study enrolling infants hospitalized for acute viral bronchiolitis during 10 seasonal epidemics in rome, italy we found a strong correlation between peak rsv activity (but not peak activity for the other 13 viruses investigated) and cold temperatures, higher relative humidity and air pollutants, especially benzene. this new information clearly linking weather condition, various traffic-derived pollutants and the timing of epidemic, comes from a large series of infants, hospitalized over a long study duration.the most frequently detected respiratory virus in our hospitalized infants was rsv (64.5% alone and 9.5% in association with other viruses as others have reported (lanari et al., 2002) . in italy, as in other countries with temperate climates, rsv causes epidemics during the winter months (vandini et al., 2013; meerhoff et al., 2009) . the second most frequent virus we detected was rv (identified in 15.7% alone and 3.6% combined with other viruses), and the third was hbov (3.8% alone and 5.2% combined with other viruses). in our study neither rv nor hbov peaked during epidemics and were diagnosed with the same frequency throughout the epidemic seasons.during the 10-year study, as other studies in european countries confirm (forsberg et al., 2012; d'amato, 2011) , mean temperature and relative humidity in rome progressively increased, but these increase has not been reported in terms of regression. these climate changes could be influenced by numerous environmental factors, including air pollution. the meteorological data differed notably during peak rsv activity and during the other months, temperatures being lower and relative humidity higher. rsv transmission is inversely related to temperature (vandini et al., 2013; lanari et al., 2002) . climatic factors could promote viral infections in different ways: for example, by increasing virus survival, affecting their climate-dependent behavior (for example, greater persistence in closed and crowded ambient settings when temperatures remain low) and by acting on the pediatric population's immune response (cui et al., 2015; tang and loh, 2014; paynter, 2015; du prel et al., 2009; nelson and demas, 1996; haus and smolensky, 1999; vandini et al., 2015) . rsv is more active at cold temperatures because cold makes the virus' lipid envelope more resistant and therefore more stable in the secretions through which it is transmitted (vandini et al., 2013 (vandini et al., , 2015 cui et al., 2015; tang and loh, 2014) . equally important, cold temperatures might drive populations indoors where rsv spreads more readily (vandini et al., 2015; barnett et al., 2005) . crowding, along with a suitable susceptible population of newborns and infants, could trigger seasonal rsv epidemics. another major climatic factor that in our study correlates with rsv activity is relative humidity. many studies have underlined the association of increased humidity and rsv, hcov and piv3 detection rates (cui et al., 2015; vandini et al., 2015; welliver, 2009) . these observations support a previous finding that high average humidity (80%) favored virus survival (cui et al., 2015; tang and loh, 2014; vandini et al., 2015) . the other climatic factor we investigated, mean wind velocity, had no correlation with rsv-positive cases nor did it correlate with the peak rsv activity. previous studies disagreed on whether wind velocity influenced seasonal changes in rsv activity (cui et al., 2015; vandini et al., 2015) . in our infants hospitalized for bronchiolitis, neither temperature, relative humidity nor wind velocity affected rv detection.when we analyzed the association between the two major detected viruses (rsv and rv) and meteorological conditions and air pollutants pearson correlation showed that rsv-positive cases correlated positively with bz, no x , so 2 and particulates (pm 10 and pm 2.5 ) and negatively with o 3 . the inverse correlation with rsv receives support from the finding that o 3 values peaked in the summer whereas the other air pollutant concentrations we tested increased in the autumn-winter season (october-february). conversely, no correlation was found between air pollutants and the number of rv-positive cases. these new findings obtained by analyzing the correlation between bronchiolitis from 14 viruses and environmental factors during 10 seasonal epidemics corroborate and extend current knowledge on how environmental factors influence rsv seasonal bronchiolitis. moreover, we decided to correlate the week of admission because the incubation period of bronchiolitis is very short, less than 5 days, and we thought that it was the week more closely correlated with times of virus acquisition, incubation, replication and clinical registration (sgala et al., 2008) . ample evidence has already shown a positive correlation between air pollutants and morbidity for viral respiratory infections and other respiratory conditions such as asthma and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (lin et al., 2005; dong et al., 2011) . in another study conducted in italy, vandini et al. (2013) examined rsv bronchiolitis in bologna (italy) during three consecutive winter seasons and obtained a similar correlation between rsv peak and mean temperature but no correlation with relative humidity concentrations. unfortunately, they studied the correlation only between rsv and pm 10 and pm 2.5 . as we did, they found a correlation between rsv and evaluated pollutants but in the regression model, neither were predictive factors for rsv bronchiolitis. conversely, sgala et al. (2008) showed a short-term relationship between air pollutants and daily numbers of emergency hospital consultation and hospitalization for bronchiolitis among children < 3 years of age in paris.we found that the most predictive air pollutant for rsv peak activity, at constant temperature and relative humidity, was benzene. the main anthropogenic sources of air pollutants are mobile and stationary combustion sources, derived from traffic density, thermoelectric data are expressed as median and interquartile range (iqr). sulfur dioxide (so 2 ), nitrogen oxide and dioxide (no x , no 2 ); carbon monoxide (co); ozone (o 3 ); benzene (bz); levels of suspended particles less than 10 m (pm10) and less than 5 m (pm2.5) in aerodynamic diameter. a mann-whitney u test. nenna et al. environmental research 158 (2017) 188-193 system, incinerators, industrial systems and domestic heating (kampa and castanas, 2008) . benzene is released to our environment from industry effluents, combustion of gasoline and other petrochemicals used in our cars and industries. evidence from experimental models has suggested the pathogenetic mechanisms underlying benzene-induced toxic damage to the respiratory airways causing apoptotic changes in the parenchymal components of the lungs (weaver et al., 2007; bahadar et al., 2014) . common cellular mechanism by which most air pollutants exert their adverse effects is their ability to act directly as lipid and protein pro-oxidants or as free radical generators, promoting oxidative stress and inducing inflammatory responses (menzel, 1994; rahman and macnee, 2000) . to bring air pollutants down we probably need to obtain more reliable information on the state of the air we breathe and to implement preventive maneuvers to minimize exposure to pollutants. although the possible pathogenetic mechanisms underlying the potentially clinical risk factors go beyond our objectives in this study enrolling infants hospitalized for acute viral bronchiolitis, our findings may indicate future research directions. infants and children differ strongly from adults in toxicokinetics. their peculiarity and vulnerability consist of lower body weight, higher relative liver weight, higher ratio between body surface and body weight, smaller lung caliber, higher particle deposition in the respiratory tract, and generally immature lungs (heinricha and slama, 2007; samuel, 1973) . our findings suggest that one way to reduce rsv bronchiolitis morbidity in infants may be to develop simple and inexpensive patient-centered measures that reduce infant exposure to indoor and outdoor pollution. for example, parents should avoid taking infants into polluted environments r. nenna et al. environmental research 158 (2017) 188-193 in cool and humid weather conditions. a limitation in our study is that we were unable to obtain significant correlations for coinfections or for some viruses that we detected less often than rsv and rv. other limitations are that we had no information on travel history (outside of roma) of the children before their hospital admission and we could examined acute background air pollution exposure alone. moreover, we have no data on outpatients with mild bronchiolitis and on patients from other hospitals in rome. another important issue is that, insofar as infants spend the majority of their time inside the home, some variables such as ventilation, gas or oil heating or cooking, may be significant unmeasured confounders or causative agents. finally, this study was focused only on the meteorological and pollution exposure during the week before admission; it would be interesting in future studies to evaluate the maximum value for the meteorological and pollution data within the week before the admission.factors responsible for increasing the risk of virus-related bronchiolitis in italy probably include meteorological factors and chronic traffic-derived air pollution combined.following the sars (severe acute respiratory syndrome) outbreak in 2003 and an increasing string of extreme weather events, the people's republic of china emergency response law was adopted in 2007, and in 2008 the weather emergency management system established new protocols for weather monitoring, warning and information sharing (yang and mao, 2012) . importantly, the china meteorological administration developed an information sharing mechanism that also includes the xinhua news agency, the ministry of industry and information technology, and the state administration of radio film and television. thus, full use of newspapers, radio and television, as well as new media outlets, has become a vital part of chinese disaster communication (yang and mao, 2012) .weather information has been an important resource utilised by chinese newspapers to attract readers ever since their first appearance in china in 1882 (ye and chen, 2011) . to meet the needs from agriculture, industries, commercial www.elsevier.com/locate/pragma expectations between teacher and student. culpeper et al. (2008) found that while mentors in general seem to value optionality and solidarity-enhancing talk over directive and authoritative discourse in their interactions with foreign language assistants, mentors in france favoured solidarity-enhancing discourse, coupled with a directive style, to a greater extent compared to those in england. similarly, through the linguistic analyses of vignettes, decapua and dunham (2012) examined the types of advice-giving and the relational strategies employed by students preparing to be teachers of young children. they concluded that the type and frequency of components of advice-giving vary according to topic, that the components interact with each other to set the tone of advice, and that relational strategies work to mitigate the threatening force of advice-giving, promote bonding and good relationships between the advice-giver and seeker. both angouri (2012) and vehvilinen (2012) have focussed on ''problem-solving'' interactions featuring direct questions. vehvilinen found that finnish supervisors use question-answer sequences (i.e. question preface) to allow the student's knowledge and perspective to surface; insight that in turn can be used to tailor the advice, and thus minimise the lilkelihood of the advice falling on deaf ears.in health-related or medical contexts, heritage and sefi (1992) and heritage and lindstrm (2012) observed home visits with first-time mothers. heritage and sefi observed that mother-initiated advice is infrequent and could be in the form of straightforward question-answer sequences or in a more cautious and indirect way by describing a state of affairs as problematic. advice-giving initiated by health visitors, on the other hand, occur much more frequently and often in a stepwise way. interestingly, tully et al. (1997) found that consumers and pharmacists have different ideas concerning who needs advice and when and how advice should be given. zayts and schnurr (2012) studied how medical providers interactionally manage the tension between giving advice and ensuring patient autonomy, typically by framing their responses as giving information rather than giving advice. they are also more direct when patients' advice-seeking is framed as questions around other aspects than the medical decision. based on their research of two internet advice columns on sexual health, harvey et al. (2013) claimed that advice-giving is a delicate act to carry out because of ''inescapable messages of authority, expertise and intimacy in advice' ' (decapua and huber, 1995:128) and is thus generally considered to be face-threatening in anglo-western contexts (goldsmith and macgeorge, 2000; vine, 2004) . therefore, they proposed the importance for advice-givers to think about linguistic strategies to mitigate the threatening force of advice-giving. harrison and barlow (2009) showed that the face-threatening aspects of advice-giving can be successfully addressed in peer-to-peer advice-giving through indirect strategies, such as indirect suggestions framed as declaratives or rhetorical questions. this study, which focused on online self-management for people with arthritis, made a special note of the use of personal narratives, which serve both as an indirect strategy for giving advice, and a positive politeness strategy demonstrating shared concerns and experiences.advice-giving in call-in radio advice programmes is commonly framed by mitigation strategies; for example, hosts tend to avoid direct language forms by adopting the same terms as clients when describing a third party's advice (hudson, 1990; pudlinski, 2005) . they also use hedges (e.g. maybe) and the imperative, when inquiring about a further more specific safe course of action, and refer to an expert when clients implicitly seek advice. decapua and dunham (1993) revealed that hosts prefer to use explanations, elaborations and narrations to help clients' advice-seeking. going further, pudlinski (2012) described how hosts can pursue advice that is initially rejected by the caller. he identified three sequential and functional strategies: interrogating for information about the caller's own experiences, supporting the advice with additional accounts, and expressing concern or worry to further extend advice pursuit. drescher (2012) identified some cultural differences after comparing patterns of advice-giving in phone-in programmes in french and cameroonian cultures, while emmison and firth (2012) concluded that the delivery of advice is often constrained by particular institutional practices. in an investigation of online spanish peer-to-peer advice-giving, placencia (2012) identified guidance as the core move. in her study of advice letters on the internet, locher (2006) noticed an overall preference for hedging as a face-saving strategy. morrow (2006) analysed online british texts and uncovered an informal style of advice-giving, expressing positive regard and solidarity. following this study up, morrow (2012) turned to japanese advice-giving on the internet. he observed that generally advice is framed in polite question forms and that advice-givers often take an empathetic stance by recounting their own experiences and using first person plural volitional forms.there have been a number of studies on forms and strategies of advice-giving in chinese, though none in the context of weather. wu (2008) posited that advice-giving strategies are determined by power, reflecting the power relation between the advice-giver and the advice-receiver, while fang (2005) found that the advice-giving forms or strategies students use vary with power and social distance, as well as solidarity. comparing advice-giving in chinese and english, lu (2014) discovered that chinese speakers think about the social power relationship much more than english speakers. yan (2011) revealed that most advice-giving speech acts in forum response posts on the issue of love on the internet are direct and are framed in the form of imperatives (see li, 2009 for a historical account of syntactic, semantic and pragmatic forms of advice-giving). similarly to waring (2007 waring ( , 2012 , ren (2013) found that adviser-initiated advice is enacted in a typical sequence: pre-advising (i.e. making comments, inquiring, etc.), advising, and post-advising (i.e. providing explanations). the pre-and post-advising act to build an appropriate environment for the act of advising and enable the advising act to be performed successfully.to our knowledge, there are no previous studies of advice-giving in newspaper weather commentaries, nor of whether the discourse differs depending on the newspaper source and/or on the weather being reported. this study aims to fill this gap, thus offering new insights into how newspapers can give effective instructions or advice. to this end, we investigated advice-giving in two chinese metropolitan newspapers, and sought to answer the following research questions:are there differences in degree of advice-giving between different newspapers (i.e. does one newspaper provide more advice), and is advice-giving linked to the type of weather? how is advice-giving distributed in the weather commentaries? is it sequential? is the distribution governed by weather and choice of newspaper? what are the themes of advice-giving? what is the typical mood choice for advice-giving? is the choice of mood dependent on newspaper source and weather conditions? how are interpersonal relationships displayed in advice-giving through the use of addressing terms, such as shmn and pngy u?two beijing local metropolitan newspapers were chosen for this study: beijing morning post(bmp) and beijing evening news (ben). these are consistently ranked among the top most widely circulated metropolitan newspapers in beijing, according to soubaoad, a national newspaper website that displays information about top national and local newspapers, including the distribution ranking list (soubaoad, 2012 (soubaoad, , 2013 . bmp sells about 340,000--500,000 copies per day (baidu encyclopedia, 2014a) and ben distributes some 1,000,000--1,200,000 copies per day (baidu encyclopedia, 2014b) . the e-versions of these newspapers are accessible online and are identical to their counterpart hardcopies.moreover, both newspapers have half or sometimes even an entire page dedicated to weather forecast information, which includes coloured maps, fact tables and weather indices, as well as special commentaries. the content of the commentaries not only cover basic weather information about the temperature, the sunshine and the wind, but also include comments and advice based on analysis of weather tendencies, meterological knowledge and traditional chinese medicine (tcm).we selected weather commentaries published between 22 march 2012 and 28 february 2013. the number of words in each text ranged between 447 and 629 words in bmp and 303 and 1127 words in ben. altogether 80 texts were chosen (see appendix), 40 from each newspaper. of these 40 selected commentaries, 20 texts were about ordinary weather, i.e. the kind of weather that would usually be expected during the month and season in question, and the other 20 texts were from days featuring extreme weather events.for ordinary weather, all texts were exactly matched for publication date. however, since some of the extreme events occurred on a weekend when ben does not publish weather commentaries, some of the extreme weather texts were from different dates (see appendix). the corpus covered the extreme weather events that happened from 20th march 2012 to 19th march 2013, namely two strong winds which were reported to have caused serious damage to public facilities and properties, a flood that killed 79 people (wang et al., 2013b) , an abnormally early snow storm (wang et al., 2013a) , as well as the unprecedented severe smogs in january 2013 (wang et al., 2014) .the following are typical examples of weather commentaries from the two newspapers. after each example, we will briefly outline the contents and structure of the text, as well as highlight examples of advice-giving.example 1 (from bmp)b ijng rqi le. qsh c ng g nshu shng, shmn pngy u z o ji jude y rqi, linr qiling, qxing shj y g ich mngqu de jnnin rqi shjin. rg u n l o biozh n, jngchng jnnin sh zi 9 yu 14 r y jsh shng zhur r de qi; rg u n xn biozh n, hid i tqin li ngtin, shng zhuw j y rqi. zu tin, nnjio gunxingti zud qwn yjng dido 12.1 8c, mnt ugu de zud qwn ddo 6 8c. ss qiy, l ngzho jngchng. b ijng jnnin de rqi shjin rg u n xn biozh n jsun, bjio ''zh n di n''; rg u n l o biozh n, z b chngnin rqi de 9 yu 5 r w n le 9 tin. h b ijng xish u zubn, b ifng db dq du yjng jnr qitin.jntin bitin duyn zhu nyn, xb h b ib y u lizhny , zugo qwn surn y u 25 8c, dn z ow n hish lingy shz. hiyo zhy jntin pngyun dq y u qngw, nngjind bji, jich yo mnxng.shungxir tinq zhnxn bcu, jb n dush qngtin, zugo qwn zi 26 8c--27 8c, shy wich y uwn. xizhu q, tin yu hu ynchn qli, k nng hiy u zhny , zi zhu'r xli, bitin qwn y hihu zuhutdo jny u 21 8c, jingwn mngxi n. qitin zi b ijng sh h ndu n de, shmn pngy u k yo zhujn shjin xi ngshu chqi m ijng, ynwi b xi oxn, yndng jiyo kuim jibin de lile.tinq lingle, qibio y ti le, y uxi pngy u fxin h oxing ''ti''gu le t u, zhzh ng shhu, bfng xu nz dmich, mgu, h ngsh , lu bu, shnzh d ng shw li bngmng qngl chngwi.[word-by-word rendering: beijing has entered autumn. actually from feeling, citizen friends have earlier already felt it has entered autumn. consecutive days autumn cold, meterological data also give definite this year entry autumn time. if according to the previous standard, the city of beijing this year is on 9th month 14th day, i.e. last sunday entered autumn; if according to the new standard, should be advance two days, last friday entered autumn. yesterday dawn, nanjiao observatory lowest temperature already dropped to 12.1 8c, mentougou lowest temperature dropped to 6 8c. cold autumn feeling, cover the city of beijing. beijing this year autumn entry time according to the new standard relatively ''punctual''; according to the previous standard is than usual year's entry time 9th month 5th day late 9 days. with beijing hand-in-hand accompany, northern large areas all already entered autumn.today the day cloudy turn to overcast, west and north have thunder shower, the highest temperature although is 25 8c, but morning evening still cold enough. also pay attention today morning the plain area has light fog, visibility is not good, drive showly.two-day weekend day really not bad, basically all sunny days, the highest 26 8c--27 8c, suitable outing for fun. from next week, sky again overcast, maybe has shower attack tuesday, the day temperature also sit on slide drop to only 21 8c, drop temperature obvious. autum in beijing is very short, citizen friends should seize time enjoy early autumn beautiful views, because if not careful, cold winter will speedy horse strengthen whips arrive.weather cold, autumn fat has affixed, some friends find seem to have over-affixed fat, this time, had better choose barley tea, papaya, sweet potato, raddish, or hawthorn to help clear stomach.][english translation: beijing has entered the season of autumn. actually, [my fellow] citizen friends must have already felt the arrival of autumn from the cool air in recent days. also, the meteorological data [of these days] has actually predicted the definite arrival date of this autumn: 14th september, i.e. last sunday, if according to the previous standard; last friday, if based on the new standard. at dawn yesterday, the temperature at nanjiao observatory dropped to 12.1 8c, with the lowest reaching 6 8c at zhaitang in mentougou district. the autumn cool filled the city of beijing. autumn arrived in beijing relatively on time this year according to the new standard, but it was 9 days late if compared to the usual arrival date, i.e. 5th september. like beijing, the majority of other northern areas [of china] have seen autumn, too.during the day today, it is going to be cloudy and then overcast later. a thunder shower will be expected in the west and in the north. although the highest is going to be 25 8c, it is chilly early in the morning and late in the evening. in addition, it is going to be a little foggy in the plain areas and the visibility will be low. drive slowly.this weekend will have two beautiful sunny days, with the highest ranging 26 8c--27 8c, and it is fit for a day out. from next week, it will be overcast. possibly there will be a shower on next tuesday and the temperature will drop to 21 8c. autumn is short in beijing. [my fellow] citizen friends had better take time to enjoy the early beautiful autumn, as the cold winter will arrive very soon.with the days getting cool, we have gained some weight. however, some friends may find themselves to have become overweight. in this case, it would be good to take some barley tea, papaya, sweet potato, radish, or hawthorn to help clear the stomach.] (bmp, 19th september 2014) this bmp text starts with an overview of recent weather tendencies, focussing on autumn in beijing and its similarity to previous years. there is also a review of the previous day's weather and in the recent days. the next part is the forecast, i. e. the weather prediction for today. before moving on with a second forecast that predicts the weather over the weekend, the writer includes the advice: ''drive slowly''. this advice is brought on by the forecasted fog and low visibility. there is further advice given after the weekend forecast, namely to enjoy the autumn as winter is coming, as well as the more implied advice: ''it is fit for a day out''. the final section is the ending (i.e. independent additional advice), which details dietary advice for readers who have gained too much weight.in sum, the sequence of components in this text is: (1) overview, (2) review, (3) overview, (4) forecast, (5) forecast, and (6) ending. noticeably, the two overviews and the review are interwoven and recursive, making it hard to separate these components. we count four instances of advice-giving in this example that occur in the two forecasts and in the ending.jntin yngli le gu qng jiq yli zuwi mngmi de ytin. y dz o, tiyng gnggng zhng dng lom , z oz o de shngg ng. gu qng w ibashng de fnghrl, g i chngji li le g wnm i shugng.ynggung suh o, z oshng de qwn k bgo. gnj b ijng qxingj xiox, jntin z oshng nnjio gunxingti zud qwn 6.4 8c, chngq dbfn dq de qwn 5 8c8 8c, jioq z gngd, tbi sh b ib dq, bsh o dfng jingdo le 0 8c xi. suzhe ynggung zhjin fwi, do le w hu, jngchng de zugo qwn k y shngdo 20 8c yshung. cwi, jntin de nng jind h kngq zhling y h n zhngq, fichng shh rnmn chxng.mngmi de qigung zi mngtin hijing chx wich. bgu, chngji guhu, jngchng shngkng de yncng jing zhjin jihu. ync, zi jihu shngbn dytin, b nsh jing zhu nwi duyn tinq, suhu jtin, l otiny de xnqng y b tih o, li ns ynchn, tinq yduyn h yntin wizh , zugo qwn zi 19 8c-23 8c zhjin. do le zhur, tinq y uwng zhu nqng.[word-by-word rendering: today welcome national holiday since the brightest day. early in the morning, the sun grandpa compete to be the most hardworking, early be on duty. on the national day holiday tail mild wind beautiful sun, give the holiday a beautiful end.sunshine though good, morning's temperature was not high. according to beijing meteorological bureau, today's morning nanjiao observatory's the lowest temperature was 6.4 8c, most urban areas' temperature was 5 8c--8 8c, suburb was even lower, especially the northern area, most places dropped to 0 8c below. as the sunshine growing stronger, when it is after noon, urban area highest temperature will rise to 20 8c above. in addition, today's visibility and air quality both are good, very suitable for people to go for an outing.bright sunny autumn tomorrow will continue. however, long holiday after, urban area above cloud will gradually grow thicker. thus, after holiday work first day, this city will be cloudy, following days, the sky will be mainly cloudy and overcast, the highest temperature will be 19 8c--23 8c. on sunday, it will hopefully turn sunny.][english translation: today embraces the most beautiful day of the national day holiday. the sun shines brightly since the very early morning. the gentle breeze and lovely sunshine give the national day holiday a beautiful conclusion.despite the beautiful sunshine, the temperature was not gentle in the early morning. according to the beijing meteorological bureau, the lowest temperature was 6.4 8c at nanjiao observatory and 5 8c--8 8c in most other urban areas. the temperature was even lower in the suburbs, especially in the north, even dropping to below 0 8c. as the sunshine grows stronger, the highest will rise up to above 20 8c. adding to this beautiful sunshine, the wonderful visibility and quality of air make it a lovely day out.tomorrow it will continue to be a bright sunny autumn day. however, the clouds will grow thick in the sky over the city. thus, on the first working day after the holiday, it will be cloudy. most of the following days will be mainly cloudy and overcast, with the highest temperature ranging 19 8c--23 8c. hopefully it will turn sunny on sunday.] (ben 6th october 2014) in this ben example, the overview of recent weather tendencies is strikingly short, before moving on to reviewing the morning's weather (which is in the past as ben is usually published at noon and reaches its readers in the early afternoon). thereafter, a forecast focusing on the weather for the afternoon. here, implicit advice is offered: ''a lovely day out''. finally, a second forecast.in sum, the sequence in this text is: (1) overview, (2) review, (3) forecast, and (4) forecast. there is only one instance of advice, located with the first forecast.hasan's generic structure potential (1984, 1985, 1996) was utilised to categorise the advice themes in the texts and to analyse the structural organisation, where special attention was paid to the frequency and location of advice. the uam corpustool (o'donnell, 2012) was also used to assist in the statistical annotation of texts.based on the assumption that genre is a type of discourse, hasan investigated the structures of genres, which led to her proposed theory for genre analysis: generic structure potential (gsp). according to hasan, the gsp of a genre consists of obligatory elements and optional elements, which appear in a linear sequence. the function of optional elements may account for the variations in the texts that belong to the same genre. in this case, a single gsp can generate a large number, or if recursion is involved, an infinite number of actual structures with the variable realisation of each element. in other words, a potentially infinite number of actual texts can occur as exemplars of the same genre. hasan's gsp allows a systemic and consistent description of generic structures of instances of texts in terms of the elements included. since some elements may be common to different genres, and the more elements two genres share, the more similar they will be.weather commentaries seem to be made up of four types of components (or moves): overview (lead-in statements summarising the general weather conditions and tendencies --past and future), review (statements regarding the most recent weather), forecast (predictions of future weather), and ending (independent additional advice). as the two examples in section 2.2 show, advice-giving can occur in the forecast or the ending, and example 5 further below illustrates how advice can be incorporated into the overview component of the weather commentaries. our examples also show that a component can occur more than once in a commentary. as our analysis in section 3.2 below will show, we found that most of the time the overview and review components are so intertwined that is not always possible to separate them. we therefore merged these two into one component: overview.qualitative analysis was carried out in stages. first, the authors agreed an initial coding scheme, before the second author, who is a native speaker of chinese, coded all the data independently and proposed a revised coding scheme based on the finding of four advice components. next, the second author translated examples of commentaries for the first author to code. the authors discussed differences and similarities in coding practice, and further examples were translated verbally and scrutinised. thereafter, the coding scheme and a multitude of examples were presented to discourse analysts fluent in chinese, and feedback was received. finally, the final coding scheme was agreed, and all the data was re-coded by the second author and jointly agreed with the first author.quantitative analysis was carried out with the use of spss 19. analysis was predominantly descriptive. since the total number of words in each article of ben varied considerably, all word counts were normalised by a 500-word factor to make the data comparable and meaningful (rundblad, 2007) . thus, all counts presented in this paper are normalised counts. where the distribution of a particular linguistic feature was normal, we used a univariate anova to determine whether the use of that feature was dependent on the newspaper source and/or on the type of weather.the annotation of the texts (table 1) revealed that both newspapers tended to offer more advice for extreme weather than for ordinary weather and that during ordinary weather, bmp, in particular, gave comparatively little advice. a univariate anova confirmed that while newspaper source had no effect independently or in an interaction (newspaper*weather), the type of weather did significantly predict higher advice-giving for extreme weather (f (1,76) = 11.413; p < 0.01).advice-giving is a general strategy used in weather commentaries to interact with and attract readers. according to an online investigation conducted by china weather web (2011) among 3589 people in beijing, up to 45% of those surveyed pay close attention to the effect of weather on general health and certain diseases; 25% care about weather for travel and outdoor activities; 25% are concerned with weather information for proper (thick or thin) clothing. thus, the chinese public very much welcome experts' instructions on how to cope with and prepare for different types of weather. during extreme events, we can presume an even greater awareness (for both the author and the reader) of the link between weather and well-being and the effect that can have on human daily life and social activities.the significant increase in the number of advice instances during extreme weather events in both bmp and ben demonstrates the importance both newspapers attach to weather-based advice-giving in emergencies. in china, it is very common that the general public do not have sufficient knowledge as to how to cope with extreme weather events. for instance, during the disastrous flood on 21 july 2012, which was the worst flood in over 60 years, many of those who were caught in the heavy rain panicked because they had never experienced such a big flood before (wang et al., 2013b) . in addition, the rescue system collapsed. as a result, 79 people in total died in the flood, including a driver who was drowned because he stayed in his car and was subsequently unable to escape, as well as two young university students who chose to swim across a flooded bridge. it is possible that if they had benefitted from professional instructions or advice before the event, they might have stood a better chance at survival. it is quite likely that events such as this one have (or will) gear the chinese newspapers to offer more substantial weather-based advice during extreme events in the short-term and climate change in the long-term.analysis revealed an uneven distribution of advice-giving ( table 2 ). the first possible place for advice-giving was in the overview. the overviews focussed typically on recent weather conditions, and/or typical weather tendencies for this season. thus, the overview included statements about what we should expect in the next few days based on seasonal information, which is different to the forecast. the overview also functioned as an introduction to the rest of the commentary, and the advice found in this component was often more generic, being based on seasonal patterns (see example 5 below). not surprisingly, only a few instances of advice-giving were found in the overview component.as the main purpose of the weather commentaries is to predict the weather, it is not surprising to find that the forecast is the most prominent, and compulsory, component in the commentaries. it is also in the forecast that we found the majority of advice and instructions, all related to the future local weather. as illustrated in example 3, some authors prefer to start the weather commentary with the forecast, especially in the case of extreme weather, and most often with related advice coming directly after.example 3ynhn tinq hizi chx, jntin sh jnydun shjin l de ''dg '',gng bny u sw j b ifng, fnghn xioyng jing chude w men bint shnghn. jntin sh zhuli, miy u shnmo tbi shqng de pngy u bfng xu nz zhi zi jizhng, byo chmn idng le.[word-by-word rendering: cold weather still is continuing, today is recent time ''low valley'', also accompanied by 4 or 5 force scale north wind, wind cold effect will blow us all over grow cold. today is saturday, not have what special business friend had better choose stay at home, don't go out to suffer being frozen.][english translation: the freezing weather continues and the temperature today is going to reach the ''bottom'' of recent times with the strong north wind of 4 or 5 force scale. the biting cold will make us feel freezing all over. today is saturday. those friends who have no special business to attend to had better stay at home. don't go out to suffer the piercing cold.] (bmp, 8 december 2012)as illustrated in fig. 1 the mean number of instances of advice in the forecasts was noticeably higher in ben during extreme weather (m = 3.89). when querying whether newspaper source and/or the type of weather impacted inclusion of advice here, we found that both factors impacted usage (weather: f (1,76) = 9.024; p < 0.01; newspaper: f (1,76) = 4.268; p < 0.05). no interaction was found. in other words, ben used more advice in its forecasts, regardless of the type of weather, and during extreme weather events both newspapers increased their advice-giving significantly.the sharp increase we saw earlier for commentaries as a whole during extreme weather events was probably linked to the rise in advice in the forecast component of the commentaries. with regards to ben, it is now clear that this newspaper generally featured greater degrees of advice in the forecasts. this might be due to the self-positioning of ben writers. ben writers seemed to portray themselves as experts or authorities who are supposed to possess more meteorological knowledge --which was typically found in the forecast component -than ordinary people, and who are responsible for offering relevant advice to lay people. another popular place for advice-giving was the ending. the popular topics here were a healthy diet, health care and disease prevention during the specific season in question. the advice in the ending was more independent from its adjacent prior weather content. example 4 illustrates two instances of ending advice.example 4zu tin, nnjio gunxingti zugo qwn 23.3 8c, shq qwn 24 8c. . .xizhu jing chx dufng, yj zhu'r zhusn qwn jing y u su xi jing. chntin tingn wzo, r ngy shnghu . y ngshng zhunji g i dji tujin zupngfn de lu b, chlu b nng shnq jinwi, qngr xiotn, zuh o shngch, hik zu lu btng h; cwi tujin lin' u h xh ngsh. . .. . .[word-by-word rendering: yesterday, nanjiao observatory highest temperature 23.3 8c, city area temperature 24 8c. . .next week will continue many winds, predict tuesday wednesday temperature will a little drop down. spring weather dry things dry, easy catch fire. take care health experts give everybody recommendation the most ordinary radish, eat radish can regulate qi protect stomach, clear heat clear sputum, best raw eat, also may do radish soup drink, also recommend lotus roots and tomatoes. . .][english translation: yesterday, the highest was 23.3 8c at nanjiao observatory and 24 8c in the urban area. it will remain windy next week and the temperature is predicted to drop slightly on tuesday and wednesday.it is dry in spring. the drought makes it likely for heat accumulation inside our body. health care experts recommend ubiquitous radish for internal heat reduction. radish can help to relieve stagnation, regulate qi, strengthen the stomach and clear away the internal heat and sputum. for the best effect, the radish should be eaten raw or as radish soup. [health experts] also recommend lotus roots and tomatoes. . .] (bmp, 7 april 2012) in terms of the distribution of instances of advice in the endings, it is worth noticing that while bmp followed what now seems to be the general weather advice pattern with more advice during extreme events, ben supplied no advice at all in the endings during extreme weather. this non-use is probably due to advice in the ending usually being relaxing health care suggestions or recommendations that very often are independent from the rest of the commentary (example 4). such advice would not serve the serious or emergent tone of advice-giving favoured in ben, especially not during adverse weather. in sum, the typical gsp of chinese weather commentaries could be summarised as: (overview)^forecast^(ending). 1 in this linear structure, the overview and the ending are optional elements; whereas the forecast is obligatory. we discovered that advice often occurs after information related to future weather in each component. although, we were forced to merge overview and review into one component, it is worth mentioning that we found no instances of advice in this component that related to past weather. possibly this was because such advice would be useless or that the relevant advice had already been included in the forecast component the day before.the texts in the corpus demonstrated a rich variety of advice in terms of the themes. one major theme for advice content was concerned with the distinctive variety of the local climate as illustrated in examples 5 and 6.example example 5 was advice for the spring, when frequent blustery winds and drought might lead to advice-giving to guard against the risks of falling objects from high buildings and forest fires. moreover, example 6 illustrates that the unreliable temperatures in the spring generated another advice theme about proper dressing to guard against the well-known sharp gaps between the highest and the lowest temperatures.example 6jnq b ijng l ng kngq hu dng pnfn, gufng rsh du, qwn qf d, shmn pngyu yo gnj tinq binhu jsh zngji n yw, qinwn bi zho ling.[ in summer, medical advice is of great importance to those who are susceptible to certain diseases that are liable to occur in this season as shown in example 7. instructions concerning self-protection in thunder storms and floods are of extreme value to save life, especially in extreme weather as illustrated by example 8.example 7jntin ''rf''. . . ftin sh xnx egu nbng duf jje, yo zuh o fngfn.[word-by-word rendering: today ''rf''. . .hot summer days are cardiovascular diseases many happen season, should be ready prevent.] jntin, . . .c ng bngw n zh yjin hu chxin dy rzh, bng ddo boy lingj. qxing zhun ji txng dji, jntin w njin byo wi ch. . . byo jud b ijng boy zhngh o chnzhe zhum tol jngchng chmn y uwn, shjshng zhc jingy bj zh ngg hub i dq.. . . shungxr duhu xiy , y ling ji od, by wich.[word-by-word rendering: today, . . .from early evening to night will occur big rain like torrent, and reach storm scale. meteorological specialists advise everybody, today evening do not out go. . . . . . do not think beijing storm use weekend escape city go out have travel, actually this time rain cover whole north china area. . . weekend will rain, rain amount big, not suit out go.][english translation: today, it will be raining in torrents from early evening until late at night, and the rain will grow into a storm. meteorological specialists put forward the following advice to everyone: do not go out this evening. . .. . . do not think of escaping from the storm by leaving the city for fun over the two-day weekend, because the storm will actually cover the whole northern area of china and it will not be suitable for any outdoor activity.] (bmp, 21 july 2012)example 9 illustrates some possible contents of advice-giving in winter. the freezing cold, the biting wind, the drought or heavy snow render it necessary to warn against risks of co poisoning due to incorrect coal heating, to provide medical advice against diseases that are liable to recurrences, or to offer instructions about how to drive skilfully on slippery snowy roads.example 9jingxu dili lmin shhu, xi oxn jish, zh dng jingd xngsh sd, ld chjinj, zi zh gndo tngxng sh, byo c ng yngj chdo choch, y chrk u jnk nng tqin c iq ji ns cush, bmi n trn binhun chdo hu jshch ji ns de qngkung fshng, fngzh zochng chling d hu shkng huzh zhuw i shg.[[word-by-word rendering: snowfall bring road slippery, be careful driving, take initiatives slow down driving speed, lengthen car distance, on the main road, do not from the emergency lane pass car, approaching exits, do best in advance take slowing down measures, avoid abruptly changing lanes and abruptly braking slow down speed situations take place, prevent cause car slip out of control or bump into another car accident.][english translation: the snow makes the roads slippery. be careful while driving. take initiatives to slow down. keep your distance with other cars. while driving on the main road, do not use the emergency lane to pass another car. when approaching an exit, do your best to slow down in advance to avoid changing lanes and braking abruptly, which may lead to losing control of the car or bumping into another car on the slippery road.] (ben, 14 january 2013)even in autumn, for the most beautiful, sunny, flowery days, advice about mood adjustment is popular as shown in example 10.example 10jntin qifn, zg fngqi bi jlio, y uq qiy linmin sh, hu rng rn xnx dlu, chxin biling de g nju. su y pngy umen yo jsh tioji xnl, qngsng lgun, byo zxn fnn o, yfng biqi.[word-by-word rendering: today the autumnal equinox, from ancient times meet autumn sad lonely, especially autumn rain continuous, can make people emotion low drop, occur sad feeling. so friends should in time adjust emotion, relax optimistic, not yourself look for sorrow, prevent feel sad autumn.][english translation: today is the autumnal equinox. when autumn is beginning to approach the end, people tend to feel sad and lonely in autumn as depicted ever since ancient times, especially so on continuous rainy days. apart from local climates, tcm was found to be another source of inspiration for advice-giving. tcm theorists believe that body functioning, health maintenance and even dietary habits have close connection with various weather conditions and with the seasons or times of the year. active adaptation to the change of the seasons in terms of life style and diet can help keep fit and prevent diseases. the failure to do so may result in health decline and eventually in diseases. accordingly, the corpus revealed that health care or dietary habits based on tcm were popular topics in advice-giving as shown in example 11.example 11jntin ''dngzh'', qifng xi oxu . . .. . .zhngy rnwi y ngshng yng yndzhy. xu hu ynshngyngshui, hnxizhng, zuy shng rn yngq, ync y ngshng yng y y ngjngxru wizh . . .. . .yng z oshuw nq; yzhu yng shdng, zhy b onu n. . .. . .y uq t u jng bi b, ji ob de fnghn y fngzh yngq shu do s n shng.[word-by-word rendering: today ''the winter solstice'', happen to be small snow. to sum up, the climate and tcm contributed to the abundant contents of advice. the topics of advice ranged from clothing, driving, hiking, sunscreening and outdoor activities, to precautions against bad weather, warnings of potential risks, instructions for prevention of certain diseases caused by certain types of weather, and tips on health care or diet according to different times of seasons in a year.imperatives were found to be a very popular mood choice in general. as table 3 highlights, the writers in both newspapers tended to use more imperatives to give advice during extreme weather conditions than on ordinary weather days. a univariate anova supports this observation (weather: f (1,76) = 9.847; p < 0.01). we did not find a significant effect for newspaper, nor an interaction between the two factors.the usage of imperatives on days of extreme weather might be linked to the writers' self-positioning in relation to putative readers. high usage implies that the writers were consciously or unconsciously considering themselves in a superior position in terms of professional expertise. as illustrated by advice 1--5 in example 9, the commentators present themselves as weather forecast experts or authorities on weather who have much more professional knowledge compared to the reader. thus, the writers tend to use imperatives to offer direct advice, especially in the case of extreme weather, to make the advice sound more authoritative, more reliable and especially more urgent. this leaves the impression that the addressee has no other option but to follow the advice for the sake of the addressee's own benefit or safety. 3.5. shmn (citizen) and pngy u (friend) as addressing termsanother important linguistic pattern was the mixed use of the high-status vocative shmn and the equal-status vocative pngy u (table 4 ). it should be noted that, technically, these two terms are not mutually exclusive; in fact, several instances of combined use was found in the corpus.as shown in example 12, shmn indicates that the writer had a higher social status or more power than the reader. by addressing the reader with shmn, the writer was above all positioning himself as an expert or authority on weather, for the purpose of making the advice-giving more authoritative or reliable so that the audience would feel secure or confident to follow the advice.example in terms of usage (table 4) , shmn was particularly favoured by ben, and again we can see an increase in use for extreme weather. this means that there was a greater tendency for the weather commentators from ben to make themselves sound more authoritative, and with it, the advice they gave.unlike shmn, the use of pngy u (pl. pngyumen = friends) indicates an equal relationship, i.e. equal social status, power or authority (example 13). as friendship means equality, trust, and intimacy, the use of this term creates the feeling of closeness or intimacy between the writer and the reader, which might definitely have a positive effect on the reader's willingness to accept and act upon the advice.example 13jnchn zud qwn jnyu 5 8c, h bitin zugo qwn ch 15 8c, pngyumen bfng z ow n tiny, bitin ji ny. . . . . . qwn f nf de shji, b ojinzhunji txng pngyumen yo jngt hxxt ng jbng, xnxugu nbng h fngshljbng ff.[ complementing our results for shmn, we found for pngy u that bmp shows a greater preference (table 4) . interestingly, this usage pattern was not affected by whether the commentary was reporting on ordinary weather or an extreme weather event. this may indicate that bmp writers defined themselves in an equal position to their readers, which logically should not change depending on the weather. alternatively, they might make a conscious choice to keep the writer-reader status equal during extreme weather in the hope that ''friendly'' advice is more palatable, ensuring greater compliance with the advice.de beaugrande (1997) has claimed that weather report texts have low informativity. therefore, advice-giving in such texts should, by extension, be even more limited in content, as it is just a minor part of this genre. this study sought to address differences and similarities in advice-giving and advice themes between two different beijing newspapers, and in particular asked whether the type of weather commented on affected the degree of advice-giving. our results reveal that weather related advice-giving was abundant, especially during extreme events. in terms of content, the variety of climate facts and the vast reservoir of medical theories on health contributed to a large number of advice themes in the weather commentaries: from ordinary weather to extreme weather, from daily activities to special occasions, from everyday health care to prevention of seasonal diseases. thus contrary to de beaugrande's presumption, chinese weather forecast texts are highly informative, with the quantity and quality of weather-related advice varying reliably and appropriately in accordance with the present weather.a second objective for the present investigation was to determine the distribution of advice-giving across the three structural components of weather commentaries, and whether the type of weather affected this. while many of the weather commentaries also contained an overview and an ending, it is the forecast section in the middle that dominates. this confirms that the main communicative purpose of these commentaries is to forecast the immediate future weather as well as to comment on the ''weather tendency'' of recent days. but this study also shows the prominent role that advice-giving featured here; in fact, the aforementioned increase in advice during extreme events could be traced to the forecast component. in addition, beijing evening news consistently featured more advice in their forecasts.finally, uses of imperatives and vocatives were investigated in order to determine how the journalists positioned themselves in relation to their audience. during extreme events, the number of imperatives used by both newspapers increased significantly. this usage pattern suggests that during times where potentially life-saving advice was communicated, the journalists sought to establish themselves as experts, thus further stressing the relevance of the advice in their commentary. for beijing evening news, we found a similar pattern for the high-status vocative shmn, where again the journalists utilised this linguistic device to display authority more during extreme events. beijing morning post, on the other hand, showed a clear preference for the equal-status addressing term pngy u regardless of the type of weather. while appropriate use of high-status addressing terms can increase the feeling of authority or reliability of advice, the use of equal-status addressing term can add credit to the intimate writer-reader relationship. this could, in turn, increase the acceptability of potentially face-threatening advice.combining our findings for these addressing terms, we conclude that writers, who were prone to take an authoritative stance when giving advice to their readers, did so to an even greater extent during extreme weather; whereas writers who position themselves ''with'' their readers, used more imperatives but did not change their vocative preferences. since the purpose behind advice-giving tends to be to urge compliance with the advice, we can assume that the different writers have deliberately chosen to pursue compliance by these different means. it is very possible that the writer's selfpositioning to the putative readers affects the willingness and likelihood to comply with the advice. future studies should attempt to investigate the extent to which readers' compliance with advice is determined by the use of vocatives and imperatives. crown-like morphology. in ecov, the hemagglutinin-esterase protein forms smaller spikes on the membrane. there are two fully transmembraneous structural proteins referred to as the membrane and small membrane proteins in the coronavirus virion (weiss and leibowitz 2011). epidemiological information for ecov is sparse at this time and either extrapolated from close-related coronaviruses such as bcov or largely based on non-published preliminary observations (table 4 .1). clinical cases are either sporadic or epizootic. collective data from three veterinary diagnostic laboratories in the usa (idexx laboratories, inc., west sacramento; animal health diagnostic center (ahdc), cornell university, ithaca; real-time pcr research and diagnostics core facility, university of california, davis) shows that the overall number of ecov qpcr-positive cases is steadily (oue et al. 2011 (oue et al. , 2013 pusterla et al. 2013; fielding et al. 2015) . outbreaks have been reported in riding, racing, and show horses and less frequently in breeding animals. one hypothesis, behind the lack of large numbers of documented clinical cases at larger breeding farms, is the frequent circulation of ecov between asymptomatic young animals and adult resident horses, conferring protection against clinical disease in adult horses. preliminary epidemiological observations support a feco-oral route of transmission. this is supported by a recent experimental study in which three 9-to-10-month old japanese draft horses were successfully infected via naso-esophageal intubation using fecal material from a previously characterized ecov-infected horse (nemoto et al. 2014) . two out of the three draft horses developed clinical disease, and all of them shed large amounts of ecov in feces. bovine coronavirus (bcov) is closely related to ecov and considered a pneumoenteric virus, causing not only enteric disease but also mild upper respiratory signs (saif et al. 1986; tsunemitsu et al. 1999; trvn et al. 2001; o'neill et al. 2014) . recently, a french group screened 395 feces and 200 respiratory specimens submitted to a veterinary diagnostic laboratory for the presence of ecov (miszczak et al. 2014) . the samples had been collected from foals and adult horses suffering from mild respiratory or enteric disease. in that study, the researchers found ecov by qpcr in a total of 12 samples (11 fecal samples and one respiratory specimen). in a study testing nasal secretions from 2437 horses with signs of fever and/or acute onset of upper respiratory tract infection submitted to a commercial diagnostic laboratory in the usa from january 2013 to december 2014 for the detection of common respiratory pathogens, ecov was detected by qpcr in only 17 (0.7 %) horses (pusterla et al. 2015b ). collectively, both these studies show that ecov is infrequently detected in nasal secretions from horses with infectious upper respiratory tract disease, suggesting lack of tropism for ecov to the respiratory epithelium. in the three experimentally infected japanese draft horses (nemoto et al. 2014) , nasal secretions were ecov pcr positive during the time of peak fecal shedding, but it could not be determined if this was due to nasal replication and shedding of the virus or from environmental contamination from the positive feces or both.morbidity of ecov in affected herds is variable and has been reported to range between 10 and 83 % (oue et al. 2011 (oue et al. , 2013 pusterla et al. 2013; fielding et al. 2015) . mortality rates have been reported to be low (oue et al. 2011 (oue et al. , 2013 pusterla et al. 2013) , although a mortality rate of 27 % was recently reported by fielding et al. (2015) in american miniature horses. mortality has been associated with endotoxemia, septicemia, and hyperammonemia-associated encephalopathy (pusterla et al. 2013; fielding et al. 2015; giannitti et al. 2015) . a large number of documented clinical cases will be needed to determine the effect of various host, viral, treatment, and environmental factors on outcome, as well as the identification of risk factors associated with risk of morbidity. similar to bcov the incubation period is short, and clinical disease develops between 48 and 72 h after either natural exposure or experimental infection (nemoto et al. 2014; fielding et al. 2015) . clinical signs persist for a few days to 1 week and generally resolve with minimal supportive care. occasionally, clinical signs can last longer as recently identified in two ecov cases from florida that experienced colic and systemic illness for 14 days (mittel personal communication 2016). shedding post-experimental infection as documented by qpcr ranged between 10 and 12 days (nemoto et al. 2014) . fecal shedding of ecov under natural conditions has been reported to range between three and 25 days (pusterla et al. 2013; fielding et al. 2015; mittel personal communication 2016) . it is not clear how long ecov will persist in the environment and potentially act as the source of infection. it is reasonable to draw comparisons from other coronaviral pathogens such as severe acute respiratory syndrome-associated coronavirus (sars-cov) which has been shown in vitro to persist for 2 days in hospital wastewater, domestic sewage, and dechlorinated tap water while 3 days in feces, 14 days in pbs, and 17 days in urine at 20 c. however, at 4 c, the sars-cov could persist for 14 days in wastewater and at least 17 days in feces or urine (wang et al. 2005) . enhanced replication of the virus in feces in the environment during colder weather is one possible explanation for the apparent higher prevalence of test-positive fecal samples and clinical disease during cooler weather. ecov disease can occur in one or more horses on a farm with no recent exposure to new horses (divers, personal communication 2016). hypothetically this might be explained by indirect ecov transmission by non-equine animal species or that colder weather might allow increased fecal replication of the virus from a chronically infected horse.clinical information collected from 16 outbreaks during the time period of november 2011 to december 2014 on a total of 406 horses showed that 122 horses (30 %) showed clinical signs (pusterla et al. 2013; pusterla, personal communication 2016) . the main clinical signs reported were anorexia (98 %), lethargy (89 %), and fever (84 %). the rectal temperature of febrile horses ranged from 38.6 to 41.0 c (median 39.9 c). changes in fecal character, ranging from soft formed to watery consistency ( fig. 4.1) , and colic were observed in 25 % and 18 % of horses with any clinical signs, respectively. gastrointestinal signs are generally preceded by systemic signs of anorexia and fever ( fig. 4.2) . these results are in agreement with recent outbreaks from japan in adult draft horses reporting that anorexia and pyrexia were the main clinical signs, while specific gastrointestinal signs were observed in about 10 % of affected horses (oue et al. 2011 (oue et al. , 2013 . in 3 % of infected horses, signs of encephalopathy including circling, head pressing, ataxia, proprioceptive deficits, nystagmus, recumbency, and seizure have also been reported (fig. 4.3; pusterla et al. 2013; fielding et al. 2015) .although clinical disease is apparent in 10-83 % of ecov-infected horses, one needs to take into account that some horses remain asymptomatic after infection. asymptomatic infection is defined as lack of clinical disease in a horse from which ecov is detected in feces by qpcr. the percentage of asymptomatic horses during an outbreak of ecov has been observed to range between 11 and 83 % (pusterla et al. 2013 ). the antemortem diagnosis of ecov relies on the presence of clinical signs compatible with ecov infection, neutropenia, and/or lymphopenia, the exclusion of other infectious causes, and the molecular detection of ecov in feces. the consistently observed hematological abnormalities with ecov infection are leukopenia due to neutropenia and/or lymphopenia. the blood work from 73 clinical cases with suspected ecov infection showed that the total nucleated cell count ranged from 520 to 7800/l (median 3580/l; reference interval 5000-11,600/l; fig. 4.4) . the white cell blood count in the 73 diseased horses showed leukopenia in 25 %, neutrophilia in 66 %, and lymphopenia in 72 % of the horses. the neutrophil and lymphocyte counts in these horses ranged from 180 to 5070/l (median 1650/l; reference interval 2600-6800/l) and 80-3580/l (median 1090/l; reference interval 1600-5800/l), respectively. both the complete blood count (cbc) and white cell differential were unremarkable in only 11 % of the horses. additionally, less consistent hematological abnormalities included the presence of band neutrophils and shifts in monocyte counts (most typically shifting from a low or a normal count to a high normal or rebound monocytosis). occasional rebound fig. 4.3 head pressing in an adult thoroughbred gelding with clinical ecov infection leukocytosis due to neutrophilia and monocytosis during the disease course and recovery was observed as well. cbc abnormalities are expected to resolve within 5-7 days as long as no complications associated with the disruption of the gastrointestinal barrier occur. biochemical parameters may be unremarkable, but elevation of total and indirect bilirubin due to partial or complete anorexia, electrolyte changes consistent with enterocolitis, transient elevation of liver enzymes, and renal parameters suggestive of prerenal azotemia have been observed in some of the cases. it is judicious to measure blood ammonia in horses with suspected ecov infection and concurrent signs of encephalopathy. fielding et al. (2015) reported on a case of severe hyperammonemia (677 mol/l; reference interval 60 mol/l) with encephalopathic signs that subsequently died. hyperammonemia associated with ecov infection is likely due to increased ammonia production within or absorption from the gastrointestinal tract due to gastrointestinal barrier breakdown. an increase in enteric ammonia production could also be the result of bacterial microbiome changes associated with ecov infection.isolation of ecov in human rectal adenocarcinoma cells, although difficult, has been previously reported (guy et al. 2000; oue et al. 2011 ). the need for costeffective and timely detection methods has restricted the diagnosis of ecov infection to direct demonstration of coronavirus antigens or specific nucleic acids in biological samples. historically, coronavirus detection in feces had been based on negative-stain em and antigen-capture elisa (davis et al. 2000; guy et al. 2000) . however, the sensitivity and specificity of these diagnostic modalities have not been evaluated, and detection may be unsuccessful if viral particles are not present in sufficient numbers. sensitive laboratory diagnosis of ecov is through fecal quantitative pcr (qpcr). a recent study evaluated the overall accuracy of qpcr and determined 90 % accuracy between clinical status and pcr detection of ecov in various outbreak populations (pusterla et al. 2013 ). the authors have documented a few cases of ecov infection, which tested qpcr negative during early disease. these few horses ended testing qpcr positive on a 24-48 h recheck fecal sample. it is hypothesized that during peracute stages of infection or when diseased horses experience gastrointestinal stasis due to colic, there are not enough viral particles in the feces to be detected. the recommendation is to retest fecal matter in a suspected index case at a later time point or collect multiple samples for pooled testing. viral kinetics of ecov in feces from experimentally infected horses showed that horses began to shed ecov rna in their feces at 3 or 4 days postinfection and continued shedding virus until 12 or 14 days postinfection (nemoto et al. 2014) . peak shedding is generally seen on day 3 to 4 following the development of clinical signs (fig.  4.2) , and qpcr detection of ecov in naturally infected horses can last for 3-25 days (pusterla et al. 2013; fielding et al. 2015) . interestingly, the fecal viral load measured by qpcr in foals (up to 6 months) appears to be lower compared to horses older than 12 months of age, although the difference is not statistically significant (p = 0.307). this observation suggests that viral replication in the gut is comparable (leutenegger, personal communication 2016) between foals and older horses. in human coronavirus infections, viral load is a strong prognostic indicator for clinical outcome and mortality (hung et al. 2009 ). a similar observation has recently been reported for ecov (fielding et al. 2015) . the viral load that is shed in humans infected with coronavirus is associated with polymorphisms of genes involved in innate immunity, an individual's genetic makeup, and immunologic host response to the virus (chen et al. 2006 ). in addition, coronavirus strain variations can influence the replication ability and viral load as shown with feline coronavirus (fcov) which exists in two genotypes: a benign feline enteric coronavirus genotype (fecv) with low replication competency in enterocytes and a highly virulent feline infectious peritonitis virus (fipv) with an enhanced ability to replicate in different cell populations (chang et al. 2012) . single-point mutations on the spike gene are responsible for dramatic changes in cell tropism, replication competency, and clinical manifestations.necropsy cases of suspected enteritis should have feces or gastrointestinal content tested by qpcr for ecov and other gastrointestinal infectious agents. further, formalin-fixed intestinal tissue samples can also be tested by immunochemistry and direct fluorescent antibody testing using bcov reagents (giannitti et al. 2015) .enteritis caused by ecov has been suspected in foals for many years, but the direct pathogenicity of ecov has only been described in one neonate (davis et al. 2000) . further, the high and similar frequency of ecov shedding detected in healthy foals and foals with gastrointestinal diseases from central kentucky suggests that ecov commonly circulates among young horses with subclinical disease (slovis et al. 2014 ).an interesting observation is that all ecov infections in foals with gastrointestinal disease were associated with coinfections, while most healthy foals infected with ecov displayed a mono-infection (slovis et al. 2014 ). this observation may indicate that in foals, pre-existing ecov infection may predispose to opportunistic secondary viral, bacterial, or protozoal infections as shown for enteric and respiratory coronavirus in other species (pakpinyo et al. 2003; srikumaran et al. 2007; brockmeier et al. 2008) .other hypothetical reasons for the lack of clinical signs in foals infected solely with ecov are that host factors such as the absence of specific receptor binding sites or presence of ecov-specific colostrally derived antibodies prevent the development of enteritis. however, in the vast majority of clinical adult horses, ecov is a mono-infection, demonstrated by enteric panel qpcr testing. this suggests a unique pathogenicity, coinfection with still unknown pathogens, or a distinct difference in immunological reaction between foals and adult horses toward the ecov infection similar to fcov. the development of a humoral, cell-mediated, or mixed immune response against the highly virulent fipv version of fcov distinctly influences the clinical outcome of the infection. interestingly, the clinical outcome of fipv has been correlated with a severe suppression of nk cells and t regulatory cells confirming earlier reports that a weakened cell-mediated immune response is associated with fatal fipv infection (vermeulen et al. 2013) .in adult horses, the pathology of ecov has recently been described in three equids (giannitti et al. 2015) . the ecov-infected equids displayed severe diffuse necrotizing enteritis with marked villus attenuation, epithelial cell necrosis in the tips of the villi, neutrophilic and fibrin extravasation into the small intestinal lumen (pseudomembrane formation), as well as crypt necrosis, microthrombosis, and hemorrhage ( fig. 4.5) . ecov was detected by qpcr in small intestinal tissue, gastrointestinal content, and/or feces, and coronavirus antigen was detected by immunohistochemistry and/or direct fluorescent antibody testing in the small intestine of all cases (fig. 4.6 ).most adult horses with clinical ecov infection recover spontaneously in a few days without specific treatment. horses with persistent elevated rectal temperature, anorexia, and depression are routinely treated with nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs such as flunixin meglumine (0.5-1.1 mg/kg bwt q12-24 h iv or po) or phenylbutazone (2-4 mg/kg bwt q12-24 h iv or po) for 24-48 h, as long as their hydration status is believed normal. horses with colic, persistent depression, and anorexia and/or diarrhea have been treated more intensively with fluid and electrolyte per nasogastric intubation or intravenous administration of polyionic fluids until clinical signs have resolved. additionally, antimicrobials and gastrointestinal protectants should be considered in horses developing signs of endotoxemia and/or septicemia secondary to disruption of the gastrointestinal barrier. while hyperammonemia-associated encephalopathy only occurs in a small percentage of horses with ecov infection, early recognition and treatment is associated with a positive outcome. horses with suspected or documented hyperammonemia are treated with oral lactulose (0.1-0.2 ml/kg bwt q6-q12 h po), neomycin sulfate (4-8 mg/kg bwt q8 h po), or fecal transfaunation and crystalloid fluids. immunization strategies have been best described in cattle for the prevention of winter dysentery infection using a modified-live commercially available bcov vaccine (welter 1998) . the use of bcov vaccine in horses for the prevention of ecov has to the author's knowledge not been investigated and cannot be recommended at this time due to the lack of safety and efficacy data and sporadic incidence of disease. cattle that recovered from winter dysentery after experimental infection with bcov maintained a very long-lasting bcov-specific serum (iga and igg) and local (iga) antibody response (trvn et al. 2001 ).the prevention of ecov infection should focus on the implementation of routine management practices aimed at reducing the likelihood of introducing and disseminating ecov at any horse-based premise (boarding facility, showground, veterinary hospital). due to the highly contagious nature of ecov, any horse developing or presenting with significant fever, anorexia, and depression with or without enteric signs (colic, diarrhea) should be strictly isolated until a diagnosis is secured. such an approach can prevent the quarantine of an entire horse population should ecov infection be diagnosed subsequently. once ecov infection is confirmed, strict isolation procedures and secondary quarantine of the source stable of the particular horse should be employed. postinfection testing of clinical cases should be done to prevent viral spread to other horses. at stables and farms, all newly arrived horses should ideally be isolated for at least 3 weeks. once an ecov infection is suspected or confirmed, strict biosecurity measures including footbaths and the use of personal protective equipment should be provided and adequately maintained for sanitary purposes. separate equipment, tack, bedding, and feedstuffs should be used in the care of these animals. grooms and other personnel should be instructed to work with these animals last in the course of their daily routine. exercise periods should be confined to a time when other horses are not present in the training areas, and riders should wear protective clothing and clean and thoroughly disinfect their boots, tack, and hands after contact with such animals. horses returning from shows or extended traveling events should be isolated according to their particular circumstances. all horse vans and trailers should be thoroughly cleaned and disinfected after use. equine coronavirus is susceptible to common disinfectants including sodium hypochlorite, povidone-iodine, chlorhexidine gluconate, phenols, quaternary ammonium compounds, accelerated hydrogen peroxide, and peroxygen compounds. the examination of at-risk horses for clinical signs of disease, including twice daily assessment of rectal temperature, remains the most effective tool in determining possible sources of virus introduction.the common cold is typically a mild upper respiratory tract infection (urti), with symptoms such as nasal stuffiness and discharge, sore throat, coughing and sneezing 1, 2 . urti are mostly self-limiting but can progress to lower respiratory tract infections (lrti) particularly in those with underlying conditions 3, 4 . adults suffer from a cold two to five times a year, and children can have 7-10 episodes annually 5 . numerous viruses can cause urti 6 . rhinoviruses (also called the common cold virus), are responsible for around 30% to 70% of all respiratory infections 5, 6 . since there are >100 different rhinovirus types, reinfections are very common 7 . coronavirus is the second most common cause of urti, causing 7% to 18% of cases 8 . other viruses including respiratory syncytial viruses (rsv) types a and b, human parainfluenza viruses (hpiv) types 1-4, adenoviruses, human metapneumovirus (hmpv) and influenza viruses a-c (iav, ibv and icv) also cause urti 8,9 . most respiratory viral infections have seasonality. in temperate regions, urti increase in frequency in autumn and spring, and remain raised through winter 8 . three theories have been put forward to explain viral seasonality. 1: the effect of climatic conditions on host resistance to infection (low vitamin d levels following lack of sun exposure can affect our ability to fight infection) 9,10 . 2: the effect of meteorological factors (e.g. temperature, humidity) on virus survival and hence on infection rates 9, 11 . 3: the effect of behavioural changes on transmission (e.g. spending more time indoors in close proximity to others or aggregation of susceptible children at schools during the colder months) 8,9 . there are other hypothesis such as diminished immune responses in a chilled host, or the reactivation of dormant viruses by chilling for the increase in urti during the colder months 12 .temperature has an important effect on viral activity, particularly in the case of enveloped viruses. in a guinea pig model, iav transmission is more effective in cold and dry conditions 13 . integrity of iav envelopes are better at lower temperatures, whilst in warm temperatures, the envelope becomes disordered and the virus susceptible to damage 14 . reports suggest that iav survival is better associated with absolute humidity (which measures the amount of water vapour in air regardless of the temperature) rather than relative humidity 15, 16 . an association of absolute humidity with hospitalisation due to influenza lrti (but not with lrti due to rhinovirus or rsv) has recently been reported 17 .most reports on viral seasonality concentrate on viruses that appear in the winter months, particularly influenza viruses and rsv. here we aim to determine the seasonality of all the respiratory viruses detected over 6.5 years, and identify any associations between changes in meteorological factors (such as temperature or humidity) and the appearance of different viruses across a whole year.between april 2009 and november 2015, rhinoviruses and adenoviruses were present throughout the year. rhinoviruses were present most days of the year (84.7%), followed by adenovirus which was present on 52.3% of the days. rsv (36.4%), hmpv (32.8%) and iav (32.7%) were present in around 1/3 rd of the year. hpiv-3 was present in 24.6% of days, followed by hpiv-1 (15.5%) and ibv (15.2%). hpiv-2 was present for the fewest number of days (6.5%) ( table 1) . children 10 accounted for 45% of the number of samples tested. the age groups of those tested are in table 2 . figures 1-3 plot the weather conditions and the virus prevalence during the study period. mean air temperature ( fig. 1) showed the expected seasonality, with a peak in july (14 c to 16 c) and a trough in january (1 c to 4 c). mean dew point (fig. 1 ) and the variation in humidity within a day (i.e. "humidity-range", fig. 3 ) showed a similar pattern. mean dew point was highest in august (10 c to 12 c) and lowest in february (2 c to 3 c). "humidity-range" was larger in the summer months (40% to 44%), and least variable in winter (15% to 18%). mean relative humidity however showed the opposite pattern, typically highest in december (88% to 91%) and lowest in june (70% to 74%). air pressure, wind speed and duration of daylight did not show clear seasonality (data not shown).many viruses have a definite seasonality (figs 1-3 ). rsv and iav have the largest seasonal peaks, appearing in november-december and december-january respectively. ibv (february-march), hmpv (march), and hpiv-3 (april-may) follow sequentially. ibv has a biennial distribution occurring every other year. hpiv-2 has two peaks, a major peak around october-november and a minor peak in july. a clear seasonality is not noticeable for hpiv-1. adenovirus and rhinovirus are present throughout the year. rhinovirus also has two peaks, a major peak around october-november and a minor peak in march. adenovirus has a smaller peak in march-april.temperature appears to have the greatest effect on viral seasonality (fig. 1) . the average temperature during the study was 9.2 c. in keeping with their year-round presence, the mean temperature when adenovirus and rhinovirus are present is closer to the annual mean at 8.8 c and 8.9 c respectively. a preference for colder temperatures is noticeable for rsv, iav, and ibv (6.3 c, 6.7 c and 6.3 c respectively). hmpv is most prevalent when the temperature becomes slightly warmer (7.4 c). hpiv-3 is the only virus to prefer above average temperatures (9.4 c). the average dew point was 6.0 c (fig. 1) . dew point has a similar pattern of relationship to viruses as temperature, with rsv (3.7 c), iav (3.9 c), ibv (3.3 c) and hmpv (4.4 c) preferring lower dew points. in contrast, hpiv-3 prefers a higher dew point (5.9 c). temperature and dew point are both significantly lower on days adenovirus, rsv, iav, ibv, and hmpv are present ( table 3) .the average relative humidity was 81% over the study period (fig. 2) . rsv (84%), iav (82.9%) and hpiv-1(82.6%) prefer higher relative humidity. hpiv-3 is more active when the relative humidity is lower (79.9%) ( table 3 ). the average variation in humidity within the day (i.e. "humidity-range") was 25%. "humidity-range" is significantly narrow for most viruses apart from rhinovirus, hpiv-2 and hpiv-3 (table 3) . rsv (21.8%) and iav (23.8%) prefer much narrower ranges then other viruses. hpiv-3, in contrast to the other viruses, appears to prefer a wide "humidity-range" (29.7%). though hpiv-2 seems to prefer raised humidity and a narrow "humidity-range", the difference in these variables between days the hpiv-2 is present or absent is insignificant (table 3) , potentially a reflection of the lower number of hpiv-2 cases. table 4 shows the results of the binomial logistic regression carried out to determine the effect of multiple metrological factors on virus activity. it demonstrates how a unit increase in each meteorological variable (either 1 c for mean temperature, or 1% for mean relative humidity or "humidity-range") alters the odds of a virus being present. only results that were found to be significant in the t-test were examined using logistic regression (i.e. rhinovirus and hpiv-2 were excluded). following the logistic regression, no significant association was found for hpiv-1. a mean temperature increase by 1 c reduces the odds of detecting adenovirus, rsv, iav, ibv and hmpv. adenovirus has a small decrease (2.8%), while rsv (17.3%), iav (13.7%), ibv (13%) and hmpv (9.9%) have larger decreases. a 1% increase in relative humidity reduces the odds of hpiv-3 being present (2.6%). a 1% increase in "humidity-range" also decreases the odds of detecting rsv (3.8%) and iav (1.7%). air temperature has a significant effect against the most number of viruses (n = 5) followed by "humidity-range" and relative humidity. the smaller effect of "humidity-range" in comparison to mean temperature may be due to an interrelationship between mean humidity and "humidity-range", since logistic regression takes multiple variables into account. figure 4a -c are the generalised linear models (glm), examining each virus' incidence across a year, averaged over the entire study period. this was compared with temperature over the same period. these models confirm a preference for colder temperatures for rsv, iav and ibv, and the timings of their seasonal peaks in and around 17 th december, 12 th january and 8 th february respectively. even though rhinovirus and adenovirus are present throughout the year, their glm's point to periods of increased activity (around the 5 th of march for adenovirus and around the 6 th november for rhinovirus). the glm corroborates hpiv-3's preference for warmer temperatures and its seasonal peak around the 4 th of may. finally, the glm suggests that hmpv peaks around the 11 th of march, hpiv-1 peaks around the 31 st october, and hpiv-2 peaks around the 15 th of november.from fig. 4a -c, a rough order of seasonal peaks is noticeable for the different viruses, beginning with iav in january. after this, there are peaks of ibv in february, hmpv and adenovirus in march, hpiv-3 in may, hpiv-1 in the end of october, rhinoviruses, and hpiv-2 in november, and ending with rsv in december. since temperature and humidity appear to have a significant impact on viral incidence when analysed individually, we table 3 . comparison of mean meteorological values on the days a virus is detectable or undetectable. ci: confidence interval, p value from t test. significant p values in bold. we measured the mean of each meteorological factor on days when we received positive samples for a given virus and on days where we did not receive a positive sample for that virus. hence a larger difference in means denotes that a virus is commonly present at an extreme of that meteorological factor: e.g. rsv more often being present when temperature is lower.scientific reports | (2019) 9:929 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-018-37481-y calculated the difference in mean temperature and humidity preferred by the different viruses and arranged them in the order as above (table 5 ). figure 5 represents this pattern visually using results from anova. starting with the seasonal peak of iav in january, there is a decrease in relative humidity from 82.9% to 81.7% in february, along with a decrease in mean temperature from 6.7 c to 6.3 c. these changes are associated with peaks in incidence of ibv. following this, relative humidity stabilises until march. however, the mean temperature rises significantly to 7.4 c in march corresponding with the peak in hmpv and then further to 8.8 c when a peak in adenovirus occurs. next, there is a further increase in temperature to 9.4 c along with a significant reduction in relative humidity to 79.9% in may when a peak in hpiv-3 is observed. a slight drop in mean temperature (8.4 c) and a significant increase in mean relative humidity (82.6%), from may to october is associated with a peak in hpiv-1. with mean temperatures being fairly constant, a further drop in relative humidity (81.6%) is associated with a peak in rhinovirus activity in november. a slight increase in humidity and a drop in temperature in november is associated with the presence of hpiv-2. a dramatic drop in temperature to 6.2 c and an increase in relative humidity to 84.0%, leads to the peak in rsv in december. then the cycle begins anew with iav in january.du prel et al. have reported that air temperature and relative humidity were important factors affecting viral seasonality in germany over a 6-year period 18 . as in our study, air pressure did not have a significant correlation. however, to our knowledge, this is the first study to report the association between meteorological conditions and the sequential appearance of viruses through the year and the effect of daily fluctuations in humidity (i.e. "humidity-range") on virus seasonality. our data shows that all the viral agents of urti show degrees of seasonal variation corroborated by the glm. based on similarity in structures and seasonality, there appear to be three groups. 1: non-enveloped viruses (rhinovirus and adenovirus) which are present throughout the year. 2: enveloped viruses with winter preponderance (rsv, hmpv, iav and ibv) and 3: parainfluenza viruses 1-3, enveloped viruses with a preference for warmer temperatures.in our study, non-enveloped agents are present year-round with some seasonal variation. adenovirus is known to be stable at high humidity levels (80%) 19 . since this is very close to the mean humidity for the study period (81%), this could explain the presence of adenovirus throughout the year. davis gw showed that adenovirus survival is better at high humidity levels (89%) than at lower humidity (50%) 20 . the peak in march found in our glm for adenoviruses is different to the december peaks observed for enteric adenoviruses in japan, though a peak in the winter months is seen when glm was drawn for 2011, a year when visual peaks for all viruses were present (supplementary fig. 1) 21 . our results show that adenoviruses prefer temperatures around 9 c. the inverse relationship between adenoviruses and temperature, corroborated by the lower or, is in keeping with the report from germany 18 .the year-round presence of rhinoviruses is similar to other reports 18, 22 , but the november peak found using the glm is later than the september-october peaks found in other research. however, as these two peaks correspond to when children go back to school, it is possible that meteorological factors do not solely account for these peaks. as rhinovirus is present throughout the year, there appears to be no significant difference in meteorological factors on days rhinovirus is present or absent. this is unlike the negative correlation with temperature and a positive correlation with relative humidity reported from germany 18 . whether this reflects the climatic conditions of the uk (being an island) compared to germany needs further evaluation.in our study, enveloped viruses with peaks in the winter months, had an association with lower temperatures, dew points and humidity-ranges, and preference for higher humidity. a significant relationship with low temperature, dew point and high relative humidity have been reported for rsv 23, 24 , iav 18,25 and ibv 25 . rsv and iav appear to be associated with lower temperatures, dew point, "humidity-range" and high humidity, however, by logistic regression significant association is only seen with lower temperatures and lower "humidity-ranges". ibv and hmpv which appear to be associated with lower temperatures, dew point, and "humidity-range", are only associated with lower temperature by logistic regression. this illustrates the complex interaction between different meteorological factors and hence the difficulty in understanding their specific effects on viral prevalence. ibv has a biennial pattern in edinburgh unlike the bimodal pattern from okinawa, a subtropical region in japan 26 . this suggests that local meteorological variation and factors affecting transmission and herd immunity might have a role to play in viral seasonality. other studies have also reported early spring peaks of hmpv, table 5 . comparison of mean temperature and mean humidity for different viruses. to determine which variable significantly affects transition from one virus to another, we calculated the differences in mean temperature and relative humidity of virus in column minus virus in row. e.g. a decrease in temperature from autumn to winter is associated with a change from hpiv-2 to rsv. t = temperature difference, h = humidity difference. results of anova. significant p values in bold (*p < 0.05; **p < 0.01; ***p < 0.001).change in mean temperature and mean relative humidity as individual viruses increase in activity across a year.results from anova. changes in mean temperature and mean relative humidity associated with sequential increase in activity of viruses between january and december (vertical lines -standard error of the mean). each data point corresponds to the mean temperature or mean relative humidity during the period when the virus is most active (e.g. iav in january).scientific reports | (2019) 9:929 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-018-37481-y association with low temperature 27,28 and raised relative humidity 29 . the biennial pattern for hmpv reported from germany 30 , austria 30 and sweden 31 , is not seen in our study. both rsv and iav appear when the relative humidity is high (83% to 84%) in edinburgh. others have reported variable findings, with some reporting a positive association 18 , and others reporting that enveloped viruses are better transmitted in low humidity 32 . for example, iha y et al. reported an inverse correlation with relative humidity for influenza a and a direct association with relative humidity for influenza b from japan 26 . since relative humidity is significantly associated only with hpiv-3 on logistic regression, the absolute value of humidity may be less important than fluctuation in humidity to the survival of the virus, particularly with viruses predominantly seen in the autumn and winter. it is possible that temperature and "humidity-range" could both have a combined impact on viral stability. in laboratory conditions, rsv survives for longer at lower temperatures, with infectivity falling rapidly as temperature increases. it is known that freezing and thawing leads to marked reduction in infectivity of rsv 33 . the preference for a narrow "humidity-range" and the change in relative humidity associated with changes in temperature 34 could explain why viruses are not stable in frost-free freezers which have to warm up regularly to prevent accumulation of ice in the freezer compartment. this needs further investigation. hpiv 1-3, despite being enveloped rna viruses, seems to prefer warmer temperatures (8.2 c-9.4 c) than the other enveloped rna viruses. due to its low incidence over our study period, the seasonality of hpiv-1 and hpiv-2 remain unclear though the glm suggests it is around october-november. there is a possibility of a biennial seasonality for hpiv-1, similar to that reported in the us 35 , but the trend remains unclear due to the low prevalence in our study. unlike hpiv-1 and 2, hpiv-3 increases when temperature is highest (9.4 c) and when relative humidity is lowest (79.9%). hpiv-3 also appears to tolerate large variations in "humidity-range" (29.7%). following logistic regression, hpiv-3 is associated with lower relative humidity. the seasonal peak for hpiv-3 in may 35 , its stability at lower relative humidity 36 and higher temperatures 28, 36 have been reported previously. our results indicate that most viruses prefer stable humidity (i.e. a lower "humidity-range") through the day. this requires confirmation from further studies.there are some limitations to this study. there is a possibility that the samples tested may include those who do not live in the catchment area. as the data is anonymised, it is not possible to determine whether the individuals are tourists or residents of the area. however, since all samples tested over the time period were analysed we believe that it is as representative as it can be. and, as the incubation period in viral respiratory infections is relatively short, it is unlikely that a viral infection will have originated abroad unless the patient was infected just prior to travelling to edinburgh, which should be a relatively small percentage of the overall population examined in this study. another limitation is that our data only represents those who sought medical care and were then tested. hence a time lag between the individual becoming infected, becoming symptomatic and subsequently becoming unwell enough to require medical attention is present. we have not corrected our data for incubation period or for duration of illness prior to sampling. we have analysed the proportion of positive results for each virus for each day. since proportion depends both on the number of positive results and on the total number of samples tested, it does not directly reflect the number of positive cases. we did not analyse coronavirus seasonality as it was not part of the routine testing panel during that period. since meteorological factors can be interlinked (e.g. dew point and relative humidity), examining the effects of individual meteorological factors on viral seasonality can lead to an incomplete picture 37 . we hence attempted to tease this out by performing logistic regression on variables which showed an association in the univariate analysis. since dew point was removed to prevent collinearity affecting the results of logistic regression, a new regression could in the future be performed to analyse the impact of dew point by removing temperature. there is a preference for stable "humidity-range" in most enveloped viruses except for hpiv-3. following a visual inspection of the minimum and maximum for each variable and comparison with virus seasonality patterns for different viruses, there appeared to be a relationship between "humidity-range" and viral seasonality. hence, we investigated the relationship between "humidity-range" and viral seasonality. it would be interesting to assess if a similar relationship is seen with other ranges such as "temperature-range", "dew point-range", etc in the future. relationship with other variables appears to be virus specific. therefore, we need models which can investigate multiple variables for each virus. changes in weather, human behaviour and the immune system can all affect an agent's seasonality and are all interlinked, as seen in the decrease in vitamin d in temperate climates due to the decrease in daylight hours (shorter/cloudier days). this also makes it difficult to describe the effect of weather on viral seasonality in isolation. finally, the glm used in this study has some disadvantages. the glm used does not account for the lag period between people becoming infected and then seeking medical help, and it also cannot model the multiple peaks seen for rhinoviruses. furthermore, average data was used to calculate the glm. this has led to some of the curves not being as smooth as when yearly data is analysed (for e.g. from 2011 a year when peaks were seen for all viruses ( supplementary fig. 1) ). the two steps seen in the curves correspond to the start and end date and probably reflect the lack of samples from january to march in 2009 and the month of december in 2015 as we have analysed data from april 2009 and november 2015. despite this, the average data over the 6.5 years is very similar to that from 2011. this helps confirm the seasonality for most viruses. there may be differences in individual years as can be seen for adenovirus which had a peak seasonality in december in 2011.nonetheless, our findings on temperature, humidity and "humidity-range" could potentially help explain the variation in seasonality between temperate and tropical regions of the world. iav is known to occur throughout the year in south east asian countries closer to the equator (warm, humid environment) 38 . the further you are from the equator, winter seasonality and or association with monsoon rains is notable 39, 40 . our findings on "humidity-ranges" need confirmation in a tropical setting. the order of occurrence of different viruses in tropical and temperate regions needs to be investigated in relation to the parameters highlighted. additionally, whether these peaks in viral activity change depending on the age of the population analysed could also be a topic for future research. in conclusion, non-enveloped viruses were present throughout the year. enveloped viruses were more seasonal starting from iav in january to rsv in december with other viruses in between. rsv, hpiv-3 and iav and ibv showing the clearest patterns. rsv, iav and ibv show a clear preference for colder temperature and dew point, as well as consistent humidity. in contrast, hpiv showed a preference for higher temperatures. additionally, hpiv-3 demonstrated a significant tolerance to low humidity. hence, meteorological factors like temperature, humidity and "humidity-range" have a significant effect on the incidence of the causative agents of the common cold and changes in meteorological factors could potentially predict the decline of one virus and the emergence of the next.meteorological data. following discussion with the met office, edinburgh gogarbank weather station, which captures data on an hourly basis, was identified as the most representative weather station for the catchment areas examined in this study. we downloaded meteorological data collected by the edinburgh gogarbank weather station from the met office weather observation website. hourly air temperature (c), air pressure (hpa), relative humidity (%) dew point (c), wind speed and daylight length measurements from 1 st april 2009 to the 30 th november 2015 were available. small periods of weather data were missing in october 2011 and june 2015 (reasons unknown). we calculated means and ranges for each variable for each day. we also created weekly and monthly aggregations of the data. as rhinoviruses and hmpv testing only started from the 4 th of september 2009, results for these two agents were only available after this date.virological data. we collated anonymised virological results on all forms of respiratory samples (nose/throat swabs, nasopharyngeal aspirates, bronchoalveolar lavages, endotracheal aspirates, etc) tested at the department of laboratory medicine, royal infirmary of edinburgh. these included all samples from patients attending 8 hospitals around edinburgh (astley ainslie hospital, chalmers centre, liberton hospital, royal edinburgh hospital, royal hospital for sick children, royal infirmary of edinburgh, royal victoria hospital, western general hospital), and 126 primary care centres across in edinburgh and lothian, tested at the department of laboratory medicine, royal infirmary of edinburgh. we had results from 36,191 individual patients over the study period. of these patients, 17,936 were male and 18,241 were female (information on gender was not available for 14). the age groups of the cohort are in table 2 . pcr results were available for rhinovirus, adenovirus, iav, ibv, hpiv 1-3, rsv and hmpv. there were no major modifications to the assay in that time. rhinovirus and hmpv data was unavailable until screening commenced in september 2009. between 16 th -24 th february 2011, samples were not tested for rhinovirus due to high work load. between september 15 th and december 9 th 2010, ibv was not tested due to technical reasons. we removed repeat positive samples from the same individual collected within 14 days from analysis, resulting in a total of 52060 samples for analysis. we calculated the proportion of positive results (as %) for individual viruses for each day, to help compare results over time. we used daily data for statistical analysis to avoid loss of accuracy from averaging data. to identify seasonal trends, we plotted the proportion of positive results for each day against individual meteorological factors.analysis. univariate analysis of continuous variables (mean temperature, dew point, relative humidity, and the difference between maximum and minimum humidity in a day; "humidity-range") were compared between days where one or more samples were positive for a given virus, and days where no samples were positive for that virus using two-sample t-tests. to determine the impact of multiple factors, multivariable logistic regression was conducted using those variables with a univariate p-value of <0.1 in the t-test and models were built using the "enter (forced entry)" method on spss. due to the likelihood of collinearity affecting results because of the close relationship between dew point and temperature, dew point was removed from the logistic regression.an analysis of variance (anova) in conjunction with tukey's range test were done, to determine if the mean temperature, dew point, pressure, relative humidity, and "humidity-range" at which individual viruses were present were different between viruses. this was performed in conjunction with post-hoc analysis.finally, seasonality of individual viruses identified in our study was confirmed with a generalised linear model (glm) based on temperature following the method of naumova et al. 41 . the glm was calculated using daily incidence of each virus, averaged over the entire study period.the datasets generated during and/or analysed during the current study are available from the corresponding author on reasonable request.(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted april 17, 2020 all rights reserved. no reuse allowed without permission.(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted april 17, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.14.20064923 doi: medrxiv preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted april 17, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.14.20064923 doi: medrxiv preprint (tw:(infection transmission)) or (tw:(transmission, infection)) or (tw:(communicable disease transmission)) or (tw:(disease transmission, communicable)) or (tw:(transmission, communicable disease)) or (tw:(autochthonous transmission)) or (tw:(autochthonous transmissions)) or (tw:(transmission, autochthonous)) or (tw:(transmissions, autochthonous)) or (tw:(infectious disease transmission, horizontal)) or (tw:(pathogen transmission, horizontal)) or (tw:(horizontal transmission of infectious disease)) or (tw:(horizontal transmission of infection)) or (tw:(infection horizontal transmission)) or (tw:(infection transmission, horizontal)) or (tw:(viability)) or (tw:(transmissibility)) or (tw:(spread)) or (tw:(propagation)) or (tw:(spreading)))) opengrey coronavirus and spread 0 google scholar coronavirus and weather and spread 325 123the citations were saved in a reference manager (endnote, x9 version, clarivate (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. was classified as high, moderate, low or very low. the outcomes evaluated were 156 "association between temperature and spread rate of covid-19" and "association 157 between humidity and spread rate of covid-19". table 2 . seventeen studies were 166 included and selected for qualitative analysis of risk of bias (fig 1) .167 table 2 . list of excluded studies with reasons for exclusion.reason for exclusion characteristics of included articles 169 the characteristics of the included studies are described in table 3 . all of them 170 were retrospective observational studies that associated weather variables (temperature 171 and humidity) with the spread of covid-19. [9, [20] [21] [22] [23] [24] [25] [26] [27] [28] [29] [30] [31] [32] [33] [34] [35] only two studies were also 172 classified as prospective, as they both suggest future policies to prevent the spread of 173 all rights reserved. no reuse allowed without permission.(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted april 17, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.14.20064923 doi: medrxiv preprint covid-19 through additional control with a new vaccine, [25] (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted april 17, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.14.20064923 doi: medrxiv preprint changes in a single weather factor, such as temperature or humidity, could not correlate with the case counts very well. on the other hand, several meteorological factors combined together could describe the epidemic trend much better than single-factor models. significant impact of daily mean temperature on the daily confirmed new case counts 14 days later. it is supposed that a sufficient time delay between exposure and confirmation is crucial for weather to exhibit its effect. there are relatively narrow temperature and humidity ranges for sars-cov-2 spread, there is an optimal temperature for sars-cov-2 at 8.07  and most cities with high epidemic transmission of covid-19 are located in the humidity range of 60% ~ 90%. the results suggest that temperature has a huge effect on how rapidly the sars-cov-2 spreads during certain conditions. the author recommends that southern hemisphere countries prepare for increasing caseload, and northern hemisphere countries limit air conditioning. great heterogeneity was observed in relation to the displayed variables, that included other weather conditions beyond temperature and humidity [9, [20] [21] [22] [23] [24] [25] [26] [27] [28] [29] [30] [31] like wind speed, [20, 32] visibility, [24] precipitation, [25, 27] pressure, [20] rainfall rate, [20] snowfall rate, [20] snow depth, [20] surface downward short-wave irradiation. [20] a heterogeneity was also observed regarding the date of data collection, both in relation to the location studied, and the date of epidemiological data collection of covid-19 and climatic conditions.great homogeneity was observed in the results of the effect of temperature and humidity in the seasonal variability and spread of the virus. sixteen articles selected for final analysis [9, [20] [21] [22] [23] [24] [25] [26] [27] [28] [29] [30] [33] [34] [35] were unanimous in stating that cool and dry conditions were potentiating factors for the spread of covid-19, with the spread being largely absent under extremely cold and very hot and wet conditions. only one article reported no strong effect of temperature and humidity in the spread of the virus. [32] it was also noticed that several meteorological factors combined could better describe the epidemic trend than when a single variable was analyzed. [21, 24] in addition, confounding factors as public health policies on surveillance and containment, social isolation campaigns (home quarantine strategy), including with patients' families, socioeconomic development contributes to controlling the spread of the virus around the world. [9, 20, [23] [24] [25] [26] [27] [28] [29] 31, 33, 35] moreover, controlling population density (less crowded cities) [30] and movement, [24] travel limitations, [26, 28] increasing the number of medical staff and hospitals, isolating all the suspected cases, understanding the method of each patient's infection, combining the medical history of the patients with current diagnosis to extract information about the virus, [20] are important measures to combat the new coronavirus.it was verified, in countries with virus transmission under control like korea, that the widespread testing to identify potential covid-19 positive subjects, including asymptomatic ones, could reduce transmission. [23] regarding the review process, ten of the selected articles have not yet gone through the peer review process. this must be taken into consideration when making any inference from their conclusion. [9, [20] [21] [22] 24, [26] [27] [28] 31, 35] all rights reserved. no reuse allowed without permission.(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted april 17, 2020. . after considering all these factors, we can infer that confounding variables play an important role, even more significant than temperature and relative humidity, in the spread of covid-19.a meta-analysis was not performed due to the heterogeneity of the methods, locations, and information provided in the related articles investigating the proposed objectives. additionally, differing units of measure, variables and statistical methods did not allow meaningful comparisons. only simple and descriptive comparisons were reported, beyond the risk of bias and narrative grade of evidence of the results.the risk of bias ranged from high in four papers [9, 22, 27, 32] to moderate in the remaining thirteen (table 4 ). [20, 21, [23] [24] [25] [26] [28] [29] [30] [31] [33] [34] [35] limitations were observed in the main items evaluated. inability to satisfy "the criteria for inclusion in the sample" and "the study subjects and the setting described" items resulted in the low grade, since a limitation in the sample selection criteria meant that none of the studies received a positive evaluation. in addition, many "confounding factors" like public health interventions by the government can interfere with the real effect of the variables studied -temperature and humidity -on the spread of the virus. these factors were only identified in five of the thirteen selected articles. [25, 27, 28, 31, 33] in contrast, the items "the exposure measured", "the outcomes measured" and "the objective, the standard criteria used for measurement of the condition" were, in most articles, performed in a valid and reliable way, except for oliveiros [27] in all of these three items, bhattacharjee [32] and arajo [9] in item "the outcomes measured", al-rousan [20] and bannister-tyrrell [21] regarding item "the objective, the standard criteria used for measurement of the condition". all rights reserved. no reuse allowed without permission.(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted april 17, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.14.20064923 doi: medrxiv preprint the evaluation of the certainty of the evidence according to grade is described in table 5 . the level of certainty of outcomes evaluated in this systematic review -"association between temperature and spread rate of covid-19" and "association between humidity and spread rate of covid-19"were classified as "low". since the studies are observational and presented a considerable risk of bias, the certainty of the evidence generated received this classification. moreover, one study did not show a significant effect of the variables under study on the spread of the new coronavirus. [32] all rights reserved. no reuse allowed without permission.(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted april 17, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.14.20064923 doi: medrxiv preprint association between temperature and spread rate of covid-19of the seventeen articles evaluated, sixteen showed some effect of temperature on the transmission rate. except for one, which concluded that temperature has no effect on sars-cov-2 transmission, the other sixteen found that warmer climates are less likely to spread the virus. when other variables are included in the analysis, such as migration patterns, public isolation policies, population density, and cultural aspects, the temperature seems to have less impact.association between humidity and spread rate of covid-19fourteen manuscripts that investigated the effect of humidity on the transmission of sars-cov-2 demonstrated an association between variables. only one article reported no effect of humidity on the spread of the virus, while the other fourteen showed that wetter climates inhibit the virus spread. as with the temperature, the adjustment for confounding factors decreases the impact of humidity on the transmission of covid-19.the studies used secondary data obtained through websites for both the number of infected and the climatic conditions. therefore, eligibility criteria to control possible confounding factors have not been adopted. furthermore, several studies did not consider variables such as migration patterns and isolation policies in their results, factors that directly impact on the spread rate of sars-cov-2/covid-19.the results of the articles included in this systematic review indicate that the spread of covid-19 may be influenced by climatic variables such as temperature and humidity. apparently, warmer and humid climates may show less transmission of the sars-cov-2 virus. although the level of evidence generated was low, due to the observational design of the studies and the inherent risk of bias, overall great homogeneity of the results was observed among the included studies.furthermore, the spread of types of diseases caused by betacoronavirus, such as sars-cov-1[11] and mers-cov, [36] have already been shown to suffer the impact of climatic conditions. in both these coronoviruses, hot and humid climates demonstrated the ability to decrease the viability of these viruses, while in places with low temperature and humidity there was greater viral stability.seventeen articles were included in this systematic review, and methodological issues were identified. regarding the classification of the articles and their score evaluated by the jbi critical appraisal checklist tool, [18] thirteen studies were classified as moderate risk of bias, [20, 21, [23] [24] [25] [26] [28] [29] [30] [31] [33] [34] [35] and four as high risk of bias. [9, 22, 27, 32] this was due, among other factors, to limitations in the sample selection criteria, once the main items "the criteria for inclusion in the sample" and "the study subjects and the setting described" received a negative rating in all selected articles. a reasonable explanation for this fact would be that due to the urgency of the world situation with the rapid spread of covid-19 worldwide and the need to search for immediate responses to contain the pandemic, secondary data available was used at the moment that the studies were realized, both in relation to the epidemiology of the new coronavirus, and to the climatic conditions, in an attempt to verify a possible association between them.because of this, there was a limitation in the sample selection criteria and the confounding factors that could interfere with the analysis of these secondary data were not controlled by the eligibility criteria.the quality of evidence of clinical outcomes was also graded using the grade tool. the evidence was scored as low because of the study designs, classified as observational cross-sectional studies, due to the effect of other confounding variables on temperature and humidity in the spread of the virus, and because one selected article did not find a positive strong association between the spread of the new coronavirus with temperature and humidity. according to the author, the results found no strong all rights reserved. no reuse allowed without permission.(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted april 17, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.14.20064923 doi: medrxiv preprint relationship between the effectiveness of virus and different environmental factors. [32] however, due to homogeneity in the results, which indicate, in summary, that cool and dry conditions were potential factors to the spread of covid-19, and warmer and wetter climates are less likely to enhance the transmissibility of the virus, the level of evidence could not be rated lower than that.the analyses of covid-19 outbreaks in relation to meteorology aspects reveal significant correlations between the incidence of positive cases and climatic conditions. social factors in combination with meteorological factors play a role in coronavirus outbreaks. [37, 38] in fifteen included studies, [9, 20, [22] [23] [24] [25] [26] [27] [28] [29] [30] [32] [33] [34] [35] the authors investigate the association between temperature and humidity in the transmission rate of covid-19.in the other two articles,[21,31] the association was made only with temperature.luo et al. [26] suggested that sustained transmission and rapid (exponential) growth of cases are possible over a range of humidity and temperature conditions. bu et al. [22] concluded that a temperature range of 13~19 and humidity of 50% ~ 80% are suitable for the survival and transmission of covid-19. moreover, wang et al. [31] have support the role that temperature could have in changing the covid-19 human-to-human transmission and that there might be an optimal temperature for the viral transmission.they suggested that colder regions in the world should adopt the strictest social control measures, since low temperatures significantly contribute to the viability, transmission rate and survival of coronaviruses. finally, kathabbi et al. [34] stated that by air quality analysis in areas highly contaminated by the virus, the population could be informed and be encouraged to avoid this area, creating a microclimate that helps to eliminate the spread of covid-19.arajo et al. [9] made it clear that it is not possible to characterize the exact local temperature and humidity conditions that minimizing the virus spread. on the contrary, it is reasonable to determine the type of macroclimate conditions in the places where transmission is occurring. for example, in the tropics, where high temperatures and humidity characterize the weather, the climatic suitability for spread of covid-19 seems to be more difficult. heat intolerance of the virus is probably related to the breakdown of their lipid bilayer, [39] in a similar model to what occurs with the predecessor of the new coronavirus, the sars-cov. [40] speculative explanation also based on patterns observed for other sars-cov justifies the effect of humidity on the less effective spread of the virus on the environment, which reduces the total indirect and secondary transmission. [41] although higher humidity may increase the atmospheric suspended all rights reserved. no reuse allowed without permission.(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted april 17, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.14.20064923 doi: medrxiv preprint matter, [22] the amount of virus deposited on surfaces, and virus survival time in droplets on surfaces, [41] the reduction of the virus spread by indirect air transmission may be an important factor behind the reduced spreading of covid-19 in a humid climate.high temperature and high humidity reduce the transmission of others infections of the respiratory tract, like influenza [42, 43] and of sars coronavirus. [11, 38] the main reasons are: the virus is more stable in cold temperatures, and respiratory droplets, as containers of viruses, remain in suspension longer in dry air. [44] cold and dry weather can also demote the hosts' immunity and make them more susceptible to the virus. [45] many respiratory pathogens show seasonality and the human activity patterns and immunity can be influenced by environmental factors limited during the covid-19 outbreak, due to the absence of extreme climatic conditions and specific immunity for a newly emerging virus. [35] cold air temperature contributes to spread of viruses, including coronavirus, and the possibility of infection. some possible reasons are: low temperature provides suitable survival and reproduction conditions for coronavirus; [46] cold air causes vasoconstriction of the respiratory tract which contributes to weakening of the immune system; and dry cold air makes the nasal mucosa prone to small ruptures, thereby creating opportunities for virus invasion. [47] in contrast, a long period of low or extremely cold temperature played a positive role in reducing the transmission of the coronavirus. [9, 22] in addition, bukhari et al. [23] discuss another hypothesis for the lower number of covid-19 cases detected in the tropics. it could be due to less mass testing as many of the underdeveloped countries that presents deficiency in the health care system and may have not done enough testing to detect the actual spread of this virus.two of the articles were classified as retrospective and prospective [24, 25] since they suggest implementing future public policies and mass actions that aim to control the spread of covid-19 around the world. chen et al. [24] proposed a daily predictive model that in combination with weather observations in the previous 14 days, for five highlatitude cities (new york, toronto, italy, paris and cologne), is able to predict daily new case counts of covid-19 for the following 12 days in these places. it is important to notice that a single weather factor alone could not affect the virus transmission too much.however the combination of different meteorological variables could fit a more complex model, in order to address the systematic influence of different types of weather data on the spread of the virus. jiwei et al. [25] verified further control with specific medicines and an effective vaccine. considering the practice of social isolation, the process of this all rights reserved. no reuse allowed without permission.(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted april 17, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.14.20064923 doi: medrxiv preprint strategy is considered a short-time vaccine for susceptible populations in helping to control the disease.according to oliveiros et al., [27] temperature and humidity contribute to a maximum of 18% of the variation, the remaining 82% being related to other factors such as containment measures, general health policies, population density, transportation, and cultural aspects. population migration is another key factor in the spread process that cannot be ignored, [25] as well as community structure, social dynamics, and global connectivity. [23] in cities with higher levels of population density, the virus is expected to spread faster than that in less crowded cities. [30] al-rousan et al. [20] suggested that international governments should adopt rigorous public policies. this can be done by increasing the number of health professionals and hospitals, and socially isolating mainly the suspected cases. better health care facilities tend to reduce the transmission of covid-19. [30] the relatively fast outbreak, associated with imperfect daily reporting practices, make a vast underreporting of new cases of covid-19. travel limitations and other control interventions need to be implemented consistently. [28] additionally, gupta[33] recommended that all citizens be required to wear a face mask whenever they go out, because the primarily viral infection is through airborne or close contact. the chinese government used this as a key tool in managing the disease, especially with asymptomatic infected people.finally, the review process of the selected articles should be evaluated with caution. ten of the included studies in this systematic review have not yet gone through the peer review process, which must be taken into consideration when making any inference from the authors' conclusion. [9, [20] [21] [22] 24, [26] [27] [28] 31, 35] the results of this systematic review indicate that the confounding variables, together, are even more significant than temperature and relative humidity. the timing, implementation, and magnitude of the likely public interventions from international governments should reduce the adverse consequences of covid-19 on the public health system. only with proper planning will unnecessary damage be avoided for individuals and the global economy.the eligibility criteria adopted in the selection of participants were not clear in all included articles. it was only reported that the number of individuals diagnosed with covid-19 was obtained through secondary data available on websites. in addition, several manuscripts did not go through peer review, [9, [20] [21] [22] [23] [24] [26] [27] [28] 31, 35] due to the all rights reserved. no reuse allowed without permission.(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted april 17, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.14.20064923 doi: medrxiv preprint urgency of publication on the topic, so care should be taken when considering the results of these studies, although they point in the same direction of effect and impact.furthermore, some studies [9, [20] [21] [22] [23] [24] 26, 29, 30] have not evaluated possible confounding factors that could influence the impact of climatic variables on the spread of covid-19, such as migration patterns, containment measures, general health policies, population density, herd immunity, transportation, and cultural aspects. the articles that included these variables in their analysis [25, 27, 28, 31] concluded that climate alone does not explain most of the variability in the spread of the disease.considering the existing scientific evidence, the spread of covid-19 seems to be lower in warm and wet climates. however, the certainty of the evidence generated was graded as low. furthermore, temperature and humidity alone do not explain most of the variability of the covid-19 outbreak. public isolation policies, herd immunity, migration patterns, population density, and cultural aspects might directly influence how the spread of this disease occurs.assembly [1, 2] and pick-and-place [3] of the target object (to) are important and common steps in manufacturing, which are usually operated by the robots [4] . however, the accuracy problem is always a bottleneck for the above process. one developed industrial method is to specifically design an end effector (ef) and a container/fixture for one specific to [5, 6] . the tos are accurately located in the container/fixture with their movement being constrained, so the relative position between the ef and the container/fixture can be pre-calibrated, and the relative position between the ef and the to is known when the to is grasped. therefore, the to can be precisely manipulated by the robot. this method has already been widely used in industry [7] , especially for the automobile assembly [8] .over the years, the development of the intelligent manufacturing [9] and the concept of the industry 4.0 [10, 11] propelled manufacturing to a more autonomous and flexible way, leading to the next generation manufacturing through robots being much different from its traditional manner. in traditional manufacturing, the robots are usually fixed and the trace of its ef is pre-programmed, so that the robot can only perform repetitive and tedious work with little flexibility. however, in future manufacturing, the robots are moveable (usually on an agv) and intelligent, being able to deal with different tasks in unstructured environment [12] . under this circumstance, the ef of the robot is required to be more universal to grasp different tos and can not to be made for a specific one. more importantly, the tos are not usually placed in a dedicated designed container/fixture, so that the initial pose of the to cannot be precisely obtained. therefore, the traditional method is in urgent need of improvement, in which the pose of the to expressed in the coordinate system (cs) of the ef should be measured, that is, a new different design of the end effector with a measurement system is required.some literatures have been published on this field, and the existed measurement plans can be roughly classified into two categories: (1) measurement through vision [13] and (2)assembly [1, 2] and pick-and-place [3] of the target object (to) are important and common steps in manufacturing, which are usually operated by the robots [4] . however, the accuracy problem is always a bottleneck for the above process. one developed industrial method is to specifically design an end effector (ef) and a container/fixture for one specific to [5, 6] . the tos are accurately located in the container/fixture with their movement being constrained, so the relative position between the ef and the container/fixture can be pre-calibrated, and the relative position between the ef and the to is known when the to is grasped. therefore, the to can be precisely manipulated by the robot. this method has already been widely used in industry [7] , especially for the automobile assembly [8] .over the years, the development of the intelligent manufacturing [9] and the concept of the industry 4.0 [10, 11] propelled manufacturing to a more autonomous and flexible way, leading to the next generation manufacturing through robots being much different from its traditional manner. in traditional manufacturing, the robots are usually fixed and the trace of its ef is pre-programmed, so that the robot can only perform repetitive and tedious work with little flexibility. however, in future manufacturing, the robots are moveable (usually on an agv) and intelligent, being able to deal with different tasks in unstructured environment [12] . under this circumstance, the ef of the robot is required to be more universal to grasp different tos and can not to be made for a specific one. more importantly, the tos are not usually placed in a dedicated designed container/fixture, so that the initial pose of the to cannot be precisely obtained. therefore, the traditional method is in urgent need of improvement, in which the pose of the to expressed in the coordinate system (cs) of the ef should be measured, that is, a new different design of the end effector with a measurement system is required.some literatures have been published on this field, and the existed measurement plans can be roughly classified into two categories: (1) measurement through vision [13] and (2)assembly [1, 2] and pick-and-place [3] of the target object (to) are important and common steps in manufacturing, which are usually operated by the robots [4] . however, the accuracy problem is always a bottleneck for the above process. one developed industrial method is to specifically design an end effector (ef) and a container/fixture for one specific to [5, 6] . the tos are accurately located in the container/fixture with their movement being constrained, so the relative position between the ef and the container/fixture can be pre-calibrated, and the relative position between the ef and the to is known when the to is grasped. therefore, the to can be precisely manipulated by the robot. this method has already been widely used in industry [7] , especially for the automobile assembly [8] .over the years, the development of the intelligent manufacturing [9] and the concept of the industry 4.0 [10, 11] propelled manufacturing to a more autonomous and flexible way, leading to the next generation manufacturing through robots being much different from its traditional manner. in traditional manufacturing, the robots are usually fixed and the trace of its ef is pre-programmed, so that the robot can only perform repetitive and tedious work with little flexibility. however, in future manufacturing, the robots are moveable (usually on an agv) and intelligent, being able to deal with different tasks in unstructured environment [12] . under this circumstance, the ef of the robot is required to be more universal to grasp different tos and can not to be made for a specific one. more importantly, the tos are not usually placed in a dedicated designed container/fixture, so that the initial pose of the to cannot be precisely obtained. therefore, the traditional method is in urgent need of improvement, in which the pose of the to expressed in the coordinate system (cs) of the ef should be measured, that is, a new different design of the end effector with a measurement system is required.some literatures have been published on this field, and the existed measurement plans can be roughly classified into two categories: (1) measurement through vision [13] and (2)assembly [1, 2] and pick-and-place [3] of the target object (to) are important and common steps in manufacturing, which are usually operated by the robots [4] . however, the accuracy problem is always a bottleneck for the above process. one developed industrial method is to specifically design an end effector (ef) and a container/fixture for one specific to [5, 6] . the tos are accurately located in the container/fixture with their movement being constrained, so the relative position between the ef and the container/fixture can be pre-calibrated, and the relative position between the ef and the to is known when the to is grasped. therefore, the to can be precisely manipulated by the robot. this method has already been widely used in industry [7] , especially for the automobile assembly [8] .over the years, the development of the intelligent manufacturing [9] and the concept of the industry 4.0 [10, 11] propelled manufacturing to a more autonomous and flexible way, leading to the next generation manufacturing through robots being much different from its traditional manner. in traditional manufacturing, the robots are usually fixed and the trace of its ef is pre-programmed, so that the robot can only perform repetitive and tedious work with little flexibility. however, in future manufacturing, the robots are moveable (usually on an agv) and intelligent, being able to deal with different tasks in unstructured environment [12] . under this circumstance, the ef of the robot is required to be more universal to grasp different tos and can not to be made for a specific one. more importantly, the tos are not usually placed in a dedicated designed container/fixture, so that the initial pose of the to cannot be precisely obtained. therefore, the traditional method is in urgent need of improvement, in which the pose of the to expressed in the coordinate system (cs) of the ef should be measured, that is, a new different design of the end effector with a measurement system is required.some literatures have been published on this field, and the existed measurement plans can be roughly classified into two categories: (1) measurement through vision [13] and (2) 48th sme north american manufacturing research conference, namrc 48 (cancelled due to covid-19) measurement through sensors [14] . measurement through vision utilizes one or several cameras mounted on the ef to capture the rgb and depth information (rgb-d data) of the to and the environment, then extract the to from the acquired data by data-driven method [15, 16] to derive the pose of the to expressed in the cs of the ef. for instance, lenz et.al [13] applied a deep learning system utilizing rgb-d data for calculating the pose of the to for grasping. this method is more universal for different tos but the accuracy is highly dependent on the resolution of the camera. compared to the measurement through vision, the measurement through sensors utilizes displacement sensors to locate the features of the to [17, 18] , and further calculate its pose [19] . this method seems more vintage and less universal than vision-based method but is very useful for objects with simple features, and its accuracy is usually higher. additionally, it can be observed that all the existed vision-based methods or sensor-based methods are noncontact method. that is because the non-contact method improves the flexibility of measuring tos with different features, ensuring the robot to handle various tasks.according to the above analysis, the measurement through non-contact sensors is a more accurate scheme for picking and placing tos with simple features, which currently has thriving applications in industry such as laying square ceramics/bricks by construction robots. therefore, in this paper, aiming at square tos or tos with square feature, an end effector with ccd laser displacement sensors will be designed to measure the pose of the tos within the cs of the end effector. to avoid the interference between the measurement instruments and the to, a middle measurement frame ("frame", for short) will be also established in the design, whose cs is served as an intermediate to transfer the expression of the pose of the to to the cs of the ef. the geometric model of the whole design will also be established to guide the manipulation of the to.thus, the structure of the paper is arranged as below: the structural design of the ef and the middle measurement frame (frame) is introduced in section 2, followed by the establishment of their geometric model illustrated in section 3, in which the pose of the to described in the cs of the end effector is derived from the measured data. an experiment was carried out in section 4 to verify the whole design, and the conclusions are in section 5.since square object (or object with square feature) is one of the most common objects manipulated by the robot during the manufacturing processes, this paper will mainly focus on the measuring strategy of the pose of the square object within the cs of the end effector. according to the schematic shown in fig. 1 , the measurement is actually a 2d problem. there are totally 3 key degree of freedoms (dofs) needed to be measured: (1) the deviation of the to along the e x -axis of the cs of the ef, te x  ; (2) the deviation of the to along the e yaxis of the cs of the ef, te y  ; (3) the rotational deviation of the to around the e z -axis of the cs of the ef,as for the design of the ef and its measurement system, since the number of the defined deviations is 3, the minimum number of the independent measured data acquired by the measurement instruments is also equal to 3. however, to reduce the random errors and to enhance the reliability of the whole system, redundant measured data is also needed. more importantly, to avoid possible interference between the measurement instruments and other tos, indirect measurement strategy is needed instead of direct measurement. in this section, a design of measurement strategy was proposed according to the above requirements. the design is composed of two parts: the design of the ef and the design of the frame. the designed ef is of a square shape, as shown in fig. 2(a) . in the design, eight ccd laser displacement sensors (ccd1 ~ ccd8) are mounted on the back side, in which every two sensors are aligned with one of the four sides of the ef, that is, the laser beams of these sensors are paralleled with xe-or yeaxis of the cs of the ef. the distance between each two parallel laser beams is defined as d, and the distance between each two symmetrical ccds is defined as h. the geometric relationship between the above beams logically represents the shape of the ef, and the aim of the layout of these sensors is to acquire the pose of the frame in the cs of the ef.since the direct measurement is hard to be realized, the frame is designed as a media to measure the pose deviation of the to expressed in the cs of the frame and to measure its own pose (pose of the frame) deviation in the cs of the ef, then derive the pose deviation of the to in the cs of the ef. the structure of the frame is shown in fig. 2(b) . for better understanding of the measurement, the ef is also included in the figure. it mainly composed of the frame structure and 8 ccd laser displacement sensors (ccd 9~16). the frame is of a square shape side-lengthed by h, served as the target for the ccds mounted on the ef. therefore, the pose of the frame expressed in the cs of the ef can be calculated by the reading of these ccds. the 8 ccd sensors mounted on the frame are utilized to measure the distance between the ccd and the corresponding side of the to, and to calculate the pose deviation of the to expressed in the cs of the frame. the distance between the neighbor parallel laser beams is defined as d. in this section, geometric model of the above proposed design will be established to calculate the pose deviation of the to in the cs of the ef. since the pose deviation is indirectly measured, the geometric model of the design is divided however, since there are errors (manufacturing errors, assembly errors, etc.) existed in the design, the exact locations of the origin of the ccd laser displacement sensors cannot be precisely acquired, in other words, it is almost impossible to derive the exact pose deviations directly through the absolute readings of the ccds. it is also time consuming and inefficient to attempt to acquire the exact locations of the origins of the ccds. therefore, in this paper, a relative error measurement strategy is utilized to eliminate the influence of the origin offset along the laser direction. the core concept is to firstly place the object to be measured (ef and to) at the ideal center of the frame where all the pose deviations are zero to get the initial readings of the ccds, then utilize the relative values of the ccd sensors to calculate the pose deviation under other actual circumstances.in order to locate the center of the ef to the center of the frame, several additional accessories were mounted on the ef to expand its size, as shown in fig. 3 (these accessories will be dismantled during the actual task). after expansion, the size of the ef is almost exactly the same as the size of the frame the geometric relationship between the to and the cs of the frame can be abstractly illustrated in fig. 4 . in the figure, the dashed blue lines represent the ideal position of the to, and the actual position of the to is represented by the solid blue lines. in which, i c represents the current reading of the ith ccd sensor; ini i c represents the initial reading of the ith ccd sensor when the to is exactly at the center of the frame;since the laser points (red points in the figure) are on the sides of the to, the equations of the 4 sides of the to ( t15 t9 p p , t9 t11 p p , t11 t13 p p and t13 t15 p p ), represented by ti l (i = 9,11,13,15), can be derived from the coordinates of the laser points as: ( 1) ( 1):the intersection of each two adjacent lines, separately represented by t9 although the layout of ccd 1~8 is similar to the layout of ccd 9~16, the calculation of the pose deviation of the ef expressed in the cs of the frame is different from the calculation of the pose deviation of the to, because ccd 1~8 are mounted on the ef instead of the frame, necessitating some coordinate transformations between different css. the geometric relationship between the cs of the ef and the cs of the frame is abstractly illustrated in fig. 5 . according to fig. 5 similarly, the equations of the laser beams expressed in the cs of the ef, i l , can be directly derived according to fig. 5 :according to the definition of the htm [20] , the equations of the laser beams can be transformed to the format being expressed in the cs of the frame by respectively replacing x and y in eq. (10) =  (13) in which, the function "intersection()" represents calculating the coordinate of the intersection of the two input lines, it can be implemented by solving the combination of the equations of the two lines.according to fig. 5 , the current readings of the ccd laser sensors, i c , can be represented by the length of the dashed dark red lines, and they can be projected to the fx -and f y -axis respectively. therefore, the relationship between the projections and the coordinates of the points p ( , ) according to eq. (14) , there are two equations for each ccd. by combining the equations of ccd 1~8, totally a set of 16 equations can be derived, which can be written in a matrix format, i.e.:where matrix a and b can be derived by substituting eqs.(6)~(13) into eq. (14) . according to the least square method (lsm), the above equation can be solved as: (16) o x y z  can be written as: through eq. (20) , the pose deviation of the to expressed in the cs of ef was derived, which will be used to precisely manipulate the to by the robot in the verification.in this section, the above design and its geometric model will be verified on an abb irb4600 robot shown in fig. 7 the verification process and its results are shown in fig. 9 , in which fig. 9 (a) and fig. 9 (b) demonstrate the placement of the first and the last one of the 4 tos. fig. 9 (c) shows the misalignment of the tos when they were piled in the container. the positional and angular misalignments between the adjacent tos are listed in table 1 . fig. 9 (d) shows the improvement of the alignment of the tos after pick-and-place with compensation, and the distance/angular errors between the adjacent placed tos are also listed in table 1 . according to the results shown by the figures and the table, the average distance error between the adjacent tos can be reduced from 5.34 mm to 0.73 mm after compensation, with an 86.3% of compensation rate. the average angular error between the adjacent tos are reduced by 84.8% from 0.685 to 0.104 after compensation.it can be observed that except for some residual errors, most of the error were compensated by the algorithm proposed in the paper. the residual errors may come from the following sources: (1) gravity distortion of the robot at its extension pose, causing the inclination of the ef; (2) the abbe errors of the ccd sensors. although the positional mounting errors along the direction of the laser beams of the ccds were basically eliminated by relative measurement, the abbe errors caused by the angular mounting errors still exist.through above analysis, it can be concluded that the design of the measurement system and its geometric model proposed in this paper can relatively precisely calculate the pose deviation of the squared shape to within the cs of the ef, and further improve the pick-and-place accuracy of the tos a bmisalignment of the tos in the container c d 10 mm a design of an end effector (ef) and its corresponding measurement scheme for robot to precisely manipulate the square shape target objects (tos) was proposed in this paper. to acquire the pose deviation of the to in the coordinate system (cs) of the ef, in the design, except for mounting ccd laser displacement sensors on the ef, a middle measurement frame ("frame", for short) also mounted with ccd sensors was designed to establish a middle cs to describe the pose deviation of the ef and of the to separately, thus to transfer the pose deviation of the to to the pose being described in the cs of the ef. the geometric model of the design was also investigated, in which the pose deviation of the to was expressed as a function of the readings of 16 ccd displacement sensors. compared with the traditional existed method, the proposed measurement method uses relative values of the instruments to calculate the pose of the to, so that the initial position of the instruments needn't to be precisely determined, and the cost of the calibration process can be consequently reduced. this method is expected to achieve a better balance between the cost and the accuracy.a verification experiment was carried out on an abb irb4600 robot to use the proposed design and its affiliated geometric model to compensate the error between the ef and its grasped to. results show that the average position error can be reduced from 5.34 mm to 0.73 mm while the average angular error can be reduced from 0.685 to 0.104, and the overall compensate rate is around 85%. according to the analysis of the sources of the residual errors of the experiment, future work includes establishing the stiffness model of the robot to compensate the gravity distortion, and updating the geometric model of the ef and the frame to compensate to abbe errors.geomorphological, socio-economic, human population and activity, etc. (see wmo, 2018) . they are essential to provide context and support for urban analyses and model applications addressing issues, including policy requirements, urban planning and assessments, emergency response, human behavior, etc. development of urban database tools, like the world urban database and access portal tools (wudapt; www.wudapt.org) is extremely important. wudapt (ching et al., 2018) is an international community-based initiative to acquire and disseminate climate relevant data on the physical geographies of cities for modeling and analyses purposes. the current lacuna of globally consistent information on cities is a major impediment to urban climate science towards informing and developing climate mitigation and adaptation strategies at urban scales. wudapt consists of a database and a portal system; its database is structured into a hierarchy representing different levels of detail and data are acquired using innovative protocols that utilize crowdsourcing approaches, geowiki tools, freely accessible data, and building typology archetypes. the base level of information (level 0, or l0), categorizes and maps city landscapes into local climate zones (lcz), each category of which is associated with a range of values for model relevant surface descriptors (e.g. roughness, impervious surface cover, roof area, building heights, etc.). l0 data and the protocol for acquisition, storage and dissemination is best developed and provides a framework for gathering other data. wudapt levels 1 (l1) and 2 (l2) will provide values for other relevant descriptors at greater precision, such as data morphological forms, material composition data and energy usage.the main objectives of this paper are: to demonstrate the novel concept and approach of integrated urban hydro-meteorological, climate and environmental services using examples of several selected cities with good existing practice; aggregate main joint similarities and provide a synergy of cities experience; identify achievements and research findings, as well as existing gaps in knowledge and further research needs and strategy.various cities have already started implementation of integrated urban services and successfully test and use them following specific requirements of local stakeholders, for example, shanghai (tang, 2006; tan et al., 2015) and stockholm (amorim et al., 2018) . the following sections demonstrate the best available knowledge/technologies and practices in four case study cities from different continents and countries (hong kong, toronto, mexico city and paris) that have considered different ways to realize such services.integrated urban hydro-meteorological, climate and environmental services (ius), suggested by wmo (wmo, 2018) , include a combination of dense observation networks, high-resolution forecasts, multi-hazard early warning systems, and climate services. these services should meet the special needs of cities as expressed by urban stakeholders and assist cities in setting and implementing mitigation and adaptation strategies that will enable them to build resilient, thriving sustainable cities that promote the sustainable development goals.the current task of wmo, its members and research community in this direction is to develop a comprehensive guidance for integrated urban hydro-meteorological, climate and environmental services. the conceptual and methodological part of the guide was recently issued (wmo, 2018) and adopted in june 2018 by the wmo executive council. it documents the best available knowledge, principles, integration methods and practices for producing and providing the relevant services cities require to respond to the hazards posed by extreme weather, severe pollution episodes and climate change. the guide includes a multidisciplinary approach (i.e., not just meteorological agencies) to better serve the social-economic needs of urban areas, and identifies the required a. baklanov, et al. urban climate 32 (2020) 100610 partnerships to establish and sustain urban services, including research, city governments, international organizations, and private sector stakeholders. the combination of hazards and risk factors can be different for different cities. they depend on geographical (e.g., coastal, river, mountainous, polar, deserts and others) and geophysical (e.g., fault lines, volcanoes, dust storm, fire danger, space weather and others) factors, climate conditions and the existing environment of the city itself. in general, integrated urban services include monitoring and prediction for physical and environmental impacts (wmo, 2018) and should include also societal impact predictions, as presented in table 1 .to build integrated urban services, each city, due to its own geographical, socio-economic, climatological, environmental and political setting, must identify the hazards (natural and human-made) and other risk factors at both urban and larger scales to which the city is likely to be exposed and the agencies that need to be involved.the general structure of integrated urban services typically includes the following (wmo, 2018):(i) observation and monitoring; (ii) data, databases and data sharing; (iii) modeling and prediction capability; (iv) tailored urban service applications;(v) decision support systems to support decision-making that includes human behavior/response considerations (vi) products, service delivery, communications and outreach; (vii) evaluation, assessment, societal impacts; (viii) research and development; (ix) capacity development.usually integrated urban services are realized using existing systems, infrastructures, and mechanisms. ius focuses on improving and integrating the following main elements and sub-systems:(i) weather (especially high impact weather prediction at the urban scale), (ii) climate (urban climate, climate extremes, sector specific climate indices, climate projections, climate risk management and adaptation). (iii) hydrology and water related hazards (flash river floods, heavy precipitation, river water stage, inundation areas, storm tides, sea level rise, urban hydrology), baklanov, et al. urban climate 32 (2020) 100610 (iv) air quality (urban air quality and other larger scale hazards: dust storms, wildfires smog, etc.).integrated urban services must consider seamless provision of services across all time scales: from historical records, monitoring current conditions, nowcasting (for very short term multi-hazards early warnings, e.g. thunderstorms, flash floods, dispersion), shortterm and medium-range forecasting for larger scale phenomena (typhoons, extra-tropical storms), to long-term (sub-seasonal to seasonal and climate change) time scales at urban and sub-urban spatial scales for climate risk management, adaptation to climate change, mitigation strategy assessments and urban planning.we selected four cities with successful experiences and evidence of effective data and information services application by policy makers and other users. each city system is described following the ius guide requirements with a particular view of the issues identified in table 2 .hong kong, situated along the southeastern coast of china and over the eastern part of the pearl river delta (prd), has a subtropical climate with hot and humid summer and cool and dry winter. a wide variety of severe weather hazards may pose a threat to hong kong. these include: tropical cyclones, heavy rain, severe thunderstorms, extreme high temperatures and cold surges. in 2017, hong kong had about 7.4 million residents with an average population density of about 6830 people km 2 in urban areas (hksar, 2018) . in hong kong, the average building height is about 60 m and domestic building gross floor area per lot area is about 5-8. this high-density and compact urban setting is detrimental to urban climatic conditions especially urban ventilation and thermal environment in downtown areas (lam, 2006; lau and ng, 2013) .against the background of global climate change and local urbanization, hong kong has experienced significant changes in climate in the last century, including a long term warming trend, rising sea level, and more frequent extreme weather (e.g. lee et al., 2010; wong et al., 2011) . looking into the future, hong kong can expect even warmer weather, more variable rainfall, a sea level that keeps rising, and more frequent extreme weather hazards (shun and lee, 2017) . moreover, rapid development, large population increase and economic growth in the entire prd region have had a great impact on the environment, including air quality (enb et al., 2013) . weather, climate and environment, in particular extreme hazards, have an impact on hong kong residents everyday life in many ways and shape the socio-economic development and infrastructure characteristics of societies (lam, 2006) .the hong kong observatory (hko) is the meteorological authority responsible for monitoring and forecasting weather, issuing warnings on weather-related hazards and providing climate services in hong kong, among others. atmospheric environmental monitoring and air quality forecasting and warning services are under the purview of the environmental protection department (epd). the integrated urban service system in hong kong is comprised of three key components, namely weather and environmental monitoring; weather, climate and environmental services; and information dissemination/communication (fig. 2) .3.1.1.1. monitoring networks. for weather and atmospheric environmental monitoring, meteorological observations have been conducted at hko headquarters since 1884 (lee, 2016) . the advent of automatic weather station (aws) networks of hko and other government departments since the mid-1980s has significantly expanded data coverage both in terms of spatial and temporal resolution with over 200 awss providing a wide range of meteorological measurements (e.g. rainfall, temperatures, winds, etc.). regular upper-air soundings and the increasing availability of high-resolution remote sensing observations (e.g. doppler weather radar, wind profilers, lidars (light detection and ranging), satellite reception systems, etc.) also enable the monitoring of meteorological parameters beyond the near-surface levels through the depth of the atmosphere. the implementation of the community weather information network (co-win) in 2007 further extended the meteorological measurement network to the school and community levels (tam and ong, 2012). epd has been monitoring the air quality in hong kong since 1990, and currently baklanov, et al. urban climate 32 (2020) 100610 operates a network of 16 air quality monitoring stations in hong kong (epd, 2018) . the pollutants being monitored regularly include o 3 , no 2 , so 2 , co, pm 10 and pm 2.5 .3.1.1.2. urban services. by integrating comprehensive weather observations and numerical weather prediction products, hko now provides a wide range of forecasts covering multi-time scales (e.g. nowcasting, 9-day forecasts, seasonal predictions, climate projections, etc.) and different spatial resolutions in hong kong, including territory wide, district, and specific sites (fig. 3) . moreover, warnings and advisories for various weather hazards (e.g. tropical cyclone, thunderstorm, heavy rain, landslide, flooding, cold and very hot weather, etc.) have been in place to reduce loss of life and damage to property, and minimize disruptions to economic and social activities of the city during inclement weather. hko has been providing different sectors of the community (e.g. general public, government departments, public utilities (water and energy), building industry, health sector, insurance sector, transportation sector, disaster risk management, etc.) with a full range of climatological information services (hko, 2018a) and conducting climate research as well as promoting climate change public education (yeung and song, 2016) . epd has developed the air quality health index (aqhi) to provide timely and useful air pollution information to the public. by utilizing various air quality monitoring data and numerical air quality models, epd also provides aqhi forecast for the next 24 h to advise the public before the onset of high health risk categories due to pollution episodes.timely dissemination of various weather information, forecast and warnings from hko are made to the general public, government departments, marine community and other specialized users through different channels, including media, dial-a-weather service, webpages, mobile platforms and social media. in particular, the online information service and location specific weather services offered by hko's highly popular "myobservatory" mobile app and website (hko, 2018b) allow urban dwellers to access various first-hand weather information anywhere and anytime (hko, 2018c). hko website and the "myobservatory" mobile app have attracted more than 145 billion page views in 2018, while the total number of downloads of the mobile app has exceeded 7.6 million. hko also launched its facebook page and instagram platform to enhance communication with the public through social media in march 2018 with encouraging responses (hko, 2018d). moreover, close liaison is maintained with relevant government departments and public utilities during inclement weather. regarding air quality information and forecasts, real-time hourly air pollutant concentrations and aqhi information are released by epd to the public via various channels, including the website and mobile app of epd, computer desktop alert wizard and telephone hotline.hko has successfully cultivated close partnerships with various stakeholders to enhance its weather and climate services by embracing the spirit of the big data concept (shun and chan, 2017) , in particular in areas related to disaster risk reduction, energy, water, and health, in alignment with the priority areas of the global framework for climate services (gfcs) of wmo (wmo, 2018) . some examples are highlighted in the following paragraphs.3.1.2.1. public health. given that weather conditions have impacts on public health, hko has been studying, in collaboration with other government departments, tertiary institutions, and social enterprises, the impact of weather on public health in hong kong. some examples include: hko collaborated with microbiologists of the chinese university of hong kong (cuhk) to study the seasonal variations of the occurrence of influenza in hong kong (chan et al., 2009).  hko and local researchers from cuhk and hku collaborated to develop the hong kong heat index (hkhi) for use in the city's hot and humid sub-tropical climate and to study the health impacts of extreme hot weather events on city residents (wang et al., 2019; lau and ren, 2018; ho et al., 2017; shi et al., 2019) for further enhancing the heat-health information services in hong kong. hko has been working closely with the senior citizen home safety association (schsa) to study how weather and climate impact the health of senior citizens (mok and leung, 2009; wong et al., 2015) and to enhance care services for the elderly in hong kong through the utilization of weather and climate information (hko, 2018e; lee and leung, 2016) .to support water resource management, hko has been providing monthly forecasts of yield collected in hong kong reservoirs to the water supplies department (water authority in hong kong) since 2010. verifications showed that the yield forecast is generally a better reference than climatology, demonstrating the benefits of climate prediction for managing water resources in hong kong (lam and lee, 2012) .since severe acute respiratory syndrome (sars) happened in 2003, a series of applicationbased urban climate related governmental consultancy projects have been launched and a range of design measures have been developed and implemented into local planning and development ( fig. 2) (ng, 2009; ren et al., 2011) . hko has been providing technical support and weather records in these consultancy projects. knowledge of the impact of high density urban morphology on local climatic condition and design related outcomes from hong kong have been adopted by other application-based projects in mainland china and overseas countries . a. baklanov, et al. urban climate 32 (2020) 100610 3.1.2.4. energy sector. with a view to promoting energy efficiency and conservation, hko and clp power hong kong limited (clp) have collaborated to provide a "9-day energy forecast" which utilizes the 9-day weather forecast provided by hko. this energy consumption forecast allows property managers to plan ahead energy saving measures to reduce electricity consumption and peak loading under hot weather situations with significant results (cheung et al., 2016) .3.1.2.5. infrastructure design for disaster risk reduction. over the years, hko has been working closely with different engineering departments and professional bodies to establish and regularly review the engineering design standards and codes of practices appropriate to local conditions for protecting the city and public safety against various weather hazards and natural disasters (fig. 4) . some examples include the code of practice on wind effects; the estimation of extreme rainfall return periods and probable maximum precipitation; and the anticipated highest sea level for incorporation in the port works design manual.with the continuous improvement of weather forecast and warning services and strengthening of infrastructure design based on climate data and services, there has been a long term decrease in the number of casualties associated with events related to extreme weather (such as landslides and tropical cyclones) in hong kong over the past 50 years (geo, 2007; lee et al., 2012) . facing the climate change challenges, hko will continue to work closely with different sectors and government departments to provide climate services support with a view to enhancing the city's resilience and readiness to climate change and extreme weather events.some future thrusts and pilot projects for enhancing the urban weather, climate and environmental services for hong kong include establishing an urban weather monitoring system suitable for the climate and high density urban environment of hong kong, developing impact-based and risk-based public weather services, enhancing the applications of social media, big data, a.i., and crowdsourcing in various weather and climate services, improving the coverage, resolution and forecast accuracy of air quality forecasting system, and strengthening the contribution of environmental monitoring data for wmo's global atmosphere watch (gaw) programme.the greater toronto and hamilton area (gtha) is the most populated place in canada. it is an important region of economic activity and continues to experience both population increase and urban sprawl. between 2011 and 2016 (statistics canada 2019), the population increased by nearly 6% and 4.5% for the gtha and city of toronto respectively. the gtha is located along the north coast of lake ontario, and more generally is situated in a region bounded by three of the great lakes. the region is characterized by the regular occurrence of complex hydro-meteorological conditions with high impact. these have led to recurrent infrastructure damage in the region due to isolated extreme rainfalls, fog or strong winds and lightning, problematic thermal stress conditions related to high levels of humidity in summer and cold weather in winter, occurrence of unhealthy air quality episodes, risks of high water levels along stream networks and coastal flooding in the springtime.integrated urban services in toronto are tailored by many different organizations including municipalities, the provincial government, the federal government, and even at the international level for some cross-border targeted issues. for example, the government of canada distributes the responsibility for meteorological, air quality, climate, and environmental research, development and operations to the ministry of environment canada and climate change (eccc), and climate change impacts assessments and adaptation tools to natural resources canada (nrcan). crucial bridges are already provided (https://changingclimate.ca/ cccr2019/), although many more are required to improve the ius at the scale of toronto.the 2015 pan and parapan american games in toronto (to15) were a high-attendance event that offered an opportunity to develop new seamless city-scale services. the eccc to15 science project has been a showcase on the capacity to implement advanced technical tools and to provide derived products to end-users ( a. baklanov, et al. urban climate 32 (2020) 100610 this event were directed towards three major end-users: the to15 organization (regular briefings), the police, and public health organizations (partnership for the extended region surrounding toronto). the key success was improved communications between researchers and those involved in operations and services for the different sectors (public and marine weather, air quality, uv, nowcasting, emergency preparedness, public health) and for different organizations (eccc, health canada, public health regional and municipal organizations, some universities, and a network of provincial and municipal government partners). eccc project objectives for the games were: 1) to provide advanced capacity to issue weather warnings, 2) to forecast weather conditions (in particular at the sport venues sites), 3) to provide climatological information, 4) to support critical weather sensitive government services, and 5) to monitor atmospheric conditions (johnston et al., 2017 ). an overview of the daily eccc operation cycle is presented in fig. 5 . underlying wider objectives were to provide legacy to the involved partners and the scientific community by developing: 1) monitoring strategies, 2) prediction models, 3) forecast methods, 4) data acquisition processes, and 5) distribution applications.the observational network was designed to provide environmental conditions at the sport venues sites and to capture meteorological patterns specific to toronto, such as lake-breeze front tracking (as they can lead to high-impact weather or modify local conditions rapidly, e.g., mariani et al., 2018) , heat stress conditions (monitored by the wet-bulb globe temperature -wbgt-index obtained with black globe thermometers measuring the radiant temperature, e.g., herdt et al., 2018) or atmospheric pollution (e.g., using vehicle traverse sampling, wren et al., 2018) . substantial time (years in some cases) was needed to obtain land use licenses or leases required for siting fixed stations. a network of 55 weather stations were deployed at ground-level and rooftop locations using compact, inexpensive, and easily sited weather instrumentation together with high speed cell technology that increased bandwidth and memory capacity. once installed, data from the mesonet network successfully reached users with 95% 'up time'. the new highresolution data acquisition system (60 observations per minute) for the weather mesonet was supported by existing operational network protocols to facilitate the use post-games.at the technical level, research and development methods were not mature enough to integrate all components. however, as illustrated in fig. 6 , significant research and development innovations did progress in that direction (see joe et al., 2018 for an overview). daily integrated high-resolution urban scale forecasts with 250 m grid spacing including modeling of heat stress indices , and lake-breeze fronts forecasting assessment were disseminated in real-time to the ontario storm prediction centre (ospc) for nowcasting purposes. on the other hand, weather and air quality sectors followed two relatively distinct roadmaps in term of monitoring, model resolution and configuration, and products. service integration was therefore implemented in the communication plan. this included a weather portal for sharing observations, forecasts and alerts to sporting federations and to15 organization, push-type communication with a mobile application for integrated health ("ec alert me"), and pull-type communication such as the weather and public health decision web-portal based on the web-mapping services (wms), that were efficient with 96% up time during the games.the project resulted in a number of lessons learned. sufficient preparation time and good communications were critical to update, expand and increase the observation frequency of the weather mesonet because many players were involved. it was also found that more research is needed to assess the value of providing model output to decision makers and educating them to internalizing the risk a. baklanov, et al. urban climate 32 (2020) 100610 of the uncertainties associated with their use. as an example, although public health requested a full range of data (model outputs for heat, air quality, uv, etc.) for the web-based portal wisdom, many small units did not have sufficient staff or the expertise to use these data to their fullest. direct provision of more integrated indicators such as the aqhi (air quality heat index, environment canada, 2016) more adapted to decision-making would probably be more efficient and sufficient. merging recent research and development tools and methods with operations remains challenging.following the completion of the games, additional objectives and partnerships have naturally arisen and strengthened due to improved knowledge of the different urban sectors and the potential for even more integration services. eccc urban scale research activities for weather, air quality and climate sectors are progressing towards more coherent tools. development and operation divisions have more activities directed towards the use of new technical capabilities to deliver city services. for example, national operational forecasts at moderate resolution (2.5 km) have included urban processes since 2018 and now deliver wbgt and utci thermal stress indices. air quality experimental forecasting at eccc has been moving to the urban scale at the same resolution.expanded use of refined sub-km urban scale modeling from weather to multi-purpose environmental services is underway. as a climate adaptation perspective, a recent eccc study driven by the quebec provincial program for action plan on climate change ('fonds verts'), heat mitigation strategies for montreal and toronto were evaluated in heat-wave conditions (leroyer et al., 2019) . as a hazard watch perspective, due to the lake ontario flood over the toronto islands in may 2017 with continuing high water levels, the experimental panam system was operated again during the season in support to eccc's complete hydro-meteorological platform for water level and waves assessments, with results used for decision-making by the international lake ontario-st lawrence river board (international joint commission, 2017). another important to15 legacy is the development of a demonstration for applications relevant to greenhouse gas emission studies in the gtha. in the context of the lima-paris action agenda the paris agreement has formalized a role for sub-national entities such as metropolitan regions as leaders in greenhouse gas mitigation and climate adaptation. urban regions account for roughly two-thirds of global energy-related greenhouse gas emissions due to their concentration of population and economic intensity. given the high level of urbanization in canada, 81.8% in 2015, urban regions are even more relevant here.in order to provide a diagnosis of urban ghg emissions at relevant scales, these regions need to understand their emitting landscape due to both natural and human activities. currently, four atmospheric measurement sites are operated in the gtha area all of which include co 2 and ch 4 as well as additional proxies like co, n 2 o,  13 co 2 ,  14 co 2 , and 222 radon at some sites. eccc and the university of toronto have successfully built a high-resolution (2.5  2.5 km 2 ) emission inventory 'soce' (southern ontario carbon emission) for co 2 based on air quality emission maps for the to15 domain (pugliese et al., 2018) . significant differences of up to 40% for total annual emissions were found in the urban domain when compared to existing inventories. in comparison, the climate action plan for the city of toronto is to reduce ghg emissions by 30% between 1990 and 2010. furthermore, the contribution of different emission categories is also significantly different as e.g. soce predicts traffic to contribute 24 mtco 2 a 1 , while edgar v4.2 (edgar, 2010) predicts nearly twice the amount, i.e. 41 mtco 2 a 1 . to build confidence and investigate the differences in these emission datasets we compared their ability to correctly predict atmospheric co 2 concentrations. as a benchmark, a forward simulation using an air-quality model was compared to co 2 observations at eccc sites, i.e. the mean daily cycle for winter 2016. pugliese et al. (2018) showed that the novel soce inventory displays the best performance with only minor deviations from observed atmospheric co 2 at the downsview measurement site as seen in fig. 7 .this study increased the confidence that the novel inventory better reflects local fossil co 2 fluxes. as soce is sectorially explicit, this new framework now allows calculation of the impact of specific sources, like traffic or domestic heating on urban co 2 concentrations, which can be used to guide targeted mitigation actions. this approach is now being expanded to allow assessment of urban ch 4 emissions and how the key source sectors, e.g. landfills and downstream natural gas infrastructure, impact urban ch 4 concentrations. an improved understanding of the ch 4 source will eventually help better understand air quality in the gtha as ch 4 is a known short-lived climate pollutant and ozone depleting substance.the mexico city metropolitan area (mcma) is one of the most densely populated cities in north america and one of the largest megacities of the world, with about 22 million inhabitants. the mcma, which includes mexico city, 59 municipalities of the state of mexico and one municipality of the state of hidalgo, has undergone massive transformations in urbanization and demographics during the 20th century. the population increased from less than 3 million in 1950 to more than 18 million in 2000, corresponding to an approximate 6-fold increase in 50 years. within this metropolitan area lies mexico city with a population of 8.8 million and covering an area of~1500 km 2 (fig. 8) .mcma is situated in an inland basin at an altitude of 2240 m above mean sea level and is surrounded on three sides by mountains and volcanoes, with an opening to the mexican plateau to the north and a mountain gap to the southeast. the topography and meteorology of the metropolitan area affects its air quality substantially. a cool dry season from november to february is followed by a warm dry season until may and a rainy season from june to october. the dry-warm season is characterized by high pressure systems that induce clear skies, high solar radiation and weak wind most of the day. these conditions promote photochemical processes that induce the formation of ozone and other oxidants as well as an increase of secondary aerosol loadings through chemical reactions, dust and biomass burning. weak winds and strong temperature inversions at night also lead to high primary pollutant concentrations during rush hour that persist into the morning, followed by very rapid boundary layer growth to about 2 to 4 km in the early afternoon. as a consequence, there is relatively little recirculation or day-to-day carry-over of pollutants within the basin. the dry cool season has stronger surface inversions and higher morning concentrations of primary pollutants. the rainy season has lower particulate matter but continues to have relatively high ozone concentration due to intense photochemical reactions occurring before the afternoon showers. air pollution is therefore a year round concern for the residents of the mcma (molina et al., 2007 (molina et al., , 2010 .rapid population growth, uncontrolled urban development, high rate of motorization, industrialization and consumption of fossil fuels, the topographic setting and climate conditions combine to cause serious problems of both primary and secondary pollutants for the metropolitan area. the automatic air-quality monitoring network, established in the late 1980s, revealed high concentrations of all criteria pollutants as ozone peaked above 300 ppb for 40-50 days per year, which at that time placed mexico city air pollution problems among the worst in the world (molina and molina, 2002) .after four decades of comprehensive air quality management programs based on scientific, technical, social and political considerations, mexico city has waged a successful war on air pollution. the atmospheric concentrations of lead, sulfur dioxide and carbon monoxide have dramatically reduced and are below the current air quality standards. air quality standards as well as other measures have been strengthened including the environmental contingency program. (fig. 9) . ozone, pm 10 , and pm 2.5 concentrations have decreased significantly, but both pollutants are still at levels above the respective air quality standards.mexico city government has also taken actions to mitigate emissions of greenhouse gases and short-lived climate pollutants by integrating air quality and climate action plans in the design of environmental policy to realize potential synergistic benefits. these benefits include: emission control standards for vehicles, energy efficiency programs for public and private buildings, improved collection and disposal of solid waste with more efficient solutions including potentially using landfill gas recovery to supply clean energy.mexico city is faced with multiple environmental risks due to its geographic location, meteorology and socio-economic circumstances. climate change has become the biggest long-term threat to mexico city's future. it is linked to water, health, air pollution, traffic disruption from floods, and housing vulnerability to landslides. the following are the main risks: high pollution events exacerbated due to high pressure systems and thermal inversion  extreme hydrometeorological events leading to floods and landslides  health impacts caused by heat waves  earthquakes  volcanic eruptions  wildfires  vector-borne diseases related to climate change. a. baklanov, et al. urban climate 32 (2020) the main objective of mexico city ius is to provide key information to different sectors of the urban population about weather, water, air quality, climate and wildfires. mexico city was motivated to develop integrated urban services in order to provide timely information to both decision makers and citizens due to the problems mexico city has faced over time:-air quality management programs to mitigate severe air pollution revealed in the late 1980s; -water services to address the flooding mexico city suffers during the rainy season; -wildfire prevention and monitoring measures to protect mexico city's conservation land from wildfires occurring during hot dry season; -volcanic alert on the hazards from volcanic eruptions and emissions.these services are provided by mexico city government through the different agencies that report to the mayor and to the public.the integrated urban service system for mexico city is shown in fig. 10 . the center for command, control, computation, communications and citizen contact (c5) monitors multiple hazards and responds within five minutes of an incident. the city government has also deployed various communication strategies to disseminate information to the public, including real-time reporting of ambient air quality data and forecasting information. these are available to the public via website and mobile application, and are used by the news media in weather forecasts to alert the public of high pollution episodes and severe weather events. the information is also used to provide hydrometeorological notices and has contributed to the development of a risk atlas.in 2016, mexico city launched the resilience strategy to build resilience in specific areas at the community level that includes the following 5 pillars: i) foster regional coordination; ii) promote water resilience as a new paradigm to manage water in the mexico basin; iii) plan for urban and regional resilience; iv) improve mobility through an integrated safe and sustainable system; and v) develop innovation and adaptive capacity. in 2018, the mayor of mexico city announced the implementation of a contingency task force for water scarcity.in spite of the progress that mexico city has made towards implementing integrated services, some challenges still remain, including the following: recognize the large social and spatial inequality and high vulnerability of mcma population to climate change;  the mcma and the surrounding states comprising the megalopolis incorporate multiple jurisdictions including both federal and state level administrations. integrated long-term planning and coordination among the various administrative government levels and entities is a major challenge; continue and finalize integration among mexico city agencies; a. baklanov, et al. urban climate 32 (2020) 100610  continue to promote more collaboration with national and international institutions and private sectors;  expand and strengthen capacity building for technicians and scientists;  improve communication with relevant stakeholders and the public;  continuity of integrated services through different administrations.the mexico city ius has provided investment in new technology, including measurements, air quality and meteorological modeling, and encouraged innovative open data practices with high access and transparency as part of public policy. human resources are a key priority in the success of the ius. use of the best available knowledge and science has been the basis for informed decision making, and research is crucial for designing, implementing and improving many of these services: -data, information and knowledge generation through air quality and meteorological parameters -collaboration with national and international research institutions. -mexico city government agencies (e.g., mexico city secretariat of science, technology and innovation) have devoted substantial budget to support many research studies related to these services.the development of a specific mexico city air quality risk index as part of the ius, which incorporates both health impacts and air quality condition to inform people with high vulnerability has been a success. research conducted as part of the ius has shown evidence of health benefits that have arisen due to improvements in air quality, e.g., the recent harvard-sedema publication showing 22,500 premature deaths avoided during the period of 1990 to 2015 and an increase in life expectancy of 3.2 years (sedema-hsph, 2018).given the variability in geography and climate in france, cities focus on several and different hazards on adaptation strategies in urban planning. in general, coastal cities are more concerned by sea level rise and, especially around the mediterranean sea, on flash flood events, that are recurrent in autumn. inland cities, like paris however, are more focused on heat waves and river flooding. for these cities, the expected climate change especially points to the risk of future increases in the frequency and intensity of heat waves . this is why, even if this is not the only hazard, adaptation to heat waves and mitigation of urban heat islands has become a priority for many french cities, such as paris, lyon, toulouse, lille, and rennes, even though these cities are under contrasting summer climates (much warmer in toulouse than rennes or lille). ius for paris will be presented here. proposition and evaluation of adaptation strategies to climate change demand a quantification of the combined uhi and heat wave impacts, in terms of exposure of people, sanitary issues, and the development of interdisciplinary urban climate services (ucs).because questions of mitigation of, and adaptation to, climate change are driven by very long-term horizons, a common tool to address these is numerical modeling. however, a city is a very complex system, with its own evolution, influencing strongly the local meteorology (e.g. a growing city is likely to lead to a larger uhi). studying future urban climate require ucs to consider the interactions between city and climate changes , including city evolution models (that include socio-economics and architectural aspects) and state-of-the-art urbanized atmospheric models.using modeling approaches, ucs should be delivered on the urban agglomerations at the city-scale (both processes and impacts cover the entire agglomeration), with a spatially fine-scale (typically 200 m). this allows assessment at the neighborhood scale, which is considered by french urban planners as the pertinent scale for the study of energy transition policies concerning urban planning related to buildings energy consumption.quantification of impacts on city and population (uhi, comfort, energy consumption, water needs) and effects of adaptation strategies on these, were performed over paris. the wide range of impacts but also the large scope of the adaptation scenarios (limited only by the imagination of people) require the use of, and sometimes the development of, many specific parameterizations within the numerical modeling system.many scenarios are based on the application of urban vegetation in various configurations (e.g. ground vegetation, street trees, vegetated walls and green roofs). this required development of the teb model (masson, 2000) to consider, and further evaluate, such scenarios (lemonsu et al., 2012; de munck et al., 2013; de munck et al., 2018; redon et al., 2017) . using a complete vegetation and soil model to represent green roofs, de munck et al. (2018) showed that green roofs would not have a significant effect on air temperature at street level, contrary to ground vegetation and trees. impacts on hydrology are now included in the model (stavropulos-laffaille et al., 2018) and will allow study of the combined uhi-hydrology impacts on paris and its suburbs. the model developments also permitted testing of implementing alternative urban energy systems; masson et al. (2014b) showed that solar panels could be widely implemented without adverse effect on the uhi (where a slight cooling, of approximately 0.2c, was simulated). air conditioning can increase night-time temperatures in more densely built parts of paris by more than 1c (de munck et al., 2013) , so a building energy module is also a desirable component of the modeling system to evaluate anthropogenic heat fluxes to the atmosphere. energetic human behavior has been including in teb (schoetter et al., 2017) thanks to a collaboration with sociologists ). the modeling system then permits testing the impacts of not only changes to the character of the urban structure (insulation), but also eventually, societal change, such as aging of the population, who may demand greater use of building cooling during summertime. this emphasizes the interdisciplinary interactions that are needed to study the urban system and build ucs.in order to be pertinent, such ucs need to be co-constructed between several actors, including city administrations. in france, this has been initiated by direct collaboration with urban planning agencies in research projects with local communities (through meetings, co-funded phd thesis), and by the inclusion of sociologists and researchers in urban law in the research projects (lambert-habib et al., 2013) . these collaborations facilitate knowledge transfer and the proposition of modification of the legal documents to better consider energy and micro-climatic issues in urban development.in the collaboration between several actors, especially institutional and academic ones, one field where co-construction is particularly important is during scenario development. during the conception of ucs, urban scenarios are built at both the services and technical levels: they are built in a cooperative way with the stakeholders, and then translated into input variables for the models (houet et al., 2017) . this allows definition of practical tools for ucs and facilitates knowledge exchange between sectors and between planners and academics.a crucial point for city administrations is to anchor the state-of-the-art knowledge, coming from researchers or experiences in other cities, into their own city. this is preliminary to concrete action and realization of an adaptation strategy.experimental studies are then considered necessary for cities to reach this objective. two examples are used to illustrate this need. new technologies allow development of city-owned real-time urban networks of meteorological stations. municipalities can gather such data to allow for future conception and production of ucs, internally or externally. touati et al. (2019) presents how such finescale meteorological data can be combined with urban features in order to reach a spatial resolution fine enough for communities.the city of paris launched an experimental study focused on the estimation of the impact of the watering of sidewalks and roads during summer days (hendel et al., 2015 (hendel et al., , 2016 . this experiment (fig. 11 ) was performed after previous numerical studies evaluating adaptation scenarios on paris (based on white roof and street watering, desplat et al., 2009 , kounkou-arnau et al., 2014 , in order to gain both experimental evidence and a first assessment of feasibility. a meteorological station was installed on a sidewalk, and several heat flux measurements were performed within the sidewalk and the road. watering time intervals by water trucks were optimized, and daytime cooling of 0.8c on air temperature, and 1.5c on utci comfort index were observed. such experimental implementation also eases the knowledge exchange with the stakeholders.ucs delivery to the stakeholder requires interdisciplinarity at different stages. interactions are of course needed at the co-construction stage, in order to build ucs that are both pertinent for the user and feasible. transfer tools are also needed to utilize the full potential of the ucs results . in the toulouse case, the analysis of the current vulnerability of the city to heat waves used the urban climate map approach. it was further improved by using the local climate zones approach (stewart and oke, 2012) , a now common way to represent urban neighborhoods from a climatic perspective. modelled temperature and wind fields were provided at 250 m resolution. local weather types (with specific weather types linked to the city site, not synoptic-scale weather regimes) proved a nice way to communicate with the stakeholder and for the stakeholder to comprehend the variability of the urban climate of their city. finally, in order to facilitate integration of urban climate issues within the urban planning practice, sociologists and researchers in law analyzed various french legal documents related to planning to point out the most appropriate places where quantitative information or incentives should be included.proceeding from the above description and characterization of iuss for the four selected cities and following the analysis categories/topics of table 2 and table 3 , as a profiling summary table of the cities, shows how their needs are covered by ius, as well as differences and synergy of cities experience, ius novelty, gaps, and further needs.the case study cities all reported flooding associated with pluvial (surface water) or fluvial (river) flooding events was a concern. these are often associated with convective weather events that bring intense rainfall to urban areas and the watersheds for rivers in these areas. forecasting of these types of events is needed on short timescales at high resolution with rapid communication to those potentially impacted. heatwaves and the urban enhancement of temperatures related to impacts on human health and energy demand were a common concern. two cities also mention cold wave type events for which some urban inhabitants may be particularly at risk. air quality was also a common concern.the geographical setting of the city is an important determinant of the hazards noted. coastal cities report concern with coastal flooding associated with storms, tropical cyclones and sea level rise as well as availability of sea/lake breezes for urban ventilation, and recognize the need for information to support infrastructure modification. cities in steep terrain with active tectonic processes note the risk posed by geophysical hazards such as landslides as well as on transport/dispersion of air pollutants and the possible importation of air pollution due to forest fires.the need for ius (its initiation) and scope as described by the case studies revealed that the 'co-construction between several actors' is an important element. it recognizes the complexity of urban systems and their socio-economic as well as physical dimension and the need for efficient and timely distribution of products to end users. initiators of projects may arise from specific events with impact (e.g. sars, natural disasters) or that have the potential to affect multiple operations as well as the citizenry (international sporting event), or simply recognition of need from users. the scope was generally broad in both time scale (e.g. severe weather warning vs information in support of infrastructure development) and type of users.the case study cities indicate their ius were subdivided into two or three components, these typically included an observational, modeling and forecast component, a communications component, and a broad component related to applications, which may be fig. 11 . appropriation of climate services by the city of paris. after numerical evaluation of road watering scenarios (left, source: epicea project), experimental study of road watering took place (right, hendel et al., 2016) . a. baklanov, et al. urban climate 32 (2020) 100610 baklanov, et al. urban climate 32 (2020) 100610 services, impacts and/or evaluation. the hong kong example (fig. 2) provides a useful categorization of such applications: category 1 are routine operations, emergency preparedness and disaster risk reduction. category 2 relate to climate change mitigation and adaption, planning, sustainable development and infrastructure and urban design. category 3 apply ius data in a 'big data' framework, e.g. for smart city development and category 4 relates to research, development and public education. all the case study cities included category 4 components; partnerships among universities, government departments (especially security, health, and planning), private sector involved in service delivery (e.g. utilities or non-profit health agencies) were common. most cities included categories 1 and 2; category 3 was explicit in two of the case studies but may be implicit as part of the others. these categories show overlap with those typical of motivational themes for the use of climate services (perrels et al., 2020) that include resilience, adaptation, mitigation and integrated sustainable development.the toronto case provides an example of an ius that incorporates a greenhouse gas perspective. greenhouse gas testbed cities combine state-of-the-art regional atmospheric monitoring and high-resolution monitoring, along with other elements such as short term forecasting for high-impact weather and aq episodes. urban-scale greenhouse gas studies provide additional scope for ius that try to link stakeholder demand with existing technical skills. an improved understanding of ghg emissions from combustion sources can also lead to a better prediction of air pollutants that are co-emitted in the same process. for example, the ability to identify leakages of ch 4 and related vocs in an urban area that can have significant impact on air quality (increased ozone levels) and thus important health implications. greenhouse gas studies in paris (france), indianapolis, los angeles, salt lake city (usa), recife (brazil) (staufer et al., 2016; turnbull et al., 2015; newman et al., 2016; wu et al., 2016) have contributed to efforts under wmo's ig3is (https://ig3is.wmo.int/) and the co2-usa (http://sites.bu.edu/co2usa) network. work can range from simple surveys of atmospheric ghgs to identification of major ghg sources to long-term monitoring to track emission changes and even into processspecific studies. it is obvious that ghg are targeted by many policies to achieve the paris agreement, but beyond this they are also an important puzzle piece in the ius approach that is intrinsically linked with understanding urban circulation (weather) and air pollutants.a wide range of challenges were experienced by the case study cities (table 3 ). these included: scientific and logistical challenges related to making the required representative observations in high density urban settings, development of numerical modeling systems and their required input data able to represent impacts at the required scale, and coupling physical modeling systems to urban socio-economic and human behaviors that are important in determining the future configuration of cities and the vulnerability of their citizens. communications and/or coordination challenges were noted by all cities. particular challenges were associated with social and spatial inequalities of urban residents and their vulnerabilities, coordination and communication between different levels of government and to the ability to reach a wide range of potential users through fast-changing modes of communication.besides improving observational techniques and increasing sensor densities, e.g. by deploying lower-cost medium precision sensors (e.g. lewis et al., 2018) another key area of development is improving high-resolution modeling capabilities. these help overcome some of the`matching domain' obstacles identified by perrels et al. (2020) . in urban areas, we require a thorough understanding of the impact of building infrastructure such as heat island effects etc. and how these affect local ghg concentrations. the same is true for air pollutants, which share many of the same sources as ghg, e.g. fuel combustion causing co 2 , co, nox emissions or fugitive leaks of process gases like ch 4 or other vocs. here an ius approach provides multiple benefits: the improved ability to model urban weather, i.e. the dynamic part of the atmosphere, then allows better simulations of local ghg and air pollutant concentration.one major barrier for cities, in comparison to national governments, is the limited capacity to deal with multiple, possibly inconsistent, data streams. it is key that all atmospheric observations are integrated into one framework that provides timely and comprehensive information to the stakeholders. such a framework also allows weighing potential trade-offs and multi-benefits more clearly. for example, the use of burning renewable biomass like wood for heating, which is clearly positive in reducing fossil fuel use, but can significantly increase emissions of particulate matter and deteriorate air quality. an example of multi-benefit policies is the greening of cities. additional tree planting will help sequester a certain amount of co 2 , while also helping to counter act urban heat island effects.advances to model development and higher resolution observational and model data provided novelty and formed the basis for some innovative solutions described by the case study cities. integration of government, private sector and research communications supported research and development advances. the development of impact-based services, such as an aq risk index targeting vulnerable populations in mexico city, was another area reported by multiple cities. in line with increased model and observational resolution, the handling of 'big data' was reported by some cities as a focus of current and future efforts.level of integration can be assessed on two axes: cross-service integration that represents interactions between the components of weather/climate services (meteorological, climatological, hydrological, and air quality), while crosssector integration refers to the integration between service providers and urban partners (ius guidance volume 2, wmo, 2019). assessment of integration can also vary for different components of an ius so that the same city may receive multiple categorizations. a crude categorization by quadrants (q) recognizes ius with low levels of integration on either axis (q1), strong integration across sectors, so a city with partners, but reliant on simple data provision (q2), a more comprehensive integration of data products from service providers tuned to urban needs but without a lot of urban partners (q3) and, at its most mature, maximum integration on both axes (q4), which represents specialized products developed collaboratively with urban partners (wmo, 2019). table 3 shows the level of integration according to these quadrants. not surprisingly, the case study cities show maturity of ius (q4) in at least one component of their ius. in hong kong, the hong kong observatory partnered with the environmental protection department and other government departments to create an integrated system where users are supported by various weather, climate and environmental services through a combination of communication approaches (fig. 2) . mexico city's c5 centre provides a broad mechanism for communication of hazards to the public. in toronto, a major international sporting event provided the opportunity to build initial relations with select end users (event organizers, security, and public health) and to facilitate partnerships among government agencies at different levels. however, the legacy of these relations and partnerships has to be strengthened and organized, and gaps were noted in the training and ability of local agencies to use research outputs provided by forecasters. in paris, urban planning elements of the ius directed towards modeling for climate change adaptation was most advanced, with research projects providing the basis for integration among sectors with incorporation of researchers from different academic backgrounds providing key input on the research. multi-hazard early warning systems for paris however were much less advanced, with largely a data-only availability and little integration with partners.4.1.1.5. observations and data. the majority of the case study cities reported urban to meso-scale meteorological networks designed to help provide higher spatial resolution data appropriate for urban needs. air quality measurements were also made by three cities, although typically at a much smaller number of stations. site specific or mobile stations were used to answer specific research questions in some cities. reporting on databases and sharing was split between cities advancing open data with high access for the public as well as ius partners (hong kong, mexico city), and those where it was more targeted to ius partners (toronto, paris).the most common city data reported were urban morphology and land use. transportation and public health information were mentioned by two cities.4.1.1.6. modeling, prediction & applications. the majority of cities reported short term forecasting products on the urban scale for hydrometerorological hazards and air quality / heat risk. over the longer term, case study cities were directing modeling results towards climate change adaptation or mitigation strategies to advance sustainable urban development and infrastructure. mexico city reported development of a risk atlas that incorporated other geophysical hazards in the urban environment.all cities recognize the importance of liaison with other agencies and that effective communication is a key element of success that must incorporate researchers, operations, services and end users from different sectors. social media is a new tool for communications that requires further development in the context of ius, along with big data/ai/crowdsourcing approaches for timely collection and dissemination of information. mexico city has set up a command centre that explicitly integrates multiple agencies. research-based projects have become multidisciplinary recognizing the importance of, for example, the need for social scientists to better represent the expected future development of cities, the role of human behavior in modeling the anthropogenic heat flux, and socio-economic dimensions of vulnerability as they relate to specific products such as heat and air quality information.a key element for the case study cities was the establishment of interdisciplinary partnerships and collaborations that facilitated the application of data, knowledge transfer and provided feedback to service design and outputs. this is consistent with the view that more intensive interactions between users and providers is a key element of ius (giordano et al., 2019) . communications -the type and format -were also important -whether it be to targeted user groups, such as in toronto and paris, or more broadly to the public in hong kong and mexico city. research was an important element to help demonstrate the benefits accruing from ius. human resources were needed, especially to develop specialized products and for end-user education.the analysis for the four case study cities clearly demonstrates that the integrated urban systems and services are not fully integrating different elements and sectors of the system and remain at a development level. there remain several gaps in scientific platforms and effective communications between different agencies and stakeholders. these are broadly described in the literature (e.g. perrels et al., 2020; giordano et al., 2019) .realization of integrated urban systems and services requires further developments of unified complex and multi-disciplinary data bases and large scale data sets, as well as seamless integrated multi-scale modeling tools and models for the earth system prediction on urban and down to the street scale. data sets from urban observations are collected by different agencies, with different systems, sensors, formats and for different requirements to provide evidence-based services.the continuous enhancement of weather monitoring networks, the development of higher resolution models, and introduction of new remote sensing technologies will result in rapid growth of meteorological big data, which requires extra resources and manpower as well as analytic expertise for storage, processing and utilization.the engagement of social scientists and public communication experts in developing services in the social media and big data era are very important for further consideration.the implementation of the smart city initiative and the advancement in big data analytics and a.i./machine learning techniques enable the feasibility of automatically and intelligently integrating meteorological and non-meteorological data in weather analysis and forecasts and open the opportunity to develop new services to meet users' needs (e.g. chatbot, impact based forecasts, location specific services, etc.).the experiences of the case study cities suggest that for more detailed analysis and to provide recommendations for ius development for other cities, it is important to develop a set of criteria that can be used to classify and select future best practice demonstration cities for cities on different continents and countries. from the four cities examined here, a potential list of criteria are: -socio-economic condition (city size, isolated or agglomeration, economic condition (e.g. contribution to gdp); -existing environmental activities (adopted climate action plan, activities of non-governmental organizations and citizens, mitigation and adaptation commitments, membership in city network like c40, iclei (international council for local environmental initiatives) -local governments for sustainability, etc.) -level of infrastructure (e.g. transport and communication, environmental management, monitoring and response mechanisms); -location, including continent, climate zone, weather classification and position in the landscape (inland, coastal, mountains, desert, etc.); -governance structure, policy making powers (local, regional, national), responsibility pathway for addressing urban hazards, role of hydro-meteorological service, management scheme of overall airshed; -types/combinations of hazards, focus on early warnings or/and long-term planning; -existing practice in the realization of integrated urban services (two or more hazards/elements integrated); -levels of integration: observation, infrastructure, modeling, decision making.this article demonstrates successful integrated urban service realizations with different configurations using four case study cities that represent different geographical conditions, continents and countries: hong kong, toronto, mexico city and paris. they are excellent demonstrations of the wmo urban cross-cutting focus and the ius methodology integrating the various scientific disciplines in an innovative holistic way, and of continuous development of ius linked to high-resolution and cost-effective observation systems, satellite observations, modeling, forecast and warning services, and effective use of communication. the analysis for the four cities also demonstrates that the iuss are not fully integrating different elements and sectors of the system and several gaps remain in scientific platforms and effective communications between different agencies and stakeholders.the configuration and focus of specific ius depend on geographical, economical and other conditions and differ from city to city. to analyse and provide broad recommendations for ius development for any specific city it is important to elaborate and use a set of criteria for classification (proceeding from many more cities under different conditions).it is demonstrated that legal and institutional frameworks and climate-partnerships are essential to enhance urban services and improve research development in support of decision making and policy formulation, in particular in areas related to disaster risk reduction, energy, water, and health, in alignment with the priority areas of the global framework for climate services (gfcs).it is also important to engage with relevant stakeholders (agencies, the public, nmhss, city government, private sector and businesses) from the beginning, including raising awareness and getting feedback.none.previous chapters examined public health-related transportation issues that have received a great deal of attention in the literature and that have been subject to research on the underlying causal phenomena. this chapter examines some topics that have not received as much attention, at least not concerning the potential roles for transportation in mitigating or avoiding public health impacts.the reason the chapter is entitled "transportation and _____" is that transportation is viewed in this book as enabling many other outcomes, many of which have clear public health impacts and consequences. to some extent, this chapter represents all other possible linkages between transportation and public health. in this chapter, we examine two major categories of public health concerns relating to transportationdthose that relate to what is carried by transportation systems (people, goods, and pathogens) and those that relate to direct and indirect consequences when transportation systems are disrupted. in the first category, we will examine three major topics, transportation's role in (1) transmitting infectious diseases (e.g., enabling pandemics), (2) the transfer of invasive species in the natural environment, and (3) transporting hazardous materials. the two topics examined in the second category are climate change and disaster response. in each of these cases, the transportation system is either a contributor to public health consequences (a carrier of infected persons or animals) and/or a contributor to mitigating the negative public health outcomes (e.g., evacuation or disaster recovery routes).in what is now an iconic visual used by transportation and security officials to illustrate the role of transportation systems in national and community emergencies, the shutdown of the us national airspace after the terrorist attacks of 9/11 showed how over a very short time period airplanes in the united states and those destined to the united states were diverted to the nearest airports. national security officials did not know how many other airplanes might have been hijacked by terrorists and targeted at major cities. a protocol had been in place for many years that allowed the administrator of the federal aviation administration (faa) to order the closure of us airspace in the event of a national emergency. on the ground, the washington d.c. metro system was shut down after the attack on the pentagon because security officials did not know if there were other terrorists in the city trying to reach targets or trying to escape. similarly, after the boston marathon bombing, the city of boston and regional transportation authorities closed the freeway system, regional transit, airport, and intercity rail services to not allow the bombers to escape.these examples show the important role of transportation systems in conveying people and goods (or possibly harmful materials), and how they can in themselves become part of a strategy to harm people or disrupt communities/economies. the exact nature of the public health threat will vary by how transportation systems are used and what they carry. the airplanes in the 9/11 attacks were clearly part of the weapon delivery system; a hazardous materials spill is more an issue of what a train, truck, barge, or ship is carrying. one must be cautious in basing future forecasts on these estimates because these historical events did not have available many of the medical treatments we have today (e.g., antiviral therapy, ventilators and intensive care units). in addition, the social, economic, and environmental conditions today are very different than those of the past. modern medicines, population monitoring for early onslaught of illness, and a medical establishment prepared to handle emergencies might suggest that the epidemic/pandemic outcomes of the past (where tens of millions died) would not likely occur today. however, at the same time, the more extensive and interconnected global air system (permitting more rapid and dispersed transmittal of communicable diseases) and the ability of small groups of individuals (terrorists) to manufacture and deliver biological weapons are much greater today. these considerations would suggest that such epidemic/pandemic outcomes might be even more serious than those of the past.due to their very nature, transportation systems allow the physical movement of, and enable contact among, many different people. in the course of many types of trips, there are many surfaces that have been touched by other people. medical science has known for some time that sneezing, coughing, talking, and even breathing can carry pathogens that expose others nearby. pathogens are also easily transferred from one person to another by the touching of infected surfaces that are used by many different people over the course of a day (e.g., ticket machines, turnstiles, door handles, poles or straps in subway cars that provide support against vehicle acceleration, and toilet facilities). to the extent that pathogens or toxins are transmitted to others on a journey (either through physical contact or airborne), it is the transportation system that permits this to happen. some research indicates, for example, that very small droplets from a sneeze can in fact travel around 200 feet (kopman, 2014) . on airplanes, a study conducted by the us national academies found that for people seated within a seat or two to the side of someone who is infected, or within one row forward or backward, the chances of catching a contagious virus were about 80%; outside of that immediate radius; however, the risk was much lowerdonly about 3%.in medical terms, the route or mode of transmission refers to the mechanism by which a communicable disease is spread. for example, modes of transmission include direct transmission, which includes respiratory droplet and direct contact; indirect transmission, for example, airborne or indirect contact via a fomite (contaminated surface); and via a vector, which is the means of transferring a pathogen, for example, malaria/zika via mosquitoes and lyme disease via ticks.the more efficient the mode of transmission (and this is what transportation officials constantly strive for in the transportation sector) combined with the virulence of a pathogen, the faster the potential transmission of disease.in a global economy connected by supply chains in the freight sector and tied together with global air travel to most major regions of the world, the potential for rapid and widespread transmission of infectious diseases and other harmful elements can be very high. indeed, a major concern of national health and security officials is that such transmission could occur before authorities even know that it is happening (the incubation time for many communicable diseases is 1e4 days, much longer than it takes for someone to travel around the world).evidence of rapid (in relative terms when looking historically) transmission of disease comes from the historical records of pandemics and the spread of infectious disease that have occurred throughout the world. the eradication of entire native american civilizations from smallpox brought to the western hemisphere by christopher columbus and subsequent european expeditions well illustrate the potential world-spanning threat from the transmittal of infectious diseases via transportation.the bubonic plague (black death) which swept across africa, asia, and europe in the 14th century spread along the major shipping and communications lanes of the time, primarily sea lanes. the conventional rationale for the black death was that rats carrying infected fleas traveled in ships bringing with them the plague, starting in harbor cities or in major centers of commerce and then spreading as the rats moved inland. such an explanation is now questioned given the examination of plague-caused death patterns and the rapidity with which it spread (which does not conform with how fast rats could propagate throughout europe). sea transportation is still viewed as a major vehicle in the plague's initial spread, but a leading hypothesis is that it was the human, land-based contact that spread the disease so quickly after being introduced in port cities (tatem et al., 2006) . historians estimate that worldwide about 50 million people died in the initial plague; in europe, plaguecaused deaths represented between 25% and 60% of the population. an estimated 200 million people died over the three major plague outbreaks from the 14th to 17th centuries. rodriquez et al. (2017) report that there have been 10 major influenza pandemics over the past 300 years, with the 1918 spanish flu causing an estimated 30% of the world's population to get sick and resulting in the estimated deaths of between 50 and 100 million people (an estimated 40 million in one year alone). it resulted in an almost 10-year drop in the calculated average life expectancy of the global population (palese, 2004) . in the united states, over one-third of the population was affected and 500,000 people died. the virus spread around the world due to many reasons, such as the widespread dislocation of large populations due to world war i. however, many explanations focus on the predominant use of crowded intercity and international modes of travel (that is, rail and ocean liners). it is not surprising to note that some of the most severe outbreaks of influenza centered on shipyards and train stations. in sweden, major outbreaks or cases were reported in large workplaces such as factories, telegraph and telephone stations, and the tram and railway stations (holmberg, 2017) .as ever more modern transportation technology produced faster speeds, transportation became an even greater enabler of a pandemic (wilson, 1995) . saunders-hastings and krewski (2016) , who examined pandemics since the late 1500s, noted that the state of transportation technology was a likely contributor to the time it took for a disease to spread.in the winter of 1889, an influenza pandemic emerged in russia, spreading by rail and sea across europe and north america. with an estimated case fatality rate in the range of 0.1%e0.28%, the outbreak killed about one million people globally. this pandemic spread at a faster rate than previous ones and may provide the first indication of the accelerated spread of emergent diseases as a result of progress in transportation technology.with respect to cholera, tatem et al. (2006) note the importance of transportation in cholera outbreaks, in many cases caused by the movement of military transport.cholera first started as an epidemic outbreak in 1817 in india, but soon started spreading in part due to british ship and troop movements carrying the infection north and east to china, japan and indonesia. the disease also spread along trade routes to the west as far as southern russia. each successive pandemic increased in extent and severity, reflecting the expanding reach of the global transport system and increased movements of people, particularly on religious pilgrimages. the 1830s saw russian troops, english ships, irish immigrants and canadian exploration carry the cholera bacterium to the baltic, england, ireland, canada, usa and mexico.more recently, the severe acute respiratory syndrome (sars) in the early 2000s and the swine flu epidemics in 2009 quickly spread because of air travel and in some cases passenger ocean liners. browne and beck (2016) noted that air transportation is one of the major means of accelerating and amplifying influenza propagation, occurring aboard the planes as well as at airports.transportation systems can play a role in spreading communicable disease within urban areas as well, although most likely not as prominent a mode of transmission as other factors (such as community spaces, schools, and areas of employment that allow for direct person-to-person transmission). a simulation of a potential influenza outbreak in new york city based on calibration data from the 1957e58 influenza pandemics and from nyc travel surveys estimated that only 4% of the spread of influenza would occur on the subway (cooley et al., 2011) . however, simulations in sweden found that banning journeys of more than 50 kms (31 miles) would drastically reduce the speed and geographical spread of influenza outbreaks, even when compliance with the ban was not total. the 50 kms is a typical range for commuter rail services in most major metropolitan areas (camitz and liljjeros, 2006) .for surface transportation modes, such as public transit and intercity rail, dealing with an outbreak of a communicable disease or a pandemic could create significant challenges to the transportation agency. not only is there the potential for the transmission of dangerous microbes in crowded conditions, but the agency employees themselves might succumb to illness or otherwise be unable to report for work, creating a serious constraint on providing service. the same could be true for any major disruption due to earthquake or other regional disasters.the us national academies of sciences, engineering, and medicine (2014) produced a "guide for public transportation pandemic planning and response" that identified the differences between local disasters that result in service and system disruptions, and more global and national pandemics.the report identified such differences as:l workers could possibly be absent for a short time in local disruptions, whereas they might be absent for extended periods in pandemics l disruptions due to extreme weather or terrorist attacks will likely result in infrastructure damage, whereas pandemics do not l dealing with the injured from a local disaster could likely be handled by the community medical services whereas pandemics might need massive medical intervention from outside the community with respect to transit as a means of transmitting communicable diseases, one of the few systematic examinations of the how this could occur was a study supported by the european union in 2014 called, prevention and management of high threat pathogen incidents in transport hubs (pan-dhub) (kulmala, 2016; ). the research identified what it called potential transport hot spots for pandemics, defined as "points or sites within a traffic hub environment where the risk of microbial transmission is at least periodically increased due to favorable conditions or human behavior." the possible mechanisms for transmission were: (1) direct and indirect contact and (2) airborne or droplet transmission. these hot spots would likely vary by type of pathogen or microbe and the environmental conditions within which they thrive.a study by ikonen et al. (2018) , which sampled different locations in an airport, showed the potential hot spots for different types of viruses.nucleic acid of at least one respiratory virus was detected in 9 out of 90 (10%) surface samples, including: a plastic toy dog in the children's playground (2/3 swabs, 67%); hand-carried luggage trays at the security check area (4/8%, 50%); the buttons of the payment terminal at the pharmacy (1/2%, 50%); the handrails of stairs (1/7%, 14%); and the passenger side desk and divider glass at a passport control point (1/3%, 33%). among the 10 respiratory virus findings at various sites, the viruses identified were: rhinovirus (4/10%, 40%, from surfaces); coronavirus (3/10%, 30%, from surfaces); adenovirus (2/10%, 20%, 1 air sample, 1 surface sample); influenza a (1/10%, 10%, surface sample).some of the different types of hot spots are shown in table 8 .2. of some interest for the transmission of microbes transmitted by indirect contact, the research cited a study that observed people on a metro system touching their faces an average of 3.6 times per hour and common objects an average of 3.3 times per hour (alonzo et al., 2013) . by their behavior, passengers readily provide the means of transferring microbes from a surface to the skin and to mucous membranes in the nasal passage.public health and transportation officials agree that being prepared for possible infectious diseases and having strategies, plans, and protocols in place for dealing with such threats at the first sign of infection is an important first step. source: (kulmala,2016) . this step will vary by level and responsibility of government (see chapter 3). for example, some of the key observations/conclusions from the first us influenza pandemic plan included the following (homeland security council, 2006) .the goals of the federal government response to a pandemic are to (1) stop, slow, or otherwise limit the spread of a pandemic to the united states;(2) limit the domestic spread of a pandemic, and mitigate disease, suffering and death; and (3) sustain infrastructure and mitigate impact to the economy and the functioning of society.homeland security council. 2006. national strategy for pandemic influenza l "the center of gravity of the pandemic response will be in communities.the distributed nature of a pandemic, as well as the sheer burden of disease across the nation over a period of months or longer, means that the federal government's support will be limited. the secretary of homeland security is responsible for coordinating federal operations and resources, establishing reporting requirements, and conducting ongoing communications with federal, state, local, and tribal governments, the private sector, and nongovernmental organizations (ngos).l the secretary of health and human services will lead federal health and medical response efforts and will be the principal federal spokesperson for public health issues.l measures at the borders might provide an opportunity to slow the spread of a pandemic to and within the united states but are unlikely to prevent it. moreover, the sheer volume of traffic and the difficulty of developing screening protocols to detect an influenza-like illness pose significant challenges.l measures to limit domestic travel may delay the spread of disease. these restrictions could include a range of options, such as reductions in non-essential travel and, as a last resort, mandatory restrictions .. communities, states, the private sector, and the federal government will need to carefully weigh the costs and benefits of transportation measures when developing their response plans, including the effectiveness of an action in slowing the spread of a pandemic, its social and economic consequences, and its operational feasibility.l in order to ensure that international arrivals undergo proper screening protocols and are subject to isolation and quarantine if appropriate, the number of airports accepting international flights will be limited early in a pandemic.l managing air passengers who might be infected with an influenza virus having pandemic potential includes isolation of ill persons, quarantine of all non-ill travelers (and crew), and targeted treatment and prophylaxis with antiviral medications.l the risk of influenza transmission by cargo is low (inanimate ship-borne cargo poses low risk, and routine surfaces are easily decontaminated).l state, local, tribal, and private sector entities should assess the systemic effects on freight delivery such as supply chain impact, just-in-time delivery, warehousing, and logistics they should develop contingency plans in the event of loss of critical services such as the delivery of essential commodities (e.g., chlorine for water purification, gasoline, food, and medical supplies).lthe federal government recommends that governmental entities and private sector organizations assume that up to 40% of their staff may be absent for periods of about 2 weeks at the height of a pandemic wave, with lower levels of staff absent for a few weeks on either side of the peak.l due to stresses placed upon the health-care system and other critical functions, civil disturbances and breakdowns in public order may occur. likewise, emergency call centers may be overwhelmed with calls for assistance, including requests to transport influenza victims. local law enforcement agencies may be called upon to enforce movement restrictions or quarantines thereby diverting resources from traditional law enforcement duties. to add to these challenges, law enforcement and emergency response agencies can also expect to have their uniform and support ranks reduced significantly as a result of the pandemic. private sector entities responsible for securing critical infrastructure will face similar challenges."for those interested in pandemic strategies for transportation agencies, the national influenza pandemic plan included separate plans for maritime (dhs, 2008a) , rail (dhs, 2008b) , transit (dhs, 2008c) , aviation (dhs, 2008d) , and highway (dhs, 2008e) transportation. table 8 .3 shows some of the strategies that a transit agency could use to prevent the spread of disease. l support emergency risk management capacity development. l develop and maintain continuity of operations plans and protocols that address the unique consequences of a pandemic, including l absenteeism l line of succession for the agency l identification of mission essential services and priorities l procedures for the reassignment of employees l redundancy of mission critical communication and information systems l coordinate pandemic response strategies with other agencies in the region to account for the mobility of the population in spreading the disease. l training and technical support to make sure vulnerable populations are able to sustain and access critical services. l identify staff who can be cross-trained to perform emergency response functions. l identify functions that could be temporarily is continued or performed via telecommuting for several weeks. l make sure agency's call center knows how to forward relevant calls to health and medical triage centers.alert phased influenza caused by a new subtype has been identified in humans. local area is affected or has extensive travel/ trade links with affected areas l reassess and recalibrate response plans in light of actual epidemiological features as seen elsewhere and in early stages in impacted area, including case fatality rate and differential impacts on subgroups of the population. l promote and disseminate pandemic influenza educational messages to the staff. l identify with local health providers the need for staff to use personal protective equipment such as respirators and surgical masks. l local surveillance system, coupled with state, national and international surveillance efforts and laboratory testing, serves as an early warning system for potential pandemics. l begin information campaign to influence public behavior toward basic infection control measures (hand washing, using alcohol hand gel, respiratory etiquette, staying home when sick, and avoiding unnecessary contact with other persons during a pandemic).much has changed since the worldwide pandemics and plagues of past centuries. historical accounts of the spread of these infectious diseases show the importance of factors such as households (and families), schools, military training camps, city density, and transportation flows. the relative importance of these factors has changed profoundly over time, as have public health interventions, medical care technologies, and nutrition (holmberg, 2017) . however, given continued innovations in transportation and logistics technologies, it seems likely that global transportation systems will continue to become more efficient and reliable. thus, transportation systems will continue to be an important potential vector for the transmission of communicable diseases (note, this statement does not even consider the use of biological agents in a terrorist attack against transportation systems of which smallpox and anthrax are considered to be the greatest threat). it seems clear in the literature and in governmental contingency plans that the burden in handling epidemics/pandemics will rest with local public health/ medical providers. the transportation component at this level of response could well be making sure the personnel and supplies necessary to be transported into containment zones are available and not hindered due to illness among drivers or pilots.as noted by haggett (2000) , the transportation contribution to the control of epidemics and pandemics will likely be characterized by the following:1. "pandemic control will rely less and less on conventional spatial barriers as the global transport network continues to expand, reporting now play a critical role in preventing the spatial spread of a disease, 3. mathematical models will become central in identifying aberrant behavior in disease trends, and 4. the high cost of surveillance makes sampling design and the development of cost-effective monitoring and testing approaches vital to effective epidemic early warning systems."it seems, however, that controlling the dispersion of communicable diseases could still require the isolation of those contaminated, which in turn will likely mean curtailing in some fashion the transportation systems that serve as a vector in disease transmission. this is especially true for the aviation system (note the federal pandemic strategy of allowing international flights to land at only a few, well-prepared airports). if such a strategy is necessary, it will not only cause a massive dislocation of segments of the population who now find themselves stranded in different parts of the country but could well result in large-scale economic costs to global, national, state, and local economies (meyer and brown, 2019) .over the long term, climate change could very well be one of the most influential enablers of newly introduced diseases and vectors that are transported to new environments (cdc and apha, undated). according to the fourth us national climate change assessment, "climate change is expected to alter the geographic range, seasonal distribution, and abundance of disease vectors, exposing more people in north america to ticks that carry lyme disease or other bacterial and viral agents, and to mosquitoes that transmit west nile, chikungunya, dengue, and zika viruses. changing weather patterns interact with other factors, including how pathogens adapt and change, changing ecosystems and land use, demographics, human behavior, and the status of public health infrastructure and management" (u.s. global change research program, 2018a). more will be said about this later.the "ride-alongs" in transportation transportation systems carry more than just people. historical accounts from the early use of ships traversing different parts of the globe described how certain types of species (rodents and insects, primarily) were transported as well (hulme, 2009 ). the introduction of some of these species has had devastating effects on local ecologies and, in some cases, has created serious public health issues (e.g., introduction of disease-carrying mosquitos) (national invasive species council, 2016 ). an illustration of the former is where new species have interfered with the recovery or contributed to the decline of 42% of the federally-listed threatened and endangered native species (kurth, 2017) . other examples include: l the brown-tail moth as a defoliator of a variety of deciduous trees and shrubs can cause dermatitis and respiratory problems when people come in contact with larval hairs. l invasive species such as birds, rodents, and insects (e.g., mosquitoes, fleas, and lice) can serve as vectors of human disease (dix et al., 2009 ).another common term used for these "ride-alongs" is invasive species. the national wildlife federation defines an invasive species as:any kind of living organismdan amphibian (like the cane toad), plant, insect, fish, fungus, bacteria, or even an organism's seeds or eggsdthat is not native to an ecosystem and causes harm. they can harm the environment, the economy, or even human health. species that grow and reproduce quickly, and spread aggressively, with potential to cause harm, are given the label 'invasive'(national wildlife federation, undated (a)).the us government simply defines an invasive species as "an alien species whose introduction does or is likely to cause economic or environmental harm or harm to human health" (doa, undated).some of the encroachment of an invasive species into a new ecology is enabled by transportation systems. however, changing climatic conditions, in some cases, have been an additional enabler in allowing species to migrate to parts of the country that in previous decades were inhospitable to that species. some of these species often become the dominant species in the new ecology (see following discussion of climate change). as noted by crowl et al. (2009) : "land use and climate change interact with human transportation networks to facilitate the spread of invasive species, vectors, and pathogens from local to continental scales." in addition, many of the invasive species that are causing the most environmental damage are those that were brought to the united states to control another pest species or as "pets" (e.g., the burmese python which is endangering small mammals, endangered birds, and even alligators in the everglades, florida).the following paragraphs will only focus on the transfer of invasive species due to transportation or via trade enabled by transportation (e.g., of the invasive forest insects and pathogens arriving in the united states over the past 150 years or so, an estimated 70% are thought to have arrived on imported live plants (epanchin-niell, 2014) . a global database on invasive species listed 255 invasive species that used transportation either as a contaminant or as a "stowaway" for arriving in a new ecology (invasive species specialists group, 2008) . and a research group in the state of texas in 2014 estimated that more than 800 aquatic and terrestrial species had landed in texas as of that year and predicted that the trend will continue with the expansion of the panama canal encouraging an increased use of texas ports (texas invasive species institute, 2014).some examples of invasive species that were brought to the united states via some form of transportation include:1. zebra mussel: brought in ballast water or attached to the outsides of ships.because they grow so fast, large populations of zebra mussels filtering water can severely impact native plankton, which reduces food for fish (earthrangers, 2014) . 2. earthworms: the first earthworms in minnesota probably arrived with soils and plants brought from europe when ships using rocks and soil as ballast dumped the soil on shore as they adjusted the ballast weight of the ship. they also were most likely included with imported european plants. the earthworms are causing major damage to hardwood forests in minnesota (minnesota department of natural resources, 2019). 3. asian long-horned beetle: often encased in wooden packaging materials and trees, the larvae of asian longhorn beetles eat soft sappy bark, which makes it hard for nutrients to reach other parts of a tree. as they grow, the larvae burrow into the middle of the tree leaving large tunnels as they move, making the tree physically weaker. many trees do not survive once they are infested with asian longhorn beetles (earthrangers, 2014) . 4. asian tiger mosquito: the asian tiger mosquito entered the united states in shipments of used tires from northern asia in the mid-1980s. it is a potential vector of encephalitis, dengue (all four serotypes), yellow fever, and dog heartworm. west nile virus has been detected in this species in the eastern united states (center for invasive species research, 2016). 5. northern pacific seastars: also brought in ballast water, northern pacific seastars have a voracious appetite, eating almost anything they can find. they are believed to be the major reason for the decline of several species of fish (earthrangers, 2014) .one of the major forms of the species "invasion" into the united states is via ocean-going ships. for example, the national wildlife federation (nwf) estimates that more than 185 aquatic invasive species have entered the great lakes, and that ocean-going shipping is the no. 1 source of nonnative aquatic species (a new non-native species is discovered on average once every 28 weeks) (national wildlife federation, undated (b)). since the st. lawrence seaway connecting the great lakes to the atlantic ocean was opened in 1959, 85 invasive species have been discovered with 54 linked to ballast water discharge (water carried by ships to help them stay balanced while at sea). the us maritime administration (marad) notes:invasive species are considered to be one of the greatest threats to marine and coastal biodiversity world-wide. aquatic invasions can destroy native ecosystems, overwhelm native species, reduce recreational opportunities, and adversely impact sport and commercial fisheries. although there are many pathways through which these invasions can occur, transportation in ships' ballast water and in underwater hull biofouling are known contributors marad (2018).since 1993, ocean-going ships have been required to replace their ballast water with ocean water before entering the great lakes, known as ballast water exchange (however, some species are still able to survive in this new salty ballast water).the international maritime organization (imo, 2011) has issued guidelines for the control and management of ships' biofouling (the existence of invasive species) to minimize the transfer of invasive aquatic species. the international convention for the control and management of ships' ballast water and sediments (2004) and the convention on biological diversity (1992) served as the basis for the guidelines. the convention requires participating nations to have a ballast water management plan to help avoid disrupting native ecosystems with invasive aquatic species (wiant, 2017) . two methods can be used to implement such a plan: (1) using a ballast water exchange standard, which requires ships to exchange a minimum of 95% ballast water volume at least 50 nautical miles from the nearest shore and in waters of 200 m depth or more (helping prevent invasive species spreading in coastal and shallow waters that are one of the most vulnerable to invasive species) and (2) using a ballast water performance standard, which establishes thresholds for the presence of aquatic organisms in the ballast water. the water quality limits may be achieved through physical and/or chemical treatment methods.the ballast water strategy is illustrative of one of the strategies adopted by government agencies to minimize the risk of maritime invasive species, that is, to stop their arriving in the first place. the us forest service prohibits the importation of species via environmental and public health regulations it considers to be potentially injurious. once an invasive species is established in the united states, the next strategy is to control and eradicate it with a variety of actions. these include physical removal, introducing natural predators (which as noted earlier can become themselves a problem), affecting the reproduction environment, or ultimately adopting public health strategies for dealing with the diseases or illnesses borne by the species (e.g., protecting vulnerable populations against mosquito-borne disease outbreaks).the transport of animals, insects, molds/fungi or plants that constitute an "attack" on a native ecology is a serious issue and one that has become even more important as global connectivity has increased. the physical transportation of uninvited species along trade routes has resulted in dramatic and significant impacts on native species. from a public health perspective, the invasive species concern is perhaps not as significant as that represented by infectious diseases being carried by passengers. but with changing climatic conditions, newly introduced diseases following transportation vectors could well represent an increasingly important public health issue. although steps have been taken by government agencies to try and control the risks associated with invasive species, it seems that the trend toward more (and perhaps more deadly) species being introduced into native ecologies will continue.each day in 2016 in the united states, the us freight system carried on average 48.3 million tons of goods worth $49.6 billion or about 54.7 tons of freight carried annually for every man, woman, and child in the country (bts, 2019). in the vast majority of cases, this freight arrives at its destination without incident, and when one looks at the national statistics, the safety record for those moving the freight is very good. however, when accidents or incidents do occur, the aftermath can have serious public health consequences because of what is carried by the trains, trucks, barges, or ships. the 2013 rail catastrophe in lac-mgantic, quebec, for example, resulted in 47 deaths and great property destruction when a train carrying petroleum crashed and exploded. in other cases, when hazardous materials are released as the result of a crash, evacuations of nearby communities often occur as a precaution against serious health consequences. the following sections will examine the transportation and public health challenges associated with the movement of hazardous materials.depending on the materials being used or transported, government agencies define hazardous materials in different ways (although they often crossreference one another). for example, the occupational safety and health administration (osha), which is focused primarily on the release of hazardous materials at worksites and at hazardous waste sites, defines a hazardous material as:any biological agent and other disease-causing agent which after release into the environment and upon exposure, ingestion, inhalation, or assimilation into any person, either directly from the environment or indirectly by ingestion through food chains, will or may reasonably be anticipated to cause death, disease, behavioral abnormalities, cancer, genetic mutation, physiological malfunctions (including malfunctions in reproduction) or physical deformations in such persons or their offspring;health hazard means a chemical or a pathogen where acute or chronic health effects may occur in exposed employees. it also includes stress due to temperature extremes. the term health hazard includes chemicals that are classified in accordance with the hazard communication standard as posing one of the following hazardous effects: acute toxicity (any route of exposure); skin corrosion or irritation; serious eye damage or eye irritation; respiratory or skin sensitization; germ cell mutagenicity; carcinogenicity; reproductive toxicity; specific target organ toxicity (single or repeated exposure); aspiration toxicity or simple asphyxiant.department of labor (undated).the usdot defines a hazardous material as: the us environmental protection agency (epa) expands the public health concern to beyond simply human health, impacts (of hazardous materials) on the environment can be just as devastating: killing organisms in a lake or river, destroying animals and plants in a contaminated area, causing major reproductive complications in animals, or otherwise limit the ability of an ecosystem to survive. certain hazardous substances also have the potential to explode or cause a fire, threatening both animals and human populations.(usepa, 2017).other us agencies that have definitions of hazardous materials include the us department of energy (doe), us department of homeland security (dhs), and the nuclear regulatory commission (nrc). for purposes of this chapter, we will use a general definition offered by the institute of hazardous materials and management (ihmm, 2018), a hazardous material is any item or agent (biological, chemical, radiological, and/or physical), which has the potential to cause harm to humans, animals, or the environment, either by itself or through interaction with other factors.also, for purposes of this chapter, we will focus on the guidance, contexts, and recommended actions as offered by the usdot and other transportation agencies. for labeling purposes (and for identification on vehicles and in the paperwork that accompanies shipments), the usdot uses the following classes of hazardous materials:class 1: explosives class 2: gases class 3: flammable liquid class 4: flammable solid, spontaneously combustible, and dangerous when wet class 5: oxidizer, organic peroxide class 6: poison (toxic), position inhalation hazard, infectious substance class 7: radioactive class 8: corrosive class 9: miscellaneous hazardous material (chisolm, 2018) legislative authoritythe us government has passed many laws and promulgated many more regulations pertaining to the handling of hazardous materials and how the response to hazardous materials spills should occur. the hazardous materials transportation act of 1975 (hmta), and its subsequent amendments, is the most important foundational law for transporting hazardous materials. it empowers the secretary of transportation to designate as hazardous material any "particular quantity or form" of a material that "may pose an unreasonable risk to health and safety or property." subsequent regulations from the respective modal administrations focused on procedures and/or policies, designation of hazardous materials, requirements for packaging and handling such materials, and operational rules when transporting them over the transportation network. in implementing the act, the usdot named over 3000 materials that fit the definition of a hazardous material and thus subject to regulation. thousands of other materials were included in the regulations because they were explosive, flammable, corrosive, infectious, or hazardous in other ways.even with the hmta of 1975, the institutional structure for dealing with hazardous materials was complex, complicated, and confusing. accordingly, the hazardous materials transportation uniform safety act (hmtusa) was passed in 1990 to rectify conflicting federal, state, and local regulations. the hmtusa reinforced the secretary of transportation's authority to promulgate regulations for the safe transport of hazardous material in intrastate, interstate, and us-oriented foreign commerce. the law also required uniformity among different state and local highway hazardous materials routing regulations, and in the authorization (and criteria) for the issuance of federal permits to motor carriers of hazardous materials and the transport of radioactive materials.within the usdot, the pipeline and hazardous materials safety administration (phmsa) is the lead agency dealing with hazardous materials transportation. according the phmsa website, its mission is:to protect people and the environment by advancing the safe transportation of energy and other hazardous materials that are essential to our daily lives. to do this, the agency establishes national policy, sets and enforces standards, educates, and conducts research to prevent incidents. we also prepare the public and first responders to reduce consequences if an incident does occur. (phmsa, 2018) importantly, phmsa is the repository of data on hazardous materials incidents for all modes of transportation.most state governments have their own legislation and regulations focused on similar topics. as in other policy areas, federal law preempts state and local governmental requirements that are inconsistent with the law.it is important to place the national statistics on hazardous materials incidents/ spills in context. much of the data reported to phmsa and other federal agencies relate to spills or other incidents at particular sites (e.g., at an oil distribution center) and that do not require evacuation of nearby communities (phmsa, 2017). the public health concern is primarily for those affected by a spillage and for those responding to the incident. the following data should thus not be viewed as indicating a rash of hazardous materials spills throughout the united states, but rather as an indication of any type of spill that meets the criteria for reporting to the federal government.to place the hazardous spills data in context, the latest bureau of transportation statistics (bts) annual report on the us transportation system notes the following (note: some dates are for 2016, 2017, or 2018 depending on the original source of data): l the us freight system carried 17.7 billion tons of goods in 2018 valued at over $18.1 trillion. by 2045, this is expected to reach 25.5 billion tons. l about one-half of the weight and one-third of the value of this freight is moved less than 100 miles (much of this in metropolitan areas). l the number of ton-miles (one ton moved one mile, in some sense an exposure measure for the possibility of spills) of freight moved in 2016 was just under 5 trillion ton-miles. the following statistics were for the major transporters of heavy freight, (bts, 2017) l trucks: 2.02 trillion ton-miles l railroads: 1.59 trillion ton-miles l pipelines: 896.3 billion ton-miles l water (barges): 477.9 billion ton-miles l crude/refined oil and hazardous liquid pipelines carried 3.1 billion barrels in 2017; natural gas production in the same year was 27.3 trillion cubic yards of which 34% was carried in pipelines. l there has been a dramatic increase in the total crude oil moved by rail, from 23.7 million barrels in 2010 to 139.8 million in 2017.by any measure, the amount of freight/commodity/product moved annually in the united states is impressive. although there is not an exact measure of how much of this freight is carrying hazardous materials, a 2012 study by the usdot (the latest that is reported) showed the data indicated in table 8 .4.as shown in table 8 .4, by far the largest tonnage of hazardous materials carried by value, tonnage, and ton-miles was for flammable liquids. using tonmiles as a measure of potential exposure of the general population to toxic materials, the next two commodities were corrosive materials and gases.the number of incidents occurring in 2018 over the entire process of handling hazardous materials (which includes more than just transportation) is shown in table 8 .5 for non-pipeline transportation and table 8 .6 for pipelines. for pipelines, the number of serious incidents declined from 37 in 2005 to 26 in 2017. a serious incident is one resulting in a fatality or requiring an overnight, in-patient hospitalization. the top 10 types of incidents included are shown in table 8 .7.those killed or injured from these incidents included: as noted earlier, the usdot identified over 3000 materials that could be considered "hazardous" when being transported. clearly, the public health consequences of these materials will be very different depending on the composition of the particular toxic materials, the method of transmission, the body system possible health effectsthe respiratory system's function is to supply oxygen to the body and remove carbon dioxide. it includes nasal passages, pharynx, trachea, bronchi, and lungs.asbestosis, lung cancer, chronic bronchitis, fibrosis, emphysema, and decreased oxygen supply in blood.the renal system's function is to rid the body of waste, regulate the amount of body fluids, and regulate the amount of salts in the body. it includes the kidneys, urethra, bladder, and the ureter.decreased formation of urine, decreased blood flow to the kidneys, decreased ability to filterblood, prevented urine flow, kidney tissue damage, and kidney cancer.the cardiovascular system's function is to move nutrients, gases, and wastes to and from the body, help stabilize body temperature, and fight diseases and infections by transporting white blood cells to important areas. it includes the heart, blood, arteries, veins, and capillaries.heart failure and the inability of blood to carry the necessary oxygen to the body.continued environmental conditions needed for this transmission, and the level of exposure to sensitive populations, to name a few. it is beyond the scope of this book to provide coverage for every possible release of toxic materials. table 8 .7 provides a good overview produced by the centers for disease control (cdc) of the different systems in the body that could be affected by (in this case) chemical toxins (also see (cdc, 2001a) for an extensive listing of potential health effects associated with different toxic exposures). for larger scale disasters (and certainly for regional disasters such as hurricanes or earthquakes), community-or neighborhood-level evacuations can cause serious emotional and mental stress. the public health community has recognized the immediate and longer term medical needs of those coping possible health effectsthe reproductive system's function is to produce egg and sperm cells, nurture a developing fetus, and produce hormones. for males it includes the testicles, seminal vesicles, prostate gland, and the penis. for females it includes the uterus, bladder, vagina, fallopian tubes, ovaries, and the cervix.decreased ability to have a baby, increased baby deaths, increased birth defects, and infertility (the inability to have children).the nervous system's function is to transmit messages from one part of the body to another. it includes the central nervous system (the brain and spinal cord) and the peripheral nervous system.inability to move, loss of feeling, confusion, and decreased speech, sight, memory, muscle strength, or coordination.the immune system's function is to protect the body from tumor cells, environmental substances, and invading viruses or bacteria. it includes the lymph system, bone marrow, white blood cells, and the spleen.overreaction to environmental substances (allergy), immune system slow down or failure, and autoimmunity (causing the body to attack itself, which makes it more likely to have an overreaction or infection).the skin serves as a barrier to germs and other substances, prevents dehydration, and regulates body temperature.skin irritation, rash, redness or discoloration, dermatitis, and health effects related to other systems and organs due to contamination through the skin.the hepatic system's function is to break down food and store nutrients, make proteins which are essential for blood to clot, and purify the body of drugs, contaminants, or chemicals. it includes the liver and its veins.liver damage, tumors, accumulation of fat (steatosis), and death of liver cells. (cdc, undated) with the disruption, loss, and dislocation that accompany such events. referred to as "behavioral disaster health," it consists of the provision of mental health, substance abuse, and stress management services to disaster survivors and responders.according to the dhhs, typical symptoms after a disaster include l emotional symptoms such as irritability or excessive sadness.l cognitive dysfunction such as difficulty making decisions or following directions.l physical symptoms such as headache, stomach pain, or difficulty breathing.l behavioral reactions such as consuming more alcohol or interpersonal conflict.l failure to adhere to needed physical or psychiatric medication needs (dhhs, 2012b).special attention might be needed for at-risk individuals found in an affected zone. the 2013 pandemic and all-hazards preparedness reauthorization act defined at-risk individuals as "children, older adults, pregnant women, and individuals who may need additional response assistance." the dhhs further defined these populations as including but not limited to "individuals with disabilities, individuals who live in institutional settings, individuals from diverse cultures, individuals who have limited english proficiency or are non-english speaking, individuals who are transportationdisadvantaged, individuals experiencing homelessness, individuals who have chronic medical disorders, and individuals who have pharmacological dependency" (dhhs, 2016).for those who respond to incidents or disasters, their exposure to possible widespread destruction, injury, death of others, or hazardous materials could result in distress and a need for mental health support as well.as with any kind of community/public health/transportation system disruption, one of the most effective strategies for minimizing the impacts of a disruption is to be prepared beforehand. this could include establishing the protocols on who will respond, having what responsibilities, using training programs and field exercises to practice the response given different scenarios, and continually incorporating new technologies and medical practices into the emergency response procedures. a collaborative and coordinated approach to such incidents is particularly needed when hazardous materials are present. such materials could affect not only the health of nearby residents but so too of those who respond. a good understanding of what the hazardous material is along with the possible human health consequences requires close collaboration among the transportation, emergency response, and the public health/ medical communities.the transportation of hazardous materials is accompanied by several safeguards that help those who are responding to an incident. these include distinctive vehicle/car/vessel labeling, cargo information input into a national database for certain types of movements, and travel permits that identify what was being carried. as noted by the cdc,the aim of emergency personnel should be to make a chemical-specific identification while exercising caution to prevent exposure to any chemicals. identifying the hazardous material and obtaining information on its physical characteristics and toxicity are vital steps to the responder's safety and effective management of the hazardous materials incident. since each compound has its own unique set of physical and toxicological properties, early and accurate identification of the hazardous material(s) involved allows emergency personnel to initiate appropriate management steps at the scene.(cdc, 2001a)the cdc's agency for toxic substances and disease registry developed a three-volume guide for responding to hazardous materials incidents. volume 1 was "emergency medical services: a planning guide for the management of contaminated patients"; volume 2 was "hospital emergency departments: a planning guide for the management of contaminated patients"; and volume 3 was most federal agencies, states, cities, and many local communities have developed emergency operations plans that lay out the steps in responding to a hazardous material incident. although the exact steps to develop such a plan will vary by community, the general steps can be described as follows (the description is generally adopted from the federal emergency management agency) (fema, 2013):participants should include members with diverse experience in the execution of the plan. the group's collective expertise should include experience in planning; knowledge of the community; experience with the local response forces; and knowledge of hazardous materials, their effects, and appropriate medical treatments.the process should identify the community's potential hazardous materials risks primarily through the use of reports submitted by local industries required by federal law but supplemented by analysis of hazardous materials transport and other potential local hazards identified by community members.areas that are particularly vulnerable to incidents and populations that would require special planning to protect or evacuate in an emergency (such as nursing home residents) should be identified and contingency plans developed.police agencies and fire officials should assess their capabilities to respond to different types of incidents. this should include understanding what resources and help can be anticipated from surrounding communities and state and federal agencies. in addition, the assessment should also include response capabilities of local industry and transporters, specifically those that have the potential to be involved in a hazardous materials incident. protocols then need to be developed to designate specific responsibilities of all those who will be involved in an incident.a plan is prepared, reviewed, adopted, and periodically updated by relevant agencies. 6. test the plan and practice procedures relevant agencies and involved organizations (such as hospitals and large private firms in the area) should conduct exercises (simulations of emergency situations) to determine whether responders are prepared to handle their assigned roles and whether the planned procedures are effective. ranging in complexity from "tabletop" discussions to the actual deployment of significant resources and personnel (as if in response to an incident), exercises are the best way to find out if the community is ready for a specific type of emergency.two major roles for public transportation agencies in the planning for incident response, especially for large-scale disruptions having widespread impacts across multiple economic sectors and markets, is to (1) get the transportation system operating again as soon as possible after an event, as well as supporting other agencies in dealing with public safety and public health issues associated with the aftermath.the role of local medical and public health providers in a response to a hazardous materials spill will be different from one community to another and will vary by type of hazard. surprisingly, an example from washington d.c. suggests that at least for some types of hazards and in at least one region, welldefined roles were not clear (schulman, 2015) . the dhhs in collaboration with the national association of county and city health officials (naccho) sought to determine how local health departments (lhds) could best contribute to a large-scale chemical event response. a focus group of 33 local, state, federal, and nonprofit agency representatives in the national capital region met to discuss possible roles. the result of the focus group was that the participants had very different perspectives on the role of lhds in a chemical response. though lhds have responsibility for protecting human health in all hazards, the role of lhds was perceived to be limited to disease prevention and control and not really in responding to a hazardous material incident. as noted by schulman (2015) , "the perception of chemical incidents as hazardous material (hazmat) events, and not public health events, may result in lhds being left out of the loop, even after the incident transitions to a mass casualty or mass fatality event." she also identified the following roles for lhds. l "public health surveillance activities are crucial to determining that an event has happened, as well as the nature of the event. routine passive surveillance results can be monitored for unusual symptoms associated with chemical exposures. l lhds' preexisting community relationships position them to be a trusted source of risk communications. while other responders handle the hazardous materials, lhds have the ability to calm and inform the populace. l lhds provide subject matter expertise to healthcare partners on matters such as the toxicity of chemical agents and sampling and screening approaches. if the agent is unknown, lhds could use epidemiologic investigation methods to help identify it. l other potential roles based on lhd expertise include: (a) coordinating the provision of mental and behavioral health services to affected communities; and (b) providing guidance to ensure the safety and health of on-theground responders.l public health expertise on the impacts of chemical agents also provides extensive opportunities to support and collaborate with healthcare and environmental health partners. l lhds may play a role assessing and monitoring the environmental impact of the agent and the pathways by which it travels. with their knowledge of environmental health impacts, lhds define exclusionary zones and evacuation areas to ensure public safety, as well as to issue advisories related to drinking water and food safety. l once a response reaches the recovery phase, lhds may be responsible for long-term monitoring of exposed individuals and environmental health impacts, as well as continued risk communication should environmental contamination linger."an effective and safe response to a hazardous material spill also involves the carriers of the material (meyer and brown, 2019) . many businesses have developed plans for what to do in response to an incident that define the responsibilities for each unit in the firm depending on the type of disruption. many large shippers and carriers also have specially-trained emergency response teams that can assist in the response to a hazardous materials incident. the business plans generally fall under the concept of business continuity plans. the importance of such plans was highlighted by the great east japan earthquake of 2011 where global supply chains were disrupted for months due to the disruption of the critical supply of motor vehicle products centered in the affected area in japan. one of the outcomes from this experience was that most japanese firms now have business continuity plans outlining the steps that will be taken for responding to immediate threats associated with such a magnitude of disruption. however, the major focus of business continuity plans is on the business itself and steps that need to be taken to recover service, maintain customer relations, and avoid negative impacts on the market value of the firm. very few plans devote much attention to the broader picture of how interaction with public agencies, especially for planning ahead of such incidents, should occur.much attention has been given to the challenges and public health risks associated with hazardous materials transport. in part because of the potentially calamitous impacts of a hazardous release (especially in a dense urban area), a wide and diverse range of public agencies, nongovernmental organizations, private companies, public health providers, and emergency responders have been engaged for many years in preparing for such incidents. over the past several decades, many incidents have provided lessons on what should be done in preparing for and responding to different scenarios. the key message from all of these experiences is that preparing and practicing for any exigency is the best possible way of minimizing the human and environmental impacts of hazardous material spills. the role of public health and medical providers is critical to this response, as is the role of all the other agencies involved with responding to and recovering from the challenges of hazardous material spills.throughout this book, we have described transportation systems as enabling other activities to occur. the opposite of this also is truedmany activities do not occur if transportation systems are disrupted. in the parlance of transportation professionals, the desire is to have a resilient transportation system. resilience in this sense has two major meaningsdthe transportation network has redundancy built in to allow other routes to be used (albeit not as conveniently) or the system can recover in a period of time such that the inconvenience is tolerable.transportation systems can fail for all sorts of reasons. natural causes include extreme weather events resulting in storm surges, flooding, or wildfires or manmade events such as labor strikes at transportation terminals (such as ports) or terrorist attacks. in the latter case, terrorist attacks against transportation systems are the number one target of terrorists worldwide, primarily for the visibility it provides to the attack. transportation systems are also relatively easy to access .most transportation agencies have developed protocols for responding to such disruptions. states along the gulf coast, for example, know what to do when hurricanes threaten, how to preposition equipment and personnel, how to interact with other agencies to restore service as quickly as possible and to assist in community recovery. clearly, there is a public health component in many types of transportation disruptions as, for example, was discussed in the chapter on traffic safety. in the following sections, two public health/transportation concerns are discussed relating to transportation system disruptions. the first relates to climate change, the long-term consequences to the environment and to infrastructure that was built with very different assumptions of future temperatures, precipitation, and storm intensities. there are serious public health consequences associated with these changes. in some cases, there is a nexus between these public health consequences and transportation.we should note here that no material is presented in this section that is intended to establish the case for a changing climate. we strongly believe the vast majority of climate scientists who predict vastly different future environmental conditions 50e100 years from now. those interested in useful background information are referred to the intergovernmental panel on climate change (ipcc, 2014) and the fourth us national climate assessment (u.s. global change research program, 2018a,b).the second topic covered in this section relates to disaster response. to some extent, the concepts relating to disaster response have been covered in the sections on pandemics and hazardous materials spills. however, the material discussed in this section broadens the coverage to what is called the "all-hazards" approach to preparing for large-scale system disruptions. because this book is focusing on the importance of collaboration among the many different groups and organizations involved with responding to disruptions, we believe more attention is merited.climate change: the future will not be an extension of the past in transportation infrastructure planning, engineers and planners use models to predict the future vehicle and person flows that will likely be using the transportation systems of the future (in order to determine where and how much new transportation capacity will be needed). these models are deemed "behavioral" in that they include variables that reflect how human behavior in making travel decisions will be influenced by changes in such things as trip price, availability of different modes of transport, perceptions of safety, and the like. even though they are considered "behavioral," most of the models are calibrated on historic travel data; in other words, the relationships among the key variables are assumed to be similar in the future as they have been in the past.with respect to infrastructure design, engineers use approved manuals and environmental input data that are often based on historic trends and years of practical use. although there is now movement to modify some of these technical references, many still are based on historic trends (e.g., the intensityduration-frequency (i-d-f) curves used by many to estimate precipitation and drainage flows are based on historic rainfall data). fig. 8.1 shows modeled future average global temperatures (in centigrade) assuming four different scenarios for global greenhouse gas (ghg) emissions (denoted in the figure as representative concentration pathways [rcps] identified by the intergovernmental panel on climate change [ipcc]). rcp 8.5 is the worst-case scenario where ghg emissions continue to go up, which many scientists believe to be the most likely scenario; and rcp 2.6 is the best-case scenario where ghg emissions stabilize. the most important observation of this figure is that sometime in the 2030s, the curves diverge. only one of the four scenarios could be considered as an extension of past trends, and even here the curve shows a faster growth rate than previous years. the future is not going to be like the past.the same is generally true for other climatic conditions as well. precipitation patterns are expected to change; predictions of extreme storms (e.g., hurricanes) are not clear, although most seem to agree that whatever the number of storms, their intensity is likely to be much greater than in the past; and with more intense coastal storms comes higher storm surge, especially when this surge occurs on top of sea level rise. all of these future weather conditions have serious implications to public health, transportation, and to those concerns where they intersect.a great deal of attention has been given to the potential effects of climate change on public health (see for example, anderson et al., 2017; patz, 2004; patz et al., 2006; stone et al, 2014; who, 2016; ziska et al, 2016) . the centers for disease control (cdc, 2014) and the fourth us national climate assessment (2018) are two useful sources of information. the material found in this section largely draws upon these two sources.the public health chapter of the fourth us national climate assessment made the following key observations: l the health and well-being of americans are already affected by climate change, with the adverse health consequences projected to worsen with additional changes in climate. l climate change affects human health by altering exposures to heat waves, floods, droughts, and other extreme events; vector-, food-and waterborne infectious diseases; changes in the quality and safety of air, food, and water; and stresses to mental health and well-being. l people and communities are differentially exposed to hazards and disproportionately affected by climate-related health risks. populations experiencing greater health risks include children, older adults, lowincome communities, and communities of color. l proactive adaptation policies and programs reduce the risks and impacts from climate-sensitive health outcomes and from disruptions in healthcare services.l additional benefits to health arise from explicitly accounting for climate change risks in infrastructure planning and urban design. two other ways of conceptualizing the public health consequences of climate change are shown in figs. 8.2 and 8.3. fig. 8.2 shows the different public health risks associated with different types of climate change. several of these linkages could include a transportation component (e.g., traffic injuries due to severe weather; transportation as a vector given new changes in vector ecology; transportation access to healthy food or alternatively disruptions to current food supply chains due to system failures, and the like). fig. 8.3 illustrates the point made elsewhere in this book that there are many different "drivers" and contexts that contribute ultimately to health outcomes.in one of the more important papers on the role of public health officials in a climate change future, frumkin et al. (2008) suggested that there are many such roles in all of the essential services associated with the public health profession. these are shown in table 8 .8. they make the point that one of the key principles in public healthddisease or illness preventiondcan be applied to climate change-related public health threats. as noted, "primary prevention corresponds to mitigationdefforts to slow, stabilize, or reverse climate change by reducing greenhouse gas emissions. secondary and tertiary prevention corresponds to adaptationdefforts to anticipate and prepare for the effects of climate change, and thereby to reduce the associated health burden" (frumkin et al., 2008) . the concepts of mitigation and adaptation are found in other fields as well, including transportation. as will be seen later, transportation adaptation includes giving transportation facilities and assets the ability to withstand weather-related risks.an excellent example of how public health agencies can examine potential climate change risks to public health is found in the california department of public health (cdph) county-level climate change studies. the study of imperial county in the southeastern part of the state, which includes the hottest location in the united states (death valley), provides an illustration of which population subgroups are most vulnerable? what are the health status, health inequities, and population vulnerabilities in imperial county? develop policies and plans that support individual and community health efforts.enforce laws and regulations that protect health and ensure safety.(little role for public health)link people to needed personal health services and ensure the provision of health care when otherwise unavailable.health-care service provision following disasters ensure a competent public and personal healthcare workforce.training of health-care providers on the health aspects of climate change evaluate effectiveness, accessibility, and quality of personal and population-based health services.program assessment of preparedness efforts such as heat wave plansresearch new insights and innovative solutions to health problems.research on health effects of climate change, including innovative techniques such as modeling, and research on optimal adaptation strategies source: (frumkin et al, 2008) as adapted from (public health functions steering committee, 1994) selected public health strategies and action steps for climate change of special note in this list is the emphasis on vulnerable populations. some observations on such groups included (note: data come from 2010 unless otherwise indicated): l there were 13,526 children under the age of 5 years and 18,152 adults aged 65 years and older considered among climate-vulnerable groups. l there were 10,517 people living in nursing homes, dormitories, and other group quarters where institutional authorities would need to provide transportation in the event of emergencies. l imperial county had approximately 6,366 outdoor workers whose occupation increased their risk of heat illness. l roughly 10 percent of households did not own a vehicle that could be used for evacuation (statewide average was 8%). l in 2009, approximately 32% of households were estimated to lack air conditioning, a strategy to counter adverse effects of heat (statewide average was 36%). l in 2005e10, there was an annual average of 135 heat-related emergency room visits and an age-adjusted rate of 78 emergency room visits per 100,000 persons (the statewide age-adjusted rate was 10 emergency room visits per 100,000 persons) (cdph, 2017).the study also identified some typical strategies that the county could adopt to be better prepared for future climate change public health risks. table 8 .9 shows a sample of these strategies.in sum, public health officials are aware of the public health risks associated with a changing climate in part because new climatic conditions largely exacerbate the morbidity and mortality of currently known diseases. in some cases, new diseases show up in regions that had not seen them before because the environment is now more conducive to organisms that heretofore had been unable to survive. as seen in the imperial county case, much of the attention of the public health community with regard to climate changeerelated health risks is focused on vulnerable populations, those who will be particularly affected by the new extremes (of temperature, precipitation, winds, etc.) that will become much more common.most transportation officials in the united states take the stance that their agencies are well-positioned to respond to any weather-related disruptions to the transportation system and/or that transportation infrastructure is designed with enough buffer in the design to handle any possible stress caused by extreme weather (fhwa, 2016) . this ignores the bigger issue of how the transportation system can be made more resilient in the face of a range of future climate change risks, and the even broader question of how climate-safe infrastructure should be part of community resilience strategies that serve diverse roles.as noted earlier, the approach adopted by those transportation officials concerned with climate change and extreme weather is to focus on the adaptation of the transportation system to potential climate change impacts. this certainly includes how one approaches the design of infrastructure, of which many assets by their very nature will likely be still in place by the year 2100 (useful lives of large bridges, for example, are usually over 100 years). but adaptation also affects the entire operation of a typical transportation work in multisectoral partnerships (local, regional, state, and federal) l expand training and education to build collaborative capacity implement policy changes at local, regional, and national levels l policy collaboration with stakeholders l occupational safety standards l model policies and training l public engagement source: (cdph, 2017) agency from planning to operations to maintenance. one of the lessons from hurricane irene that created havoc with vermont's transportation system (and with communities throughout the state) was that many of the road collapses occurred at drainage culverts which were clogged with debris (most had not been cleaned out).an example of how one type of climate stressor could affect the transportation system is provided in meyer and cumming (2016) who looked at the potential impacts of extreme heat on transportation systems. design l instability of materials exposed to high temperatures over longer periods of time can result in increased failures, such as pavement heave or track buckling. pavement designs in particular are very sensitive to temperature. l ground conditions and less water saturation (due to drought conditions) can alter the design factors for foundations and retaining walls such as is occurring with the melting of permafrost in alaska.l encased equipment such as traffic control devices and signal control systems for rail service might fail due to higher temperatures inside the enclosure.operations l increased electricity usage and power outages during heat waves might affect the electrical power supply to rail operations and supporting ancillary assets (such as electronic signing) for highway operations. l low water levels could significantly curtail barge operations along major river arteries as well as lock and dam operations. l extended periods of high temperatures will affect the health of employees who work long hours outdoors, such as those working on infrastructure reconstruction and maintenance activities.l right-of-way landscaping and vegetation will have to be more drought resistant and able to survive longer periods of high temperatures. l other water-use activities in a transportation agency might have to be curtailed, at least on a temporary basis (e.g., washing of transit vehicles).l extreme temperatures will create dangerous conditions for many users of the transportation system, placing greater emphasis on the use of air conditioning for transit vehicles and stations and on increased use of green design approaches.l extreme temperatures could result in increased maintenance activities, such as replacing tracks that have buckled and pavement sections that have experienced heave, as well as removing landslides and erosion that occur with extreme precipitation events after drought or extreme temperatures have dried out the soil. l drought-induced wildfires and/or dust storms can create dangerous blackout conditions for road users. l airplane operations in high-temperature environments might have to be reconsidered due to less lift available in higher elevations to allow a plane to take off. (in phoenix, arizona, flights have been canceled due to extreme temperatures and officials' concern that the runway was not long enough for the planes to take off.) l extended periods of high temperatures will likely result in changes in rail operations, at a minimum requiring mandatory reduced speeds in areas where the track has been exposed to high temperatures over many days.l similarly, extended periods of high temperatures will negatively affect bicycle use and the desire and propensity of individuals to walk outdoors.transportation officials are increasingly becoming interested in the implications of future climate change on their agency's operations. as this interest increases, it is likely that additional guidance will become available on how to plan, design, operate, and maintain transportation systems such that they are more resilient in the face of increasing climate change and extreme weather risks (see, for example, fhwa, 2016 fhwa, , 2017a meyer and weigel, 2011; and meyer et al., 2014) ,the interface among climate change, public health, and transportation occurs in three major areas, which have been largely covered in other sections of the book.1. weather-related conditions (e.g., high winds, dust storms, sudden floods, blinding rain, or snow) are factors contributing to fatalities and injuries that were discussed in chapter 7 as being of concern to both transportation and public health officials. in many cases, the weather-related event itself can result in fatalities. for example, the national weather service (nws) reported 116 people killed in floods, 106 from extreme heat, 43 from hurricanes, and 20 from high winds in 2018 (note: this report did not include updated estimated deaths from hurricane maria in puerto rico). fifty percent of the 418 flood deaths from 2015 to 2017 occurred in vehicles (nws, 2018). 2. transportation provides accessibility to all sorts of land uses, including medical and health care facilities. widespread disruptions due to extreme weather can cut access to such facilities seriously affecting the ability of health caregivers to provide medical help. this also impacts the supply chain of medical supplies and personnel trying to access the affected areas. during the recovery period, transportation facilities and service provide the channel for water and food to reach disaster zones, as well as supporting the social determinants of health that are stressed during times of disruption. 3. roads, and in some cases transit services, helicopters, and airplanes, can provide a means of evacuating either areas that are likely to face a disaster (e.g., hurricane) or those that have experienced one (e.g., earthquake). having a means of evacuation is especially important when there is only one way to leave. a wildfire in california in 2018, for example, surrounded the only road serving isolated campgrounds and other recreational sites that were later burned as well, resulting in fatalities for those not heeding the advice to evacuate before the fire reached those sites. hurricane katrina is partially remembered for large groups of the population stranded in new orleans with no means to evacuate (the city has since identified bus stops designated for pickups of those without vehicles prior to a hurricane hitting the region). another (nonclimate change) example is the effort of the oregon dot to establish routes into the state that would survive a major earthquake given that the major interstate serving the state (i-5) is expected to be destroyed in many locations (odot, 2014) . alternate routes are being hardened; redundant command and control centers have been established; and prepositioning of emergency supplies has occurred to provide access to water, food, and medical supplies assuming that the road network is disrupted. 4. in some cases, transportation facilities and services can provide refuge for those seeking shelter. in the aftermath of hurricane katrina, many people sought higher elevations, that is, bridges, to avoid rising flood waters. in many cities during heat waves, those without air conditioning ride airconditioned buses to avoid the heat (some transit agencies offer free trips for this purpose); during extreme cold, many likewise ride the transit system seeking heat. 5. transportation agencies are often one of the few agencies with monitoring and public information capabilities in forewarning the population about an impending disaster and to communicate after a disaster occurs. these include communications about emergency routing, roadway closures, wide-area alerts, early warnings, evacuation, re-entry into disaster zones, and disaster travel information. variable message signs that are common on major highways throughout the world can be used to convey messages concerning the locations of shelters and the most efficient paths through a road network. 6. in the aftermath of a major disaster, transportation agencies provide the physical barriers to isolate areas that are targeted for recovery to keep out those who do not belong. in addition, one of the key challenges facing many communities after a disaster is removing levels of debris that far exceed the capacity of a community to remove. state dots have the capability to transfer resources from one location to another and thus have become an important source of debris removal (if authorized to do so by the legislature). as an example of one state's efforts in debris removal, the georgia dot has formed "strike teams" for every segment of the state's freeway system that will respond quickly to system disruptions; staff from the state's forestry service are part of these strike teams in order to bring power saws to remove downed trees, often a major obstacle in reopening a road.the public health consequences of climate change represent potentially some of the greatest challenges society might face in future years. this is especially the case for (1) the transmission of diseases and environmental infections that will follow the changing environmental conditions associated with a changing climate and (2) the aftermath of major weather disasters that on average will likely be more powerful than storms of the past. the public health community has many policy, program, and prevention options for dealing with climate change impacts (watts et al., 2015) . for example, frumkin et al. (2008) suggest public health professionals can "explain the health rationale for climate change mitigation in terms of reduced morbidity and mortality .. can provide evidence on the health impacts of various approaches to climate change mitigation (including co-benefits and disbenefits) . and should play a major role in developing plans that address health threats related to climate change." in many of these actions, transportation service and infrastructure can play a critical role in minimizing the public health consequences of a changing climate.major disasters and community disruptions have common characteristics in terms of how government agencies can prepare, respond, and recover from the aftermath. an emphasis on preparation, a unified command and control structure, a focus on public health and medical needs, compatible communication systems, and the like are common no matter what type of disruption will occur. in some cases, one type of disaster follows another, often with the first one exacerbating the second. for example, drought often leads to wildfires, which if followed by heavy precipitation can lead to more serious flooding (due to the destruction of land cover) and massive erosion (e.g., landslides). an "all-hazards" approach has been adopted by many of the participants in disaster response (for example, see cdc, undated for a hospital application) to be prepared no matter what the disruption.the underlying concept of an all-hazards approach to disasters is that preparation serves as the foundation for effective response to any type of incident. fig. 8.4 shows a typical representation of the different phases of disaster preparation and response. for both response and recovery phases of a disaster, preparation is necessary, which is indicated on the left side of the figure. in fact, this preparation is continuous....indicating periodic updates and practicing of response and recover procedures. also of note in the figure is the immediate response to a disaster which evolves into a recovery operation....in fact, as indicated these phases tend to overlap. the long-term recovery includes rebuilding and making changes during the rebuilding that will provide more protection if another similar disaster strikes. the other important observation from figure 8 .4 is the time frame....immediate response measured in days and perhaps weeks; intermediate response/recovery measured in weeks/months; and long-term recovery measured in months/years. the all-hazards approach to disaster preparation considers each phase of such a disaster cycle.at the us federal level, the stafford disaster relief and emergency assistance act (stafford act) of 1988 established the legal and institutional system for presidential disaster declarations and for the response from federal agencies. fema was given the responsibility for coordinating government-wide relief efforts. dhs has lead responsibilities for incidents involving national security . beginning in the 1990s, the us government under the leadership of fema implemented the all-hazards approach for developing risk-based, all-hazard emergency operations plans. fema's "guide for all-hazard emergency operations planning" lays out the steps that "served as a basis for effective response to any hazard that threatens any jurisdiction; facilitated the integration of mitigation into response and recovery activities; and facilitated the coordination with the federal government during catastrophic disaster situations" (fema, 1996) . this guide recommended specific actions in such areas as emergency public information, communications, command and control, mass care, health and medical response, and resource management. the guide also defined a "concept of operations" that would ensure that the necessary planning and coordination be accomplished prior to the occurrence of a disaster to facilitate the management of health and medical services during disasters. the concept of operations was to include such things as establishing a medical command post at a disaster site that: l coordinated health and medical response team efforts. identified hazardous chemicals or infectious diseases, controlling their spread, and reporting their presence to appropriate state and federal health or environmental authorities. l issued health and medical advisories to the public on such matters as emergency water supplies, waste disposal, mass feeding services, disease vectors, immunizations, disinfection, and others (fema, 1996) .the guide recognized the need to coordinate the many different agencies and groups that might be involved with a disaster response. table 8 .10 shows the types of agencies that were identified for two areas: "mass care" and "health and medical."federal preparations since the 1990s have been in response to presidential policy directives especially relating to national preparedness, related fema policies, and dhs initiatives. several key concepts in the dhs directives include:national incident management system (nims): a nationwide approach for all governments, private companies and nongovernmental organizations (ngos) to prepare for, respond to, and recover from domestic incidents. the focus is on providing interoperability and compatibility among those involved with a domestic incident including the creation of an incident command structure (ics) (fhwa, 2017b).national response plan (nrp): an "all-discipline, all-hazards" plan that provides for the coordination of a federal response to a domestic incident. the plan includes annexes for specialized circumstances. specific government and private sector participants are assigned responsibility for functional roles in what are called emergency support functions (esfs) (dhs, 2008) .the primary operational-level mechanisms for federal agencies to provide assistance to other governments. for example, evacuation efforts would be supported under several esfs including transportation, communication, mass care, and emergency management (fhwa, 2017b).if as was noted earlier that "preparation" serves as the foundation for effective response to disasters, then coordination and collaboration serve as the basis for effective preparation. as noted by the fhwa, "leaders at all levels must communicate and actively support engaged partnerships by developing shared goals and aligning capabilities so that no one is overwhelmed in times of crisis .. incidents must be managed at the lowest possible jurisdictional level and supported by additional capabilities when needed (fhwa, 2017b) a recent review of all-hazards approaches to nonnuclear incidents by the organization for economic cooperation and development (oecd, 2018) emphasized this point in a review of incidents in member oecd countries. the following selected lessons learned in this review provide an excellent overview of the characteristics of an all-hazards approach to incident/disaster response that should be considered by those developing such a strategy. l legislation and regulations, while necessary, are not sufficient to ensure the prevention of accidents or adequate preparedness. it is therefore important for stakeholders to undertake additional initiatives and learn from the experience of others in different fields of work. l a common issue shared by both the nuclear and nonnuclear industries is that of identifying a wide range of accident scenarios, from design-based to beyond-designebased accidents. consideration of such a broad range of accident scenarios ensures that planning efforts are robust and provide for adequate protection of public health and safety. l promoting forward-looking risk governance that takes into account complex risks is important. in evaluating risk exposure, countries may want to not only rely on past disruptive shocks and linear risk modeling, but also consider evolving risk patterns, including demographic, economic, technological and environmental drivers, as well as their interdependencies and potential cascading impacts. l training and emergency drills have also been identified as essential for successful emergency response both on-site and off-site. l it is very important to select appropriate personnel protection measures such as equipment for emergency responders, as well as the means of improving their awareness of the hazards surrounding the event.l governments must develop crisis-management capacities to cope with the complexity, novelty, ambiguity, and uncertainty characterizing many modern crises. emergency response plans are necessary tools for conventional crisis management. l using social media effectively in crisis communication requires that appropriate resources be devoted to the management of social network messaging during the event. it is important to ensure that the information circulating in various social media platforms is accurate because accurate information leads to public trust in officials (see oecd, 2015 for a good discussion of the use of social media). l engaging the private sector in crisis-management efforts is crucial, particularly when the scale and complexity of a crisis requires a "whole-ofsociety" approach. l leaders must be identified prior to the crisis, and they along with their teams, organizations, and key partners must be sufficiently prepared to cope with the challenges presented by the crisis. l on-site emergency plans for accidents involving hazardous materials should take natural hazard risks into account. off-site emergency response plans for hazardous industries in natural hazard-prone areas should consider the impact of hazardous material releases on populations and on rescue operations. the vulnerability of emergency response resources to natural events and hazardous material releases should be assessed. medical services should be involved in the preparation of the external emergency plan. l health effects from disasters are far more than the sum of their physical or psychological health effects, including posttraumatic stress disorder. medically unexplained symptoms or syndromes may be the most prominent negative health outcome.within the context of this need for collaboration and coordination, both public health and transportation officials have important roles to play. in both cases, the command structure will likely be led by either fema or dhs depending on circumstances, but as indicated in guidance from both agencies public health and transportation agencies are important participants in the phases of a disaster shown in fig. 8 .4.1. chapter 2 discussed social determinants of health and their influence on public health. using the concepts in chapter 2, identify those factors that could influence the transmission of an epidemic in your community (assume the characteristics of the disease being transmitted). what are the socioeconomic characteristics of your community that would encourage a spreading of the epidemic? what are the characteristics of your community's transportation system that would encourage (or discourage) a spreading of the epidemic? 2. identify the key characteristics and roles of different actors in your agency's hazardous materials spill protocol/plan? create a hypothetical "incident" in your organization and describe who does what and on what timeframe. 3. using fig. 8.4 , describe the key differences in each phase of the "anatomy of a disaster" as they relate to transportation system disruption for a (1) natural disaster and (2) a terrorist attack. what agencies would be involved in each type of incident? what types of information would be necessary as part of the preincident planning? what types of mitigation strategies would be considered for each incident? 4. climate change will likely have significant public health consequences and disruptive effects on transportation systems. identify future climate forecasts for your region (if there are not specific forecasts for your community, use the fourth us national climate assessment background forecasts for your state). choose one climate stressor (e.g., heat, precipitation, sea level rise [if on a coast], etc.) and describe what impacts the forecasted level of this stressor will have on public health in your community; on your community's transportation system; jointly on public health and transportation.identify what types of organizational and institutional strategies can be used to foster collaboration among public health and transportation agencies in dealing with community disruption. what are the advantages and disadvantages of each? 6. you have been asked to write a climate change/public health report for your community, with special focus on how climatic changes might affect community infrastructure and services. outline how this report should be organized. what types of topics should be included?fatal guillain-barre syndrome after infection with sars-cov-2.j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f autores: juan marta-enguita 1 , idoia rubio-baines 1 , itziar gastn-zubimendi 1 . 1 servicio de neurologa, complejo hospitalario de navarra, pamplona, espaa.autor de correspondencia: juan marta-enguita. servicio de neurologa, complejo hospitalario de navarra, c/irunlarrea 3, 31008, pamplona, espaa. e-mail: j.marta.enguita@navarra.es conflictos de inters-ninguno.desde la aparicin en diciembre de 2019 de los primeros casos de infeccin por el severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov2) en la provincia china de hubei, la infeccin causada por este patgeno se ha extendido a nivel mundial con un alto ndice de infectividad y tasas de letalidad nada desdeables. el cuadro tpico asociado a la infeccin por sars-cov2 incluye fiebre, astenia y tos seca (1) con un cuadro de insuficiencia respiratoria en los pacientes ms graves con dao alveolar secundario a una liberacin masiva de molculas proinflamatorias (2) . sin embargo, poco sabemos de las complicaciones neurolgicas asociadas a la infeccin por sars-cov2 (3). se presenta un caso de tetraparesia progresiva con arreflexia global y sndrome bulbar fatal, compatible clnicamente con polirradiculoneuritis aguda inflamatoria asociado a infeccin por sars-cov2.mujer de 76 aos con buena calidad de vida previa, trasladada a urgencias del complejo hospitalario de navarra por presentar cuadro de 10 das de evolucin de dolor lumbar irradiado hacia cara posterior de ambas piernas y tetraparesia progresiva con parestesias de inicio distal. el dolor fue bilateral con predominio derecho y mayor intensidad nocturna con dificultades para conciliar el sueo precisando tratamiento con aines, pirazolonas y mrfico transdrmico. asoci debilidad progresiva de predominio proximal en extremidades inferiores (eeii) y 2 das antes de nuestra valoracin, present debilidad en extremidades superiores (eess) con limitacin funcional.ocho das antes del inicio del cuadro haba comenzado con tos y fiebre sin disnea, de 72 horas de evolucin habindose tratado con amoxicilina-clavulnico y azitromicina. se realiz prueba de reaccin en cadena de polimerasa (pcr) para deteccin de sars-cov2 con resultado positivo.la exploracin neurolgica mostr un balance motor de eess de predominio proximal 0/5, con preservacin parcial a nivel distal 4/5. en eeii presentaba debilidad 0/5 proximal en psoas, 1/5 en cudriceps y 2-3 distal en tibiales anteriores. asoci arreflexia global e hipoestesia en ambas piernas de rodilla hacia distal.en la analtica sangunea urgente destacaban leve plaquetopenia (102 x10^9/l) y elevacin de fibringeno (470mg/dl) y d-dmero (773ng feu/ml) sin otras alteraciones. se realiz tc craneal normal y tc de columna crvico-dorsal con signos degenerativos a nivel de cuerpos vertebrales sin invasin de canal medular. se practic tc de trax que apreci patrn compatible con afectacin pulmonar leve por infeccin sars-cov2.la paciente ingresa presentando a las 4 horas disfagia para lquidos y progresivamente para slidos con voz nasal y dificultad para la deglucin de su propia saliva con instauracin progresiva de cuadro de insuficiencia ventilatoria. presenta deterioro progresivo precisando oxigenoterapia (fio2 60%) con niveles de sato2 mantenidos en torno a 91% que no sugieren un problema de la unin alveolo-capilar y el intercambio gaseoso. finalmente fallece 12 horas despus del inicio de la clnica bulbar.la principal limitacin del caso radica en la ausencia de pruebas complementarias que puedan apoyar la sospecha diagnstica dada la rpida progresin del cuadro y la situacin de crisis sanitaria. sin embargo, el cuadro clnico con tetraparesia progresiva y arreflexia cumple los criterios clnicos principales para el diagnstico de sndrome de guillain-barr (sgb) (4). la afectacin motora simtrica, la sintomatologa sensitiva leve-moderada, el dolor lumbar irradiado al inicio o la clnica bulbar, son otros de los datos clnicos que apoyan este diagnstico (5, 6) . otros diagnsticos como un sndorme miasteniforme parecen poco probables por la presencia de sintomatologa sensitiva.existe actualmente escasa literatura acerca del desarrollo de polirradiculoneuritis aguda inflamatoria tras la infeccin por el virus sars-cov2. en algunos de los casos publicados la asociacin temporal no es clara y la infeccin por sars-cov2 pudiera ser incidental y no el sustrato etiolgico (7) . sin embargo, la presencia de una infeccin vrica, bacteriana o vacunas unas semanas antes al desarrollo del cuadro que acte como desencadenante del proceso de disinmunidad es uno de los pilares clsicos de este proceso. en la infeccin por otros coronavirus de perfil similar al sars-cov2 como el responsable del middle east respiratory syndrome (mers) con su agente casual el mers-cov se han descrito casos de polirradiculoneuritis aguda inflamatoria asociada en un caso a encefalitis de bickerstaff (8) . otros agentes patgenos como el coronavirus oc43 tambin se ha asociado a casos de polirradiculoneuritis aguda inflamatoria (9) . son necesarios ms estudios acerca de las consecuencias de la infeccin por sars-cov2 en el sistema nervioso central y la posibilidad de aparicin de complicaciones neurolgicas como la polirradiculoneuritis aguda inflamatoria.national governments from around the world met in poznan, poland in december 2008 at the 14th conference of the parties to the united nations framework convention on climate change (1). this conference came at a time of increasing political and scientific confidence in the role of human-induced greenhouse gas emissions in changing global temperatures. the most recent (2007) report of the intergovernmental panel on climate change (2) states that climate change is now "unequivocal", based on increasing evidence from global average air and ocean temperatures, melting of snow and ice, and rising global average sea level" (2) . while there remains uncertainty regarding the specific nature and rate of climatic changes and their impacts, there is negligible scientific doubt that the global climate is changing and that these changes will have significant and potentially profound impacts on a wide range of ecological and human systems across the planet (3) (4) (5) (6) .that climate change predictions are both scientifically and politically daunting lessens neither their verity nor implied imperative (7, 8) . climate change will involve an average increase in global temperatures of approximately 1.1-6.4c by the end of the century (1); this range reflects both uncertainty in climate modeling, as well as a range of possible scenarios for how we will respond to climate changes, including mitigation, technology development, economic development and population growth. this temperature shift will be manifest in average global climatic changes, including higher maximum temperature, more very hot days, increased occurrence and severity of heat waves, fewer cold and frost days, fewer cold spells, more intense precipitation events, increased risk of drought in continental areas, increased cyclone intensities, and intensified enso events. these effects will, however, vary significantly by region and act within existing climate conditions. for example, while parts of latin america will see minimal changes in temperature, arctic regions are expected to experience an average temperature shift of 4-7c by the end of the century (9) and recent research suggests that even these projections may be conservative (6, 10) .changes in our global and regional climate systems will have important implications for health and health systems (11) (12) (13) (14) (15) (16) (17) (18) (19) (20) (21) (22) . the world health organization estimated that in the year 2000, climate change caused approximately 150,000 excess deaths worldwide, as well as 5 million disability-adjusted life years (19) . temperature and weather have direct effects on mortality and morbidity through the occurrence of extreme weather events, including heatwaves, cold periods, storms, floods, and droughts (11, (23) (24) (25) . such events can, in turn, affect the incidence of food-borne and water-borne disease (26, 27) . the habitat and survival of insect species capable of transmitting many vector-borne diseases are affected by temperature and water regimes (28, 29) . many pathogen replication cycles are also determined by temperature conditions. indirect impacts of climate change on livelihoods, such as increased economic vulnerability, reduced availability of food resources, and reduced allocation of government funding for health systems, may also have important, though unquantified, impacts on global health systems (2, 12, 14, 18, 20, 30) .health impacts due to climate change have already been documented, including changes in the range of some vector-borne diseases (28, 29, (31) (32) (33) and an increase in heatwave-related deaths (11, 34, 35) . indirect effects will also include increases in regional food insecurity, migration resulting from environmental degradation, and loss of environmental-dependent livelihoods resulting from ecological shifts in weather or species distributions (16) . table 1 summarizes the reported and projected health impacts of climate change documented by the intergovernmental panel on climate change (ipcc). the ipcc, an intergovernmental body open to all united nations member countries, comprehensively assesses existing literature related to climate change science, potential impacts, and options for adaptation and mitigation. the published reports represent the consensus of thousands of scientists around the world contributing as authors and reviewers, as well as political consensus required by member countries for the acceptance, adoption and approval of the final document. these projections and measures of confidence are therefore believed to be conservative (3) (4) (5) .current climate change effects on global health are small but increasing in most countries (16) . this is due to the lag effect between greenhouse-gas emissions, climate system warming, and the weight of evidence documenting health impacts. while the burden of negative health impacts will be disproportionately high in poorer countries, even high-income countries will be vulnerable to morbidity and mortality related to increases in the number and severity of extreme weather events such as storms, heatwaves, and floods (16) . vulnerable populations in all countries include the urban poor, the elderly and children, traditional communities, subsistence farming communities, and coastal populations (16, 21, (36) (37) (38) . evidence does not support the potential for economic development to combat the health impacts of climate change (16) .canada will not be immune to the health impacts of climatic change (39) (40) (41) (42) . canada has observed approximately 1c rise in temperature since the beginning of the century, and we can expect this to continue by about 0.5 degree per decade, up to 5c over the next century (42) . this temperature change is not insignificant; the earth's temperature was, for example, only 4-5 degrees cooler during the last ice age (43) .the effects of climate change in canada will differ between regions (42) . while the prairies are expected to experience warmer, drier summers and more sever summer droughts, ontario and quebec can expect decreased snow, increased rainfall, and an increase in the incidence of severe summer storms (44) . the greatest changes will occur in the canadian north, where temperature changes are projected to be among the highest in the world, and where traditional, resource-dependent communities are considered highly vulnerable (9, 42, 45, 46) . indeed, for northern inuit communities, climate change poses a significant threat to traditional livelihoods in the short to medium term (45, (47) (48) (49) .canada will experience a number of significant direct and indirect impacts of climate change (39) (40) (41) (42) . extreme heat events are expected to become more frequent, longer in duration, and more intense (42) . extreme heat events can exacerbate health conditions, such as asthma, as well as lead to an increased number of deaths (11, 23, 50, 51) . heat waves were responsible for over five hundred deaths in chicago during a 5-daylevel of uncertainty * alter the distribution of some infectious disease vectors medium confidencealter the seasonal distribution of some allergenic pollen species high confidenceincrease heatwave-related deaths medium confidenceincrease in malnutrition and consequent disorders, including child growth and development high confidence increase in morbidity and mortality related to heatwaves, floods, storms, fires, and droughts high confidencecontinued changes in the ranges of some infectious disease vectors high confidencemixed effects on malaria incidence and distribution (expansion in some areas, contraction in others) very high confidence increase in the burden of diarrhoeal diseases medium confidenceincrease in cardio-respiratory morbidity and morality associated with ground-level ozone high confidenceincrease in the number of people at risk of dengue low confidencehealth benefits include fewer deaths due to cold high confidence (53) . children and the elderly are particularly vulnerable during heat wave events (54) . the increasing number of summer days in urban areas of quebec and ontario declared unsafe for outdoor activity due to smog and heat can be expected to negatively impact public health through reduced outdoor and exercise activities (55) . poor air quality, resulting from smog and air pollution, is associated with asthma, chronic respiratory disease and cardiovascular disease, and is a serious public health issue in canada. smog and air pollution are expected to continue to increase with climatic change (23, 56) . toronto public health recently predicted that climate change would cause a 20% increase in air-pollution related deaths in the city by 2050 (57). many regions are expected to see an increase in summer storms. this may affect risks associated with flooding, and will have implications for water quality and contamination (26, (58) (59) (60) . a prolonged drought followed by a high rainfall event -such as a summer storm -can pick up surface contaminants and flush them into local waterways, causing a 'pulse' in the contaminant load of local water treatment facilities (26, 40) . this scenario was determined to be one of the factors contributing to the e. coli outbreak in walkerton, ontario in 2000 (61) . in addition, higher than normal rainfall events may exceed expected norms for sewage treatment facilities, overwhelming treatment systems. in the inuit community of arctic bay, increased rainfall has been observed to overflow the local sewage ponds, contaminating the bay and roads (62) . these scenarios are consistent with climate change predictions and can be expected to occur more frequently.the distribution of vector-borne diseases will change (40, 41, (63) (64) (65) . warmer and wetter summers will affect the distribution and survival of pathogens and some disease vectors such as mosquitoes and ticks (39, (66) (67) (68) . research has already documented possible shifts in the distribution of the vector of lyme disease (29, (69) (70) (71) , and possible expansion of the potential range of west nile virus (wnv) (40, 41, 72) . mosquito vectors of wnv will be affected by longer summers (40, 41) . increased incidence of the virus coincides with periods of prolonged hot weather and increased mosquito activity (73) . recent research also indicates the potential for the re-emergence or emergence of exotic pathogens to canada, including locally-transmitted malaria (63) . emergent disease risks are by nature difficult to predict. despite this, it is sensible to anticipate the spread of known diseases into new areas and the emergence of new diseases.there will also be a number of indirect effects on canadian health and health care. in many cases, these indirect pathways are difficult to identify, predict, and quantify, but may nonetheless be important for changing health systems in canada. for example, changing sea temperatures are likely to impact the distribution and availability of fish and tree species through impacts on local weather, affecting the viability or focus of fisheries and forestry industries, and by extension the community health and well-being of resource-dependent communities. in this case, the concern is not the loss of traditional species per senew species are likely to emerge to fill changing niche conditions -but the rate of change in ecological systems, and the ability of industries and communities to adapt to these changes. similarly, the dramatic spread of the pine beetle has been facilitated -and many suggest triggered -by increasingly favourable weather conditions (74) (75) (76) (77) . as in the case of the pine beetle, many of the impacts of climate change on health in canada are likely to be the result of indirect causal processes, and in some cases unforeseen events. the implications of climate change for health are not limited to global and national impacts. they will also be manifest at the municipal level (table 2 ) and within canada's health sector (41, 55, 78) . for canada's health system, this will result in changing risks. for example, the increased emergence of new, re-emergent and exotic diseases will mean that conventional expectations of likely diagnoses by family physicians and primary health care providers will be insufficient. the potential for malaria infection in patients with no history of travel is one such example (63) . the increase in extreme weather events such as heatwaves, floods and storms will increase pressure on disaster preparedness and emergency health services and programming (79) . program planning for emergency health provision will need to consider future rather than historical experiences or trends in demand and frequency of health crises (34, (80) (81) (82) . increased health surveillance will be required to document baseline health measures and monitor changing health outcomes. this is particularly important in canada's northern communities where health provision and surveillance have faced significant challenges and where climate impacts will develop earlier and more rapidly than in the south (83, 84) .the good news is that opportunities for avoidance of, and adaptation to, climate impacts on health are available, feasible, and in many cases of benefit to improved health in canada more broadly (42) . given the unpredictable nature of many impacts, adaptation, prevention, and preparedness measures that increase overall health system capacity are most sensible and cost-effective -so called 'win win' or 'no regrets' responses (18, (85) (86) (87) (88) (89) . these include: increased surveillance, particularly of disease vectors, water quality, and air pollutants; integration of climate projections into emergency planning and disaster preparedness (79) ; improved access to preventive care and primary physician care to promote early detection of new disease emergence or shifting disease incidence; integration of climate change considerations into education programming for medical students and primary health care workers; integration of climate projection parameters into urban planning to increase protection against extreme weather events (55, (90) (91) (92) ; increased monitoring and evaluation of food production systems and water monitoring safety given climate projections (26, 41, 63, 68) ; development of heat wave alerts and responses, and mitigation of urban heat islands (41, 52, 53, 91) , and; increased multi-national support for improved health capacity in low and middle income countries.the risk of health impacts resulting from climate change are not restricted to within our national borders. the impact of climate change elsewhere, particularly in low and middle income nations, will influence the potential for imported infection to canada. for example, the introduction and outbreak of sars in toronto in 2002 resulted in 438 cases, 44 deaths and significant economic losses (93, 94) . international travel may have been responsible for promoting the introduction of west nile virus in north america (95) (96) (97) . similarly, a canadian outbreak of imported malaria in 1995-97 may have been brought to canada via travelers arriving from the punjab in india, where a large epidemic had occurred (63, (98) (99) (100) . more recently, concern regarding the potential spread or proliferation of avian influenza has highlighted the interconnected nature of national health to health conditions around the world. as such, the health impacts of climate change in canada will be influenced by the health and response capacity of other nations from or to which canadians, visitors or trade products travel. in this context, adaptation, preparedness and response resources may in some cases be most effectively and efficiently allocated through supporting health capacity in other countries. increased interest and prioritization of health collaborations in asia following the sars outbreak provides a germane example of a developing awareness of such risk priorities.despite the magnitude and scope of climate change, the recent global financial crisis has overshadowed concern for, and prioritization of, climate change science, policy, and action. while the implications of economic crisis at the international and national levels are undoubtedly of legitimate priority and concern, placing climate issues on the back-burner is misguided for two reasons. first, while the financial crisis may be acute and possibly prolonged in the short term -years, but not decades -the climate change crisis will last well into the next century and beyond. investments in health system capacity and surveillance need to be implemented in advance of emerging impacts to avoid and/or mitigate morbidity and mortality. additionally, observed climate impacts will begin to rapidly accelerate over the next decade. in the absence of genuine and dramatic intervention, climate change impacts have the potential to be severe and acute on a scale greatly exceeding the current financial crisis (3, 4, 6, 7) . the lack of action on climate change -including both mitigation of emissions and adaptation to current and future impacts -is generally rationalized based on the costs of interventions. the costs of a no-action approach, however, will be significant. the stern review, an independent assessment commissioned in the united kingdom, estimated that a 5-6 c warming over the next century could result in losses of up to 20% of global gdp (101); the report estimates the cost of mitigating climate emissions and severe impacts at approximately 1% of global gdp. the health sector, which makes up 10% of canada's gross national product (gnp) can make a significant contribution to climate change mitigation and adaptation in canada (102, 103) .it is no longer sufficient to use our past climate experiences to assess health risks and health system requirements. future health systems and care will need to reflect changing risk conditions; these will differ from what physicians, primary care professionals, and public health professionals are accustomed to. climate will emerge in the next years and decades as an increasingly important determinant of individual and public health in canada. reduced individual and national contributions to greenhouse gas emissions to avoid severe impacts, combined with proactive planning and programming for adaptation will be required.two coronavirus pandemics occurred in the last 20 years, transmitted from animals to humans: (i) in 2002, the sars-cov virus provoked a severe acute respiratory syndrome (sars) and spread from china, with more than 8000 cases and 774 deaths in 30 countries (about 10% mortality) [1] and (ii) in 2012, the mers-cov virus caused also a respiratory syndrome and spread from saudi arabia, with 1589 cases and 567 deaths in 26 countries (about 30% mortality) [1] . in 2019, the sars-cov-2 virus (called also covid-19) epidemic started in china in december in wuhan (hubei province) [2] . the sars-cov-2 and sars-cov genomes are very similar [3] and the spread of sars-cov is temperature-dependent [4] . hence, sars-cov-2 is suspected, like other coronaviruses, to have a weather-dependent virulence. the changes in weather alone would not necessarily decrease numbers of confirmed cases during the whole epidemic, but warm and humid weather could make sars-cov-2 less transmissible and less stable, provoking a break in the chain of transmission, and hence diminishing the contagious force of the disease [5] . ancient [1, 4, 5] studies, as well as characteristics of the covid-19 disease compared to past corona infections like the sars one [3, [6] [7] [8] , suggest that the spread of covid-19 could diminish in warm weather, particularly at the start of the epidemic, and may have a low temperature threshold under which it could spread fastest. these seasonal changes could occur in exactly the same way as for other pathogens, like the common cold or influenza [9] [10] [11] [12] . this phenomenon can be modelled and the deterministic as well as stochastic models [2, [13] [14] [15] [16] [17] [18] [19] [20] [21] [22] [23] [24] [25] include potentially temperature-dependent parameters, like the contagion coefficient increasing with cold, dry weather because of faster evaporation of aerosol droplets. the present paper aims to identify such parameters from the covid-19 spread dynamics.section 2 describes how we collected information about the covid-19 spread since the beginning of march 2020. then, we proposed two types of modelling in which parameters can depend on the temperature and we give a statistical method for studying the anti-correlation between the spread velocity and the external temperature. in section 3, we give the results of the correlation analysis for all french administrative regions and for 21 countries suffering the covid-19 epidemic.we used web sites giving world weather data (like https://www.weather-atlas.com or http://data. un.org/data.aspx?d=clino&f=elementcode%3a11). analyses at country level used mean annual temperatures for that country (from https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/list_of_countries_by_average_ yearly_temperature), and mean daily temperatures for the first half of march in the administrative capital of each french administrative region.covid-19 spread data exist in databases such as www.who.int/emergencies/diseases/novelcoronavirus-2019, www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov, www.cia.gov/library/publicapublications/ the-world-factbook/fields, www.worldometers.info/coronavirus, www.fr.statista.com/statistiques/ 1101324/morts-coronavirus-monde, www.santepubliquefrance.fr/recherche/#search=covid-19%20: %20point%20epidemiologique&sort=date). these repositories are updated daily and offer free access to information concerning new cases, deaths and recovered cases, which is sufficient to build and assess mathematical models. data for countries are from www.worldometers.info/coronavirus and for french administrative regions from www.statista.com/statistics/1101388/coronavirus-france-confirmed-cases. data collection was constrained by the date of website accession-third week of march-and the availability of adequate data for specific countries at that date. this implies the inclusion of the first record with at least 100 cases after february 15, which excludes some countries for which the spread of the virus was more advanced at that period. figure 1 gives an example of data extracted from these databases. epidemiological kinetics vary among countries, and could be due to differences in weather variables like temperature.biology 2020, 9, 94 2 of 10 include potentially temperature-dependent parameters, like the contagion coefficient increasing with cold, dry weather because of faster evaporation of aerosol droplets. the present paper aims to identify such parameters from the covid-19 spread dynamics. section 2 describes how we collected information about the covid-19 spread since the beginning of march 2020. then, we proposed two types of modelling in which parameters can depend on the temperature and we give a statistical method for studying the anti-correlation between the spread velocity and the external temperature. in section 3, we give the results of the correlation analysis for all french administrative regions and for 21 countries suffering the covid-19 epidemic.we used web sites giving world weather data (like https://www.weather-atlas.com or http://data.un.org/data.aspx?d=clino&f=elementcode%3a11). analyses at country level used mean annual temperatures for that country (from https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/list_of_countries_ by_average_yearly_temperature), and mean daily temperatures for the first half of march in the administrative capital of each french administrative region.covid-19 spread data exist in databases such as www.who.int/emergencies/diseases/novelcoronavirus-2019, www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov, www.cia.gov/library/publica publications/ the-world-factbook/fields, www.worldometers.info/coronavirus, www.fr.statista.com/statistiques/ 1101324/morts-coronavirus-monde, www.santepubliquefrance.fr/recherche/#search=covid-19%20: %20point%20epidemiologique&sort=date). these repositories are updated daily and offer free access to information concerning new cases, deaths and recovered cases, which is sufficient to build and assess mathematical models. data for countries are from www.worldometers.info/coronavirus and for french administrative regions from www.statista.com/statistics/1101388/coronavirus-france-confirmed-cases. data collection was constrained by the date of website accession-third week of march-and the availability of adequate data for specific countries at that date. this implies the inclusion of the first record with at least 100 cases after february 15, which excludes some countries for which the spread of the virus was more advanced at that period. figure 1 gives an example of data extracted from these databases. epidemiological kinetics vary among countries, and could be due to differences in weather variables like temperature. the classical epidemic modelling uses the continuous differential approach, which describes the infinitesimal change in the size of population of susceptible (s), infective (i) and recovering (r) individuals between times t and t + dt. this model explains the dynamics of epidemic spread, following the classical bernoulli-d'alembert-ross equations [14] :where r is a renewal coefficient (depending on natality and immigration), v's are diffusion coefficients (depending on population displacements), b is the contagion coefficient, which can depend on temperature, and the constants k 1 and k 2 are, respectively, the natural death rate and the specific epidemic death rate. an example of this continuous differential approach, applied to the covid-19 spread, has been developed by p. magal [2] , and more sophisticated approaches would take into account more general demographic (age-classes), sociologic (socio-economic categories), geographic (latitude and altitude) and climatic (temperature and humidity) variations explaining the heterogeneity of the data between the regions of the same countries and between the countries of the same geo-climato-demographic cluster. some parameter dependencies are described in [14] [15] [16] , like the dependency of v on altitude, b on temperature and humidity and k's on age. the applications described in [14, 16] have been performed, respectively, on classical black death data from st anthony's order and mali malaria data from o.k. doumbo.the statistical time series modelling has been introduced by n. wiener for prediction and forecasting [26] . its parametric approach assumes that the underlying stationary stochastic process of the covid-19 new daily cases n(t) can be described using a small number of parameters using the autoregressive arima model n(t) =  i=1,s a(i) n(i) + w(t), where w is a random residue whose variance is to minimize. the autocorrelation analysis is done by calculating the correlation a(k) between the n(t)'s and n(t  k)'s (t belonging to a moving time window) by using the formula:where e denotes the expectation and  the standard deviation. the autocorrelation function a allows examining the serial dependence of the n(t)'s.daily rates of new cases in french administrative regions and selected countries were correlated with mean temperatures in administrative capitals, using pearson's correlation coefficient r.by using the classical arima approach on the new cases' time series in five countries with different weather (mild for france, mediterranean for italy, continental for germany, oceanic for chile and continental for china), we show that, for all countries, the regression minimizing the standard deviation (std) of the residue w is of order 6 ( table 1) , which is in agreement with the duration of the presence of virus in urine and blood after the mean incubation time of 6 days, which corresponds to the maximum of contagion for sputum, stool and swab (figure 2a) .from the data of weather-atlas, we can calculate a mean temperature, obtained as the mean of the highest temperatures minus the mean of the lowest temperatures observed each day during february until 14 march 2020. the autocorrelation curves of the arima regression have temperature-dependent shapes and the negative initial slope of their autocorrelation function decreases with the mean temperature (figure 2b,c) , reinforcing the plausibility of our hypothesis that the spread of covid-19 could diminish in warm weather, particularly at the start of the epidemic. february until 14 march 2020. the autocorrelation curves of the arima regression have temperature-dependent shapes and the negative initial slope of their autocorrelation function decreases with the mean temperature (figure 2b,c) , reinforcing the plausibility of our hypothesis that the spread of covid-19 could diminish in warm weather, particularly at the start of the epidemic. table 2 presents the mean temperature in the first half of march in the 16 administrative regions of metropolitan france, numbers of confirmed covid-19 cases on 4 th march, and ulterior daily rates as table 2 presents the mean temperature in the first half of march in the 16 administrative regions of metropolitan france, numbers of confirmed covid-19 cases on 4 march, and ulterior daily rates as compared to data from the previous publication date. the last row shows pearson correlation coefficients between regional rates of infection and mean temperatures across the period. correlations show a slower increase in infection rates in warmer regions. the strength of this tendency decreases towards the end of this short period of rapid increase. this suggests that temperature most affects the early phases of epidemic dynamics. figure 3 presents correlation analyses for two dates, 6 and 15 march 2020. note that figure 3 includes r 2 , which is the square of the pearson correlation coefficient r. these adjustments are along logarithmic and exponential models for 6 and 15 march, respectively. we give the best (highest r 2 ) models for these dates among linear (y = a.t + b), logarithmic (y = a.ln(t) + b), exponential (ln(y) = a.t + b) and power (ln(y) = a.ln(t) + b) regression models. last row is the pearson correlation coefficient r of above data in that column with mean temperature. for column 3, the latter correlation is not with a rate, as the date of first infection in that region varies among regions. all r < 0.47615 and r < 0.63385 have p < 0.05 and p < 0.01, respectively, according to one-tailed tests. results indicate that negative effects of temperature on infection rates are strongest at the beginning of regional epidemics. table 3 presents the cumulative numbers of confirmed cases for countries with more than 100 cases in at least two days as of 14 march (last measure, besides for south korea (10 march)). the constant and slope are for the exponential regression model to these data ln(n) = a  d + b, where d is the number of days since n crossed 100 confirmed cases in that country. figure 4 shows the slope in the last column of table 3 as a function of the mean annual temperature in that country. slopes are lower and higher than expected by temperature for canada and spain, respectively. the causes for this might range from differences in containment policies and/or populational compliances, to other climatic factors (for example, humidity). table 3 presents the cumulative numbers of confirmed cases for countries with more than 100 cases in at least two days as of 14 march (last measure, besides for south korea (10 march)). the constant and slope are for the exponential regression model to these data ln(n) = a  d + b, where d is the number of days since n crossed 100 confirmed cases in that country. figure 4 shows the slope in the last column of table 3 as a function of the mean annual temperature in that country. slopes are lower and higher than expected by temperature for canada and spain, respectively. the causes for this might range from differences in containment policies and/or populational compliances, to other climatic factors (for example, humidity). daily change in case numbersmean regional temperature, first half of march table 3 as a function of mean annual temperature in that country. the pearson correlation coefficient is r = 0.568, one-tailed p = 0.0036.a study (https://www.accuweather.com/en/health-wellness/coronavirus-expert-says-the-viruswill-burn-itself-out-in-about-6-months/679415) by j. nicholls from the sun yat-sen university in guangzhou, the capital of south china's guangdong province, has determined how the spread of the new coronavirus might be affected by changes in season and temperature.we show in the present study that the negative initial slope of the autocorrelation curve related to the new daily cases n(t) of covid-19 spread and the duration of the positive autocorrelation period table 3 as a function of mean annual temperature in that country. the pearson correlation coefficient is r = 0.568, one-tailed p = 0.0036.a study (https://www.accuweather.com/en/health-wellness/coronavirus-expert-says-the-viruswill-burn-itself-out-in-about-6-months/679415) by j. nicholls from the sun yat-sen university in guangzhou, the capital of south china's guangdong province, has determined how the spread of the new coronavirus might be affected by changes in season and temperature.we show in the present study that the negative initial slope of the autocorrelation curve related to the new daily cases n(t) of covid-19 spread and the duration of the positive autocorrelation period decreases when the weather temperature increases, which corresponds to a shorter duration of the period of contagiousness. the entropy of the distribution of daily r0's during this period would decrease if the period becomes shorter, for the same overall r0. for example, if the daily r0's tend to be the same (without peak), the entropy is maximum, equal to the logarithm of the number of contagious days. the decrease in the duration of the contagiousness period is considered favorable and corresponds to the "mitigation" of the contagion. the calculation of the entropy needs a precise estimation of the arima coefficients a(i)'s in the development, n(t) =  i=1,s a(i) n(i) + w(t), which is difficult during the transient start of the spread, due to the weak number of cases.the two independent datasets, analysed at the level of french metropolitan administrative regions and of countries, show that temperature affects the increase in the number of cases at relatively local, as well as global, levels. the mechanisms by which temperature decreases the rates of detected cases are unknown. higher temperatures might prevent the spread of droplets that transmit viruses, perhaps through faster evaporation. other factors, like the decrease in the virus survival time in atmosphere probably also affect these rates, in particular at the level of the unexplained variation among countries shown in figure 4 . these results have to be considered with caution. they indicate that temperature affects early rates of spreading. it is unclear whether ulterior increases in seasonal temperatures will decrease rates [28] [29] [30] [31] . indeed, once a dynamic is set, temperature might not affect this dynamic anymore, or affect it only marginally.some papers on influenza show that if the warm weather period is followed by a cold season, the rebound of the epidemic could be severe, due to the loss of immune defense [8, 15] , and the present results have to serve as model for building a system of systematic surveillance along the future months of the covid-19 spread.for more than fifty years, the relationship between weather and diseases has been studied [32] . such studies are important for predicting viral disease spread, in particular if this leads to pandemics like in case of covid-19, in order to help decisions in public health policies at the world level. j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f sr. director, la enfermedad por sars-cov-2 (covid-19) es una infeccin causada por un nuevo coronavirus emergente detectado por primera vez en wuhan (china) en diciembre de 2019. en la actualidad se ha convertido en una pandemia y est suponiendo un grave problema de salud pblica para muchos pases 1 . las manifestaciones radiolgicas tpicas en los pacientes con neumona por sars-cov-2 consisten en la presencia de opacidades pulmonares bilaterales (tanto de atenuacin en vidrio deslustrado como de consolidaciones) con una distribucin perifrica/subpleural, a menudo con una especial afectacin de las regiones posteriores de ambos pulmones [2] [3] . una serie reciente de pacientes con covid-19 sugiere que un 1% de los pacientes pueden desarrollar un neumotrax como complicacin 4 . se han descrito algunos casos espordicos de neumotrax y/o neumomediastino espontneo en pacientes con covid-19 con desenlaces dispares y sin aclarar si pueden suponer un indicador potencial de agravamiento de la infeccin [5] [6] [7] [8] . en este trabajo describimos cuatro casos de neumomediastino espontneo (ne) en pacientes con covid-19.se trata de cuatro pacientes (58-65 aos, dos varones y dos mujeres) que acudieron a dos hospitales de madrid con fiebre y/o sntomas torcicos (tos, disnea y/o dolor) durante los meses de marzo y abril de 2020, coincidiendo con el pico de la pandemia por sars-cov-2 (covid-19) que estaba azotando espaa y, particularmente, la regin de madrid. en los cuatro pacientes se realizaron un test de deteccin de cido nucleico (rt-pcr, reaccin en cadena de la polimerasa con transcriptasa inversa) del sars-cov-2 y una radiografa de trax. la rt-pcr fue positiva en todos los pacientes, y la radiografa de trax demostr (tambin en los cuatro casos) opacidades bilaterales de aspecto infeccioso.una vez ingresados, se inici el tratamiento de la infeccin por sars-cov-2 y se emplearon otros frmacos (antitrmicos, broncodilatadores, corticoides) en funcin de las necesidades particulares de cada paciente. los cuatro pacientes requirieron a lo largo de su ingreso (antes de la aparicin del ne) administracin de oxgeno a travs de gafas nasales o mascarillas (simples o con reservorio), pero no necesitaron ventilacin mecnica. ninguno de los cuatro pacientes tena antecedentes tabquicos y en ningn caso haba historia previa de neumotrax, ne o de enfermedades pulmonares. durante el ingreso los cuatro pacientes desarrollaron como complicacin un ne (no relacionado con procedimientos invasivos como una intubacin traqueal o una traqueotoma), no sospechado clnicamente en ningn caso, y detectado inicialmente mediante radiografa de trax en tres de ellos y mediante tomografa computarizada (tc) en un caso en el que sospech un tromboembolismo pulmonar. en las j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f radiografas de trax se identific la presencia de gas ectpico disecando los tejidos del mediastino y del cuello ( fig. 1a-1d ). en uno de los pacientes estudiados con tc se observaron consolidaciones, bronquiectasias de traccin y la presencia de gas disecando el mediastino, incluyendo las paredes de ambos bronquios principales ( fig. 1e, 1f ). en otro paciente estudiado mediante tc se identificaron extensas opacidades en empedrado (asociacin de opacidades de atenuacin en vidrio deslustrado y de engrosamiento del intersticio pulmonar) y una pequea cantidad de gas en la grasa prevascular del mediastino ( fig. 1g, 1h) . la evolucin clnica fue favorable en tres de los cuatro casos; una paciente falleci por complicaciones infecciosas no relacionadas con el ne (neumona por pseudomona aeruginosa y bacteriemia por esta bacteria y por enterococcus faecalis). uno de los casos de evolucin favorable fue diagnosticado de un tromboembolismo pulmonar mediante angio-tc de trax ( fig. 1i ). ningn ne requiri tratamiento quirrgico, y los 4 casos se manejaron conservadoramente, con desaparicin del ne en controles radiolgicos. la tabla 1 resume los aspectos clnicos ms importantes de los 4 pacientes con ne.uno de los mecanismos plausibles por los que puede producirse un ne en pacientes con covid-19 es el dao alveolar difuso que se produce en cualquier neumona grave. de los cuatro pacientes de nuestra serie, tres tenan una extensa neumona bilateral (con afectacin de todos los lbulos de ambos pulmones), mientras que otro presentaba una forma menos grave, pero tambin bilateral. segn una escala de puntuacin publicada en la literatura para cuantificar la extensin de la neumona por sars-cov-2, dos de los pacientes tenan una puntuacin "grave" y los otros dos una puntuacin "moderada" 9 . los cuatro pacientes presentaban episodios intensos y repetidos de tos seca; es sabido que estos episodios de tos pueden provocar un incremento sbito de la presin en la va area distal y provocar una rotura alveolar y una fuga secundaria de gas al intersticio pulmonar peribroncovascular; desde aqu, el aire puede disecar proximalmente hasta alcanzar el mediastino. este fenmeno, denominado "efecto macklin", se ha implicado como responsable del neumomediastino que aparece en algunos traumatismos torcicos cerrados, crisis asmticas y maniobras de valsalva [10] [11] . en algunos casos de neumomediastino secundario a procesos infecciosos se han descrito imgenes de bullas o quistes subpleurales en tc, pero en los dos pacientes de nuestra serie estudiados con tc no se detectaron bullas, quistes, enfisema pulmonar ni neumotrax. el neumomediastino (y el neumotrax) es una complicacin relativamente habitual en los pacientes sometidos a ventilacin mecnica, pero en los cuatro casos presentados slo haban recibido oxigenoterapia a travs de gafas nasales o mascarillas antes del ne. es ms, el paciente con evolucin desfavorable requiri intubacin traqueal tres das despus de la deteccin radiogrfica de ne, page 3 of 8 j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f pero en la primera radiografa realizada tras la intubacin ya no se observaba el neumomediastino. el ne es una complicacin muy rara de las neumonas vricas, habindose publicado algunos casos aislados asociados a la neumona por sars (sndrome respiratorio agudo severo), a la neumona por virus influenza a (h1n1), o a la neumona por sars-cov-2 [5] [6] [7] [8] [12] [13] . en ninguno de los cuatro pacientes de nuestra serie se detectaron otras posibles causas de neumomediastino, por lo que pensamos que la causa del mismo se deba a la infeccin por sars-cov-2.aunque se desconoce el mecanismo exacto por el que se produce ne en la neumona por sars-cov-2 y en principio se considera un cuadro autolimitado que responde favorablemente a medidas teraputicas conservadoras, debe vigilarse la evolucin de estos pacientes por la posibilidad de complicaciones cardiovasculares y respiratorias relacionadas con el neumomediastino 14 . a pesar de que este trabajo describe la serie ms amplia de ne en pacientes con covid-19, es necesario estudiar ms casos para conocer su significado pronstico y, en el caso de convertirse en un marcador de progresin de la enfermedad, establecer medidas o recomendaciones teraputicas especficas.a, radiografa de trax posteroanterior en mujer de 60 aos ingresada con neumona bilateral por sars-cov-2 en la que se observa un neumomediastino incidental (flechas blancas).obsrvese la extensin del gas a los tejidos blandos del cuello (flecha negra). b, radiografa de trax posteroanterior en varn de 62 aos ingresado con neumona bilateral por sars-cov-2, que present dolor torcico y disnea. en la radiografa se observa un neumomediastino paratraqueal derecho (flechas). c) radiografa de trax posteroanterior en varn de 58 aos con neumona bilateral por sars-cov-2, que present un episodio de dolor torcico e hipotensin.en la radiografa se observa un neumomediastino con neumopericardio (flecha) y gas en los tejidos blandos de la regin supraclavicular derecha (asteriscos). d) topograma (correspondiente a una tc de trax) del nico neumomediastino diagnosticado mediante tc en una mujer de 64 aos con neumona bilateral por sars-cov-2, que present dolor torcico y disnea. en el topograma se observa un extenso neumomediastino con extensin a las partes blandas del cuello (flechas). e) imagen axial de tc de trax (ventana de pulmn) de la paciente de la imagen d que confirma la presencia de gas ectpico rodeando los bronquios principales (flechas negras) y disecando el pericardio (flechas blancas). f) imagen coronal de tc de trax tabla 1. caractersticas clnicas de los pacientes con covid-19 y ne. abreviaturas: h (hombre), m (mujer), tc (tomografa computarizada), ne (neumomediastino espontneo) * calculada segn la escala de puntuacin de la referencia n 9.** no atribuible al ne.fueron seleccionados 316 recin nacidos. se realizaron 1.865 llamadas telefnicas (mediana 4), y 106 visitas, en 89 de las cuales se confirm la enfermedad. los sntomas ms frecuentes fueron rinitis (91 %) y tos (69 %). el diagnstico clnico principal fue infeccin respiratoria de vas altas (82 %); 17 de 72 anf realizados (23,2 %) fueron positivos. se detectaron rinovirus (41,1 %) y vrs (35,2 %). ingresaron un 16 % (17/106) de los nios atendidos por enfermedad (el 5,3 % de la cohorte), diagnosticados de sndrome febril y de bronquiolitis. no encontramos nin-gn factor epidemiolgico asociado con la infeccin respiratoria viral en los casos positivos.en nuestro medio las infecciones respiratorias de los lactantes son en su mayora banales y no precisan atencin hospitalaria. el rinovirus y el vrs son los principales agentes etiolgicos. no se encontraron factores epidemiolgicos relacionados con la infeccin respiratoria asociada a virus.lactantes. infeccin respiratoria. virus respiratorio sincitial. rinovirus.respiratory syncytial virus and influenza virus infections are known causes of hospital admission in infants. it is less well known the pattern of virus infections in infants under 6 months of age in the outpatient setting.were recruited 316 newborns. the 1,865 phone calls made (median 4 for every child), produced 106 visits, and the illness confirmed in 89 illness. rhinitis (91 %) and cough (69 %) were the most common symptoms. upper respiratory infection was the principal clinical diagnosis (84.5 %), and 17 of the 72 samples (23.2 %) were positive. most common viruses were rsv (41.1 %) and rhinovirus (35.2 %). of the children visited, 17 out of 106 (16 %) (5.3 % of the cohort) were admitted to hospital. diagnoses were febrile syndrome and bronchiolitis. we did not find any epidemiological factor associated with viral respiratory infection in positive cases.in our population most of the respiratory infections in infants are minor and do not need hospital assistance. rhinovirus and rsv are the major pathogens. we did not find any epidemiological factor associated with viral respiratory infection.las infecciones respiratorias son la primera causa de morbimortalidad en el lactante en nuestro medio. el virus respiratorio sincitial (vrs) ha sido bien estudiado como primera causa de ingreso hospitalario por este motivo, y su cuadro clnico es ampliamente conocido. como segundo grupo etiolgico se encuentran diversos virus que en los ltimos aos han empezado a ser identificados, junto con sus caractersticas clnicas, gracias al desarrollo de tcnicas de amplificacin genmicas (pcr) 1,2 , altamente especficas y ms sensibles para el diagnstico de virus respiratorios comunes que los mtodos convencionales, como el aislamiento en cultivos celulares o la inmunofluorescencia directa (ifd) 3 . ste es el caso del numeroso grupo de rinovirus del que se ha conocido su importancia real como causante bien de infecciones de vas bajas en lactantes 4 , o bien como desencadenante de exacerbaciones de asma en escolares 5 . tambin mediante estas tcnicas moleculares se ha descrito la vinculacin del metaneumovirus humano como causa de cuadros clnicos muy similares a los producidos por el vrs, y se ha publicado que puede detectarse en el 12-16 % de los nios ingresados por infeccin respiratoria [6] [7] [8] . otro de los virus recientemente descubiertos es el bocavirus 9 humano, que se reconoce como causa de infeccin respiratoria por detrs del vrs y de los rinovirus. la mayora de los estudios realizados sobre ste y sobre otros virus se han llevado a cabo en pacientes hospitalizados o en otros grupos de poblacin seleccionados.los objetivos de nuestro trabajo fueron conocer la frecuencia y las caractersticas clnicas de las infecciones respiratorias virales, con hospitalizacin o sin ella, en una cohorte de nios nacidos durante los meses de invierno y controlados durante un perodo de 6 meses.estudio prospectivo de cohortes realizado entre los recin nacidos en los hospitales de las reas de salud 8 y 9 de la comunidad de madrid (hospital universitario fundacin alcorcn y hospital severo ochoa de legans). ambos hospitales tienen unidades de pediatra no terciarias, se localizan en la zona sur de madrid y pertenecen a la red pblica sanitaria de la comunidad autnoma de madrid. los nios fueron seleccionados al nacer durante un perodo de 3 meses (comprendido entre el 1 de noviembre de 2005 y el 31 de enero de 2006) por medio de una entrevista personal a los padres de todos ellos, durante su estancia en la maternidad. el seguimiento se realiz desde el momento del reclutamiento en el estudio hasta el 30 de abril de 2006. se solicit el consentimiento informado a los padres para su inclusin en el estudio. para ello deban estar dispuestos a acudir a las visitas de seguimiento cuando el nio presentara sintomatologa respiratoria. los criterios de exclusin se exponen en la tabla 1. el estudio fue aprobado por el comit de tica de los hospitales participantes.a los padres que aceptaron participar se les proporcion un cuestionario con datos epidemiolgicos (edad, nacionalidad, estudios, afecciones previas, nmero de hijos, estado vacunal, nmero de convivientes en el domicilio, hbito tabquico) para que lo cumplimentaran antes de abandonar la maternidad. se les entreg una carta informativa sobre las caractersticas del estudio, destinada a su pediatra de atencin primaria. los pediatras participantes en el estudio realizaron llamadas telefnicas quincenales hasta la finalizacin del seguimiento. en ellas se realizaban preguntas a los padres con un cuestionario prefijado sobre el patrn de lactancia, cambios en las caractersticas epidemiolgicas (asistencia a guardera, nmero de convivientes, vacunacin) y sobre la aparicin de sintomatologa respiratoria (fiebre, rinorrea, tos, anorexia, rechazo de la alimentacin, dificultad respiratoria). se concertaba una visita con uno de los facultativos responsables del estudio cuando los padres referan la existencia de sntomas compatibles con infeccin respiratoria. se valoraba clnicamente al paciente y si se cumplan al menos tres de los criterios preestablecidos se indicaba la recogida de muestra de aspirado nasofarngeo en ese momento. los criterios para la recogida de muestras se exponen en la tabla 2. se proporcion a los padres un nmero de telfono de contacto para concertar la visita si los nios presentaban sintomatologa entre las llamadas. en todo momento el seguimiento fue paralelo al de su pediatra de atencin primaria, sin interferir con sus decisiones y animando a los padres a que no se utilizara el estudio como camino alternativo a la asistencia en atencin primaria en cada una de las visitas por enfermedad. mediante cuestionario preestablecido se recogieron las caractersticas clnicas de los nios, el tratamiento recibido, la necesidad de hospitalizacin, y el diagnstico clnico y etiolgico final de cada una de las visitas por enfermedad.a todos los nios con sintomatologa compatible con una infeccin respiratoria se les recogieron muestras de anf, remitidas en medio de transporte viral al laboratorio de gripe y virus respiratorios del centro nacional de microbiologa, instituto de salud carlos iii de madrid, en donde se procesaron en las 24 h siguientes a su recogida. las muestras recogidas el viernes fueron procesadas el mismo da de su recepcin. el estudio virolgico se realiz, en primer lugar, empleando una alcuota de cada muestra para analizar la presencia de antgenos virales de vrs, gripe, adenovirus y parainfluenza, mediante ifd. una segunda alcuota se utiliz para el anlisis molecular mediante pcr y el resto de la muestra se congel a -70c.los mtodos moleculares utilizados son capaces de detectar de forma directa en afn vrs-a y b, adenovirus, gripe a, b y c, parainfluenzavirus 1, 2, 3 y 4, coronavirus, enterovirus y rinovirus, como se ha descrito previamente 10, 11 . adems, se estudi la presencia de metaneumovirus (hmpv) 12 y de bocavirus humano mediante una pcr especfica 9 .las variables cuantitativas se expresan como media (desviacin estndar [de]) y mediana (rango), y las variables cualitativas como proporciones. las caractersticas clnicas y las variables de laboratorio fueron comparadas mediante el test de la t de student, el test de la u de mann-whitney, el test de chi al cuadrado y el test exacto de fisher. se consider estadsticamente significativo un valor de p < 0,05. todo el anlisis fue realizado empleando el statistical package of social science (spss), versin 11.0.en total (reas 8 y 9) se incluyeron en el estudio 316 recin nacidos. la muestra result homognea entre ambas reas de salud en cuanto a porcentaje de madres inmigrantes, caractersticas socioeconmicas, edad gestacional, peso del recin nacido, puntuacin de apgar a los 1 y 5 min y necesidad de ingreso en la unidad neonatal. tampoco se encontraron diferencias en cuanto al nivel de estudios tanto en el padre como en la madre, ni en la existencia de enfermedades maternas previas al embarazo. las caractersticas epidemiolgicas de la muestra se enumeran tabla 3. datos epidemiolgicos de la muestra se realizaron 1.865 llamadas telefnicas (mediana, 4 por nio; rango, 2-5). se concertaron un total de 106 visitas por enfermedad en 82 nios (el 75 % de ellas a demanda de los padres; el resto motivadas por la entrevista telefnica o remitidos por su mdico). en 61 de 316 pacientes (el 19,7 % de la cohorte) se realiz una sola visita, en 18 (5,7 %) dos, y tres pacientes fueron visitados tres veces. las caractersticas epidemiolgicas de la muestra se resumen en la tabla 4.de las 106 visitas por enfermedad concertadas, 89 cumplan criterios de infeccin respiratoria aguda (el 83,9 % de las visitas concertadas). en todas ellas se recogi una muestra de anf. en el 65 % de los casos el tiempo de evolucin de los sntomas fue menor de 24 h. los sntomas ms frecuentes fueron rinitis (91 %) y tos (69 %). tras la visita, 89/106 pacientes (el 84,5 %) obtuvieron el alta mdica, siendo la infeccin respiratoria de vas altas (irva) el diagnstico ms frecuente (73/89 casos, 82 %). se diagnostic bronquiolitis en 6 casos (6,7 %).el afn fue recogido en 89 casos, si bien en un 17,9 % de ellos (16 casos) no pudo ser analizado por los mtodos moleculares por ser la muestra insuficiente. en estos casos se realiz el anlisis mediante ifd para vrs a y b y para gripe a y b. la ifd result positiva en 4 muestras (3 vrs, una gripe). en las 73 muestras analizadas mediante pcr se detect un virus en 17 casos (23,2 %). el virus detectado con ms frecuencia perteneca al grupo de los rinovirus (41,1 %), seguido de vrs, parainfluenzavirus y adenovirus (tabla 4). en ningn caso se detect coinfeccin por ms de un virus. los casos de broncoespasmo con deteccin viral positiva correspondieron a vrs a y b y rinovirus, aunque el diagnstico ms frecuentemente aso-ciado a estos virus fue irva (81 %). no se detectaron muestras positivas para metaneumovirus humano ni para bocavirus. la tos y la dificultad respiratoria fueron los sntomas ms frecuentes en los nios con deteccin viral positiva. aquellos pacientes con tos tenan cuatro veces ms riesgo (odds ratio [or], 4; intervalo de confianza [ic] del 95 %, 1,049-15,412) de presentar pcr positiva. cuando adems se asociaba a dificultad respiratoria, el riesgo aumentaba a 5,55 (or, 0,55; ic 95 %, 1, 9) . separando por etiologas, el 40 % de los nios infectados por el grupo de los rinovirus presentaron broncoespasmo, frente al 17 % de los pacientes infectados por vrs. no encontramos diferencias en otros datos clnicos considerados (fiebre, afectacin de estado general, etc.). el 16 % de los nios que cumplieron criterios de enfermedad (17 de 89 casos) precisaron su ingreso. en el 53 % de los casos (9/17) el motivo del ingreso fue la existencia de sntomas respiratorios, y la bronquiolitis fue responsable de ms de la mitad de ellos (55 %). dos de estos pacientes precisaron oxigenoterapia. comparando el grupo de ingresados con el de no ingresados la fiebre superior a 38c (el 52,9 % frente al 5,6 %; or, 19,6; ic 95 %, 5,62-63,85) y la dificultad respiratoria (el 29,4 % frente al 6,7 %; or, 5,9; ic 95 %, 1,5-22,3) fueron los sntomas en los que hallamos ms diferencias entre ambos grupos. los nios con fiebre superior a 38c y dificultad respiratoria tuvieron, respectivamente, 19,6 y 5,9 ms probabilidades de ser ingresados en el hospital. el diagnstico virolgico tuvo un rendimiento similar en el grupo de los pacientes ingresados (23,07 %, 3 de 13) y en el de nios no ingresados (23,32 %, 14 de 61). en los 3 nios ingresados con deteccin viral positiva, los virus aislados fue-pcr: reaccin en cadena de la polimerasa; vrs: virus respiratorio sincitial; parainfluenzavirus: parainfluenzavirus 1, 2, 3 y 4. ron vrs, parainfluenza y rinovirus. ninguno de los nios perdidos para su seguimiento precis ingreso hospitalario por ningn motivo en nuestros centros durante el perodo de estudio. ni el ambiente epidmico familiar, ni la asistencia a la guardera, ni tener hermanos en edad escolar, el ambiente tabquico o el patrn de lactancia aparecan como factores que influyeran en la presencia de infeccin respiratoria asociada con deteccin viral positiva. tampoco se asoci con mayor frecuencia a hospitalizacin.en nuestro estudio, el grupo de los rinovirus (41,1 %) result ser la primera causa de infeccin respiratoria en nios menores de 6 meses en el mbito extrahospitalario. la segunda causa fue el vrs (35,2 %). no hemos encontrado ningn trabajo similar que describa y estudie de forma prospectiva y en el mbito ambulatorio cualquier infeccin respiratoria que podemos encontrar en lactantes pequeos, independiente de su gravedad.desde el punto de vista etiolgico, nuestros resultados coinciden con lo publicado por kusel et al 13 , quienes tambin se basan en el seguimiento de una cohorte en el primer ao de vida, y que estudian las infecciones extrahospitalarias. los rinovirus fueron responsables del 48,5 % de las detecciones positivas de su serie, seguidos por el vrs (10,9 %) . a diferencia de nuestro estudio, el 61,8 % de las infecciones presentadas en este trabajo correspondan a nios mayores de 6 meses y, adems, la cohorte fue seleccionada por sus antecedentes familiares de atopia y tena un nivel socioeconmico medio-alto. van benten et al 14 , en una cohorte de nios controlados desde el nacimiento hasta los 2 aos de forma ambulatoria, identifican a los rinovirus como los agentes causales de infecciones respiratorias ms frecuentes a esta edad (el 58 % a los 6 meses de edad), seguidos por el vrs. sin embargo, slo recogieron muestras en las visitas por enfermedad solicitadas por los padres y en una visita programada a los 6 meses. quizs en este trabajo las infecciones menos graves no fueron valoradas. tambin copenhaver et al 15 y souza et al 16 (en estudios de cohortes de pacientes con infecciones moderadas y graves, y en pacientes que acudan a guarderas, respectivamente) presentan al grupo de los rinovirus como primera causa de infeccin respiratoria. uno de los puntos fuertes de nuestro estudio radica en que detectamos todas las infecciones respiratorias de la cohorte de nios, incluidas las ms leves que las familias no hubieran consultado al pediatra, lo que evita el sesgo de limitar el estudio a un grupo seleccionado de pacientes con infeccin respiratoria ms grave o cualquier criterio restrictivo para la inclusin de pacientes (escolarizacin o consulta mdica). este hecho quiz podra explicar que a pesar de la moderna metodologa diagnstica empleada, el porcentaje de muestras con resultado etiolgico positivo (23,2 %) sea menor al comunicado en estudios aparentemente similares (el 60 % en el estudio de kusel et al 13 , el 54-58 % en el estudio de van benten et al 14 para este grupo de edad). desde un punto de vista clnico, en nuestros resultados se observa que el 40 % de los pacientes infectados por rinovirus present broncoespasmo, frente al 17 % de los infectados por vrs. dicho de otro modo, la infeccin por rinovirus aumenta en 2,35 veces el riesgo de presentar broncoespasmo con respecto al vrs, lo que concuerda con los datos publicados por kusel, en cuya serie los pacientes infectados por rinovirus presentaron un riesgo de asociar broncoespasmo tres veces superior que los pacientes infectados por vrs.el patrn etiolgico encontrado en estos estudios y nuestra cohorte difiere respecto al comunicado para el mbito hospitalario, en el que el vrs se perfila como la primera causa de infeccin respiratoria (en concreto bronquiolitis) 17 , y episodios de sibilancias de repeticin 18, 19 , ocupando el rinovirus el segundo lugar. teniendo en cuenta lo referido anteriormente, podra esgrimirse la hiptesis de que el broncoespasmo asociado con rinovirus en lactantes pequeos sera menos grave y precisara una menor tasa de ingreso que el secundario a vrs. la tasa global de hospitalizacin en nuestra cohorte (5,3 %) coincide con la publicada en otros trabajos realizados en nuestro medio (paricio talayero et al 20 , 5,6 %) cuyos criterios de ingreso son similares a los nuestros, y difieren algo ms de la de otros pases (grupo milenium 21 , el 12 % en menores de 8 meses). no obstante todo lo apuntado, en nuestra serie el nmero de detecciones virales positivas entre los pacientes ingresados es demasiado pequeo como para poder extraer conclusiones extrapolables en el momento actual.de los resultados obtenidos podemos concluir que las infecciones respiratorias en los menores de 6 meses en general (incluido el mbito extrahospitalario) son banales, y precisan ingreso en pocas ocasiones (5,3 % de la cohorte). el 20 % de los nios estudiados present al menos un episodio de infeccin respiratoria en los primeros meses de vida, siendo el irva el diagnstico principal (82 %). el sntoma predominante fue la rinitis. a la hora de explicar la poca gravedad clnica de estas infecciones en nios de menos de 6 meses, y excluidas las mayores precauciones genricas (de imposible medicin) que las familias tienden a tener con los lactantes ms pequeos, probablemente se pueda realizar la hiptesis de que los anticuerpos maternos transferidos intratero proporcionan un cierto grado de proteccin durante los primeros meses de vida, lo que contribuira a que las infecciones respiratorias hasta los 6 meses sean poco graves. no encontramos asociacin entre factores epidemiolgicos, como la presencia de hermanos en edad escolar en el domicilio, nmero de convivientes en el hogar, ambiente tabquico o tipo de lactancia recibida, y la presencia de infeccin respiratoria.the global virus network (www.gvn.org) is a global coalition of leading virologists. founded in 2011, the not-for-profit organization gvn has grown to 52 centers of excellence and 9 affiliate institutions in 32 countries throughout the world. the gvn mission is to strengthen research and response to current viral causes of human disease and to prepare for new viral pandemic threats through the collaboration of a global network of expert virologists. the gvn activities are mainly based on virology research, training and advocacy. the gvn international meetings is one way to support its mission, providing a framework where global junior and senior virologists can connect, discuss and establish new collaborations and advance the field.past gvn international meetings have taken place in washington dc, usa and dublin, ireland (2011), naples, italy and baltimore, md, usa (2012), munich, germany and moscow, russia (2013) , beijing, china (2015) , sapporo, japan (2016), melbourne, australia (2017), and france (2018). the 2019 gvn international meeting took place in barcelona, spain, june 9-12 and was jointly organized with the spanish society of virology. the meeting had 311 delegates from 22 different countries. a common theme throughout the meeting was globalization and climate change. the 11th gvn international meeting gave participants an opportunity to discuss recent findings in virology, thus providing a platform for collaboration and networking, particularly for the high number of participating young spanish virologists. the conference sessions are outlined in the present report.in addition to plenary lectures and workshops that were held at the sev-gvn joint meeting, contributions in the format of short oral presentations were arranged to include a wide spectrum of issues addressed by member-scientists of gvn. poster sessions allowed an interesting discussion among essentially younger scientists from spanish laboratories and participants from other countries. with this perspective for the first time gvn established travel grants that consisted of partial financial help to encourage participation of younger members of https://doi.org/10.1016/j.antiviral.2019.104645 received 30 october 2019; accepted 2 november 2019 infection, viremia and virus shedding, the immune response and last but not least good, reliable, and rapid diagnostic tools. she pointed out that virus circulation in vectors and in animal reservoirs precedes human exposure and infection. during an arbovirus outbreak in humans, clinical signs might only be detected when the peak of an outbreak has already been passed. however, virus circulation in vectors and the animal reservoir will precede human infections (reusken et al., 2018) . therefore, early detection in vectors and animal reservoir hosts can serve as an early warning system to mitigate economic and human health impact.how important the interplay between different information sources is was demonstrated in 2015-2016 when the combination of weather forecast and syndromic animal surveillance during el nino rains in kenya resulted in an effective early warning for a major outbreak of rvfv, thus allowing precautions to prevent spill over to humans (oyas et al., 2018) .as a second example she presented the wnv outbreak on the american continent starting in new york city in 1999 (cdc, 1999) and the emergence of wnv lineage 2 in spain in (napps et al., 2019 . in both cases dead bird surveillance and identification of equine infections was an important for wnv surveillance as an early warning system. dr. busquets concluded that arbovirus surveillance provides a realistic picture of the epidemiological situation and allows for monitoring the effectiveness of intervention measures. surveillance in vectors and in vertebrate hosts enables detection of arbovirus circulation before clinical onset in humans. however, countries need to adapt their surveillance scheme to their epidemiological situation, surveillance objectives and capacities. effective early warning requires the interaction between multiple disciplines like entomologist, veterinarians, biologists, clinicians, epidemiologists, etc.masao matsouka (kumamoto university, japan) gave a detailed insight into aspects of the strategy and pathogenesis of human t-cell leukemia virus type 1 (htlv-1). in his presentation he focused on two viral proteins, the transactivator of viral gene expression (tax) and the htlv-1 bzip factor (hbz). htlv-1 is the causal agent of adult t-cell leukemia (atl) and htlv-1-associated myelopathy/tropical spastic paraparesis (ham/tsp) in adults. it has close relatives in several nonhuman primates and is an important human pathogen with a global distribution of infection foci and an estimated 10 million people are infected (sonoda et al., 2011) . htlv-1 is transmitted only through cellto-cell contact passing the virus from mother to infant through breast milk and from male to female through semen. therefore, living infected cells are essential for transmission and in order to enhance transmission the virus increases the number of infected cells.while the cellular receptor for htlv-1 is ubiquitous (manel et al., 2003) the provirus is mainly detected in cd4 + effector/memory t cells in vivo. however, it was not clear if htlv-1 preferentially infects these cells or if infected precursor cells differentiate into these cells. analyzing tax expression as a marker for viral replication in stlv-1 infected japanese macaques as a model for htlv-1 infection in humans, matsouka and colleagues showed that elevated tax expression is mainly seen in the bone marrow suggesting de novo infection of hematopoietic stem cells (hscs). further, in ham/tsp patients they detected identical integration sites of htlv-1 proviruses in neutrophils, monocytes, b cells cd8 + t cells and cd4 + t cells indicating that these cells are all derived from htlv-1 infected hscs in vivo.while tax has an important role in the upregulation of anti-apoptotic genes and the maintenance of cell populations it is only expressed transiently, most likely because the tax protein is highly immunogenic and a major target for ctl. in leukemic cells tax is expressed only in a minor fraction of the cells and only for a short period of time (mahgoub et al., 2018) . matsouka then concentrated on the important role of hbz in htlv-1 pathogenesis. hbz is encoded on the antisense strand of the provirus and has a low immunogenicity. in contrast to tax it is expressed constantly in all atl cells. hbz regulates several different pathways in infected cells, enable immune escape, trigger inflammation through the induction of ifng expression, and enable the infection to overcome immune suppressive effects. hbz also induces expression of the chemokine receptor ccr4 allowing infiltration of infected t-cells into tissues. seen that htlv-1 is transmitted through cell-to-cell contact he suggested that hbz-induced ccr4 expression enables htlv-1 infected cells to migrate into breast milk and into semen, thus allowing efficient transmission of the virus between humans.marion koopmans (erasmus mc, netherlands) elaborated in her presentation on the complex interplay between man-made disturbances of ecosystems and the resulting increase in number and amplitude of emerging viral disease outbreaks. she presented several examples to underline how changes in environmental conditions and in human behavior can create conditions that result in an increase of pathogen transmission, spill-over to new hosts, broad dissemination of infection, and changes in viral properties. the recent ebola outbreak in west africa and the ongoing outbreak in the democratic republic of congo illustrate how demographical and political changes can affect spreading of diseases.dr. koopmans emphasized the important role and the potential of surveillance by presenting preliminary results on arbovirus surveillance from the arbo study and data from an influenza market surveillance in poultry in china (bai et al., 2019) . she also pointed out a potential role for co-circulation of different viruses, e.g. zika and dengue for new pathogenesis pathways (langerak et al., 2019) .shifting the burden of disease detection from clinicians to early detection and forecasting of spillover through surveillance of reservoir hosts would mean a paradigm change in the surveillance of emerging infectious diseases from reactive to pro-active measures. early detection allows timely control and thus mitigates the number of human cases (karesh et al., 2012) . matching these surveillance data with data on demographic development, global travel and trade, and climate change might allow to predict potential international spread of pathogens. the utility of such approaches will very much depend on a switch from the detection of single pathogens to an "open view" surveillance with multiplex assays, broad antibody profiling, metagenomics approaches, and an efficient way of data sharing.thomas rasmussen, a senior researcher at the national veterinary institute of virology in australia, presented an update on the potential use of latency-reversing agents (lras) for hiv elimination. the great success of antiretroviral therapy (art) for hiv infection is tempered by the fact that treatment must be maintained for life. rasmussen reviewed work showing that hiv can remain in a latent state where the immune system or art cannot eliminate the virus. rebound viremia occurs when art is stopped even in individuals with no detectable virus in cells or plasma. an experimental approach to clear latent hiv and thus cure hiv infection has been dubbed "shock and kill." lras are used to activate latent hiv allowing the reactivated cells to be targeted and killed by art and/or the immune system. administration of lras alone have thus far not demonstrated an effect on the frequency of latently infected cells or the time to virus rebound following interruption of art ("shock, no kill"). for example, in the diorr trial (dolutegravir intensification effect on residual virus replication on art) lead by rasmussen there was no change in levels of hiv dna or rna. negative results where mechanisms for failure are carefully examined are important because they can demonstrate which strategies will not work and provide guidance to strategies that do work. elimination of latently infected cells (particularly those that are long-lived) may require hiv-specific cd8 + t cell effector functions similar to those of so-called elite controllers of hiv-1 infection. various strategies to boost anti-hiv immunity currently under development including therapeutic vaccines, toll-like receptor agonists, broadly neutralizing antibodies, immune checkpoint inhibitors, interferon- and interleukin therapy should be investigated. immune checkpoint blockade could also play a role in developing an hiv cure by re-invigorating exhausted t cells and potentially reversing hiv latency in cd4 + t cells.infection by mosquito-borne viruses has increased over the past few decades due to globalization, increase in societal mobility and climate change. juana diez from the universitat pompeu fabra in the lovely host city of barcelona continued the session by exploring how viruses such as chikungunya virus (chikv) are able to express their genomes at high levels in cells from diverse species. the four bases of the genetic code create 64 codons, of which 61 are translated into 20 amino acids and 3 are stop codons. synonymous codons differ principally at the third base or wobble position. different species, including mosquitoes and humans, vary widely in which codons are used for protein translation. dr. diaz and her team integrated subcellular fractionation and transcriptome-wide analyses of translation in human cells, to show that chikv infection induces a host adaptation to viral codon usage into the endoplasmic reticulum (er), the preferred site of chikv protein expression. the trna modification enzyme methyltransferase 9 (kiaa1456) methylates uridine in the wobble position and enhances speed of translation of certain mrnas, including chikv mrnas. kiaa1456 mrna is translationally activated up to 40-fold by chikv infection. overexpression of kiaa1456 increases chikv replication and kiaa1456 mrna silencing decreases replication. these findings demonstrate an unexpected interplay of viruses with the host trna epitranscriptome that favors viral protein expression. this mechanism appears to be conserved among viruses that replicate effectively in more than a single host species, which opens the intriguing possibility of future exploitation of a broad-spectrum antiviral target.the ebolaviruses cause highly lethal disease with sporadic and unpredictable outbreaks. an ongoing outbreak in democratic republic of the congo is the second largest in history. while the genome of ebola virus encodes just seven proteins, the deleterious effects on the human body are immense causing severe pathology and fatalities. thus, basic research is needed to understand the viral protein conformations and their role in viral replication.sara lenderas bueno from the scripps research institute explained that several of these proteins are multifunctional in the viral cycle, and some of these are also multi-structural, adopting different forms at different times to mediate different, essential functions. using crystallography, electron microscopy and biochemistry, it was found that two essential proteins in infection; the nucleoprotein np and the matrix protein vp40 display different conformations. np is involved in viral nucleocapsid formation and facilitates viral transcription and replication. to avoid premature self-polymerization and non-productive binding to cellular rnas, np is chaperoned by the viral phosphoprotein vp35. np complexing with the amino-terminal portion of vp35 was delineated at 2.3  resolution and electron microscopy indicated the importance of this binding interaction to control np polymerization. structure-directed mutagenesis studies identified conserved critical residues in the np-vp35 interface which could be targeted by broadly effective antivirals. with regard to the matrix protein vp40, another multi-structural protein, it rearranges into three alternative structures, each with its corresponding function at different stages of the life cycle. how these structural changes are triggered has remained unclear. new data revealed that the binding of the vp40 dimer to specific nucleotide sequences is enough to form the octameric structure/form responsible for regulation of viral rna replication. these findings provide the molecular basis for the multifunctionality of these proteins and reveal attractive targets for therapeutic intervention.kariem ezzat from stockholm university presented tantalizing data on the role of viral protein corona in viral pathogenesis and amyloid aggregation. viruses rely on the intracellular host machinery for replication, production of viral proteins and assembly. however, outside cells, viruses share many biophysical properties with nanoparticles. based on these features, viruses have the capacity to accumulate a hostderived protein corona layer in extracellular environments similar to nanoparticles. to evaluate this possibility and its implications, protein corona layers of respiratory syncytial virus (rsv) and herpes simplex virus 1 (hsv-1) in different biological fluids such as human plasma and bronchioalveolar lavage fluid were analyzed using proteomics, electron microscopy, infectivity, and dendritic cell activation assays. it was found that rsv and hsv-1 accumulate rich protein corona layers that are unique for each biological fluid and corona pre-coating differentially affects viral infectivity and immune cell activation. in addition, like nanoparticles, viruses should be able to function as nano-surface catalysts that enable accelerated extracellular amyloid protein aggregation.the authors also showed that hsv-1, which has been implicated in alzheimer's disease, catalyzes the nucleation and accumulation of the a42 peptide both in vitro and in vivo. results from ezzat et al., (2019) showed that unlike the viral genome coded surface proteins, the viral protein corona is an acquired structural layer that is dependent on the viral microenvironment resulting in different viral identities based on the target tissue and the target organism. additionally, the viral coronadriven heterogeneous nucleation of amyloids illustrates convergence between viral and amyloid pathologies suggesting a direct physical mechanistic link that warrants further investigation.ana isabel nunez from irta-cresa, barcelona, spain, discussed novel findings on mosquito molecular responses to arbovirus infection, particularly related to rift valley fever phlebovirus (rvfv) and culex pipiens. in the literature, the aedes aegypti-dengue virus (denv) combination is the most studied in terms of gene expression. however, there is a general paucity of information on mosquito genes involved in vector competence and immune responses with regard to other important vector-virus interactions. rvfv causes an emerging significant public health zoonotic disease which is commonly transmitted mainly by the culex and aedes genus mosquitoes. in her talk, molecular responses of culex pipiens to rvfv infection were presented, particularly those related to genes implicated in the innate immunity pathways (toll, imd, jak/stat) and rnai. a total of 445 differentially expressed genes (deg) were identified. the gene expression profiles varied at different days post infection. a total of 445 deg were found wherein 42 deg were immune function related. among these genes, some are involved in innate immunity pathways; cactus or defensin-a in the toll pathway or piwi4 and drosha in the rnai pathway. specifically, three immune pathways toll, imd and rnai and apoptosis were affected by rvfv infection. conversely, jak/stat pathway seems not to be involved in culex pipiens response to rvfv. toll and imd pathways are suppressed after infectious blood feeding, for example amp (defensin-a) was down-regulated. the rnai pathway was mainly down-regulated in the course of the rvfv infection. all these immune system responses would allow the establishment of the rvfv infection in culex pipiens mosquitoes. these results form a basis for future in depth studies to better understand the functionality of immune related deg in relation to vector competence to develop new strategies for vector control programs.ken olson from colorado state university reviewed the rnai and arbovirus interactions. such infections in aedes aegypti allows transmission of yellow fever, dengue, zika, and chikungunya viruses throughout the mosquito's lifetime. the mechanisms of viral persistence in mosquitoes, which involves the production of virus rna-derived sirnas and pirnas, are not well understood. the rna interference pathways involve double stranded rnas that degrade target rnas and mediate gene regulation. in his studies, sirna and pirna product depletion, small rna sequencing, pirna product expression profiles, immunoprecipitation, and arbovirus assays were used to dissect the viral and host-cell interactions. it was found that the piwi-family protein piwi4 has antiviral activity in aedes aegypti aag2 cells and in mosquitoes infected with arboviruses and insect-specific flaviviruses.although these rna viruses encode no reverse transcriptase, circular episomal dna in arbovirus-infected aedes aegypti cells consisting of hybrid sequences of arbovirus-derived cdna (vdna) and retrotransposable elements were found. these episomal dnas appear to be acquired during reverse-transcription by a discriminatory process of vdna recombination with retrotransposons. transcripts from vdna may serve as precursors for antiviral vpirnas. integrated viral-derived (vdna) can also be detected in the mosquito genome as endogenous viral elements (eves) that are often associated with pirna clusters in the mosquito genome. eves are transcribed to produce pirnas that associate preferentially with piwi4. importantly, eve-derived pirnas can inhibit the replication of a cognate virus. these findings suggest that the aedes aegypti piwi family of proteins and episomal vdna, and eves provide a means of moderating viral load in mosquito cells and a potential mechanism for transgenerational virus tolerance in the mosquito.richard zhao from the university of maryland presented data on the virologic differences in severity between historical and epidemic zika virus-mediated infection and neurocytotoxicity. the 2015 zika virus (zikv) outbreak in the americas have had a severe impact as it in brazil alone left > 3000 babies with zikv-associated neurological disorders (zand) including microcephaly. even though the causal relationship between the zikv and zand have been confirmed, the reasons why the zikv suddenly became so pathogenic and caused zand in humans remain largely unknown. to help answer this question, the virologic differences and the underlying molecular mechanisms between the representative historical african mr766 zikv strain and the epidemic brazilian br15 zikv strain were examined. glioma snb-19 cell line and 3-d neurospheres were used to evaluate both primary and chimeric viruses. notable differences were found between strains with regard to viral attachment, permissiveness and replication, as well as, the induction of neurocytopathic effects in host neuronal cells.chimeric virus analyses suggested that the zikv e protein correlates with the viral attachment, and the c-prm region contributes to the permissiveness and zikv-induced cytopathic effects. furthermore, the prm protein and its cleaved pr product, but not the mature m protein, induces apoptotic cell death in the snb-19 cells. the pr region, which resides on the n-terminal side of prm protein, is responsible for prminduced apoptotic cell death. mutational analysis further identified four amino-acid residues that have an impact on the ability of prm to induce apoptosis. these findings suggest that functions of the structural prm-e proteins contribute in part to the difference in zikv-mediated viral pathogenicity between the historic and epidemic strains. ongoing studies are likely to identify the role of other viral proteins with regard to neuropathogenesis.ramesh akkina from colorado state university reported on the zikv mediated pathology on human hematopoietic cells. while many previous studies have focused on zikv viral effects on the cns, few have explored the viral effects on the human immune and hematopoietic system. dr. akkina presented both in vitro and in vivo studies conducted on human cells. in vivo studies involved humanized mice (hu-mice) that harbor a transplanted human immune system. these mice generate human t cells, b cells, nk cells, monocytes and macrophages, as well as, dendritic cells that orchestrate both humoral and cellular immune responses and thus are ideal models to examine viral effects and interactions with human immune cells (akkina, 2013) . since the hu-mice also harbor human hematopoietic stem cells in the bone marrow, viral effects on these cells can also be ascertained. recent studies (schmitt et al., 2018) has shown that zikv infection of hu-mice can generate a human neutralizing antibody response to zikv and also that human b cells and cd34 hsc can be infected.in studies presented at the meeting, further investigations were carried out on the zikv infection on human b cells in vitro and in vivo to determine any adverse effects such as cell death or cell dysfunction, as well as, viral persistence. viral exposure of mature nave b cells resulted in the loss of one subset and aberrant proliferation of another. r. akkina, et al. antiviral research 172 (2019) 104645 upregulation of markers indicative of b cell progression into the plasmablast stage was seen in the expanding subset. in vivo, results from zikv infected hu-mice showed the presence of zikv + b cells in the periphery during acute infection and later in bone marrow during the chronic stage. it was also found that cd34 + hsc were susceptible to zikv infection in vitro and could be detected in the bone marrow of infected hu-mice. b cell loss can lead to delayed viral clearance, whereas aberrant b cell activation may have implications in the pathogenesis of autoimmune diseases such as guillain-barr syndrome. infection of cd34 + hsc has implications for hematopoietic cell differentiation and viral persistence.currently several murine models of zikv neuropathogenesis exist. since standard mice are not susceptible to zikv, mostly ifn deficient mice that lack an innate immune system and thus permitting ready viral infection are used. a significant drawback with these models is that viral infection leads to rapid fatalities, which is not a common feature with zika. in the studies presented balb/c rag2/c/ mice (also known as brg mice) with intact ifn pathway were used. neonatal mice when exposed to zikv developed severe microcephaly and other important czs features such as eye deformations and stunted growth. this model is likely to be useful as an experimental neonatal zikv infection model. with regard to human cell infections, these findings highlighted the utility of hu-mice as valuable human surrogate experimental system to directly assess zikv effects on these cells in vivo.christopher kratochvil, co-director of global center for health security (gchs, university of nebraska) presented the mission and resources of the center, which is an initiative of the university of nebraska medical center (unmc) with the purpose of leading us domestic and global preparedness for emerging infectious diseases (eids) (https://www.unmc.edu/iexcel/global-center/index.html). since its foundation in 2017 it has become a primary biosecurity resource for training, education, research, and clinical care and for advancing international capacity and innovation to prevent and mitigate the effects of eids and other public health emergencies. the program's successes have been built upon a foundation of robust partnerships with diverse governmental and academic organizations (ktatochvil et al., 2017; eitzen et al., 2019) .the gchs has numerous resources, including a clinical biocontainment unit, a quarantine unit, a training and simulation center which includes a simulated biocontainment unit, as well as, diverse laboratory and clinical resources from across the academic health center.strategic health organization has been informed of more than 2000 laboratoryconfirmed human cases including almost 838 fatalities (ramadan and shaib, 2019) . it is endemic in the middle east and human cases have been reported in 27 countries. symptoms range from asymptomatic to very severe pneumonia with acute respiratory distress syndrome (ards), septic shock and multiorgan failure. no vaccines are commercially available nor have specific treatments been developed.dromedaries are the natural reservoir, but alpacas have also been reported as potential hosts for mers-cov (chan et al., 2014) . since handling dromedary camels is not an easy option, especially under biocointantment conditions, and based on preliminary data showing that alpacas is a valuable model to study early mers-cov infection events, the catalan scientists set out to develop an ex vivo model derived from the latter animals. dr. rodon described the isolation of respiratory tissues to assess the early local immune events elicited upon infection. isolated nasal mucosa and tracheal explants were maintained in vitro and infected with mers-cov/qatar 2015. samples obtained at different times from 0 to 96 h post-inoculation were used to quantify viral rna by rt-qpcr, detect virus antigen localization by immunohistochemistry (ihc) and to isolate virus. this work indicated that nasal mucosa and tracheal explants from alpaca are suitable ex vivo models to study mers-cov replication and molecular mechanisms leading to viral infection and/or virus clearance. the researchers hope to further develop the system to explore antiviral therapeutic approaches (stalin raj et al., 2018) .wendy k. jo (riz, tiho, hannover, germany) described a new flavivirus (genus pestivirus) detected in a toothed whales from the north sea harbor porpoise phocoena phocoena (tautz et al., 2015) . highthroughput data obtained by using next generation sequencing (ngs) and analyzed using an in-house metagenomics pipeline, followed by de novo assembly and phylogenetic analyses, allowed the identification of a novel pestivirus in two out of three investigated harbor porpoises. the complete genome of 11,880 bp, were reconstructed by de novo assembly of sequence reads, and confirmed by sanger sequencing of the fulllength genome. alignment of the complete genomes of pestivirus species showed that the newly identified virus is evolutionary closest to porcine linda virus and porcine bungowannah virus with 60% homology at the amino acid level. in situ hybridization showed strong granular staining in the cytoplasm of multiple cell types. based on the new sequence information rt-pcr screening of samples from more than 100 stranded harbor porpoises, collected from the north sea indicated that about 9% of these animals were positive for the novel pestivirus. the identification of a novel pestivirus in harbor porpoises suggests that the host spectrum of pestiviruses extends to members of the order cetacea (whales, dolphins, and porpoises), which are considered to have evolved from artiodactyls (even-toed ungulates) (jo et al., 2019) .elena garca snchez (center of molecular biology "severo ochoa", madrid, spain) reported an outbreak of african swine fever (asf) affecting wild boars and domestic pigs that started in the caucasus in 2007 and spread across russia and eastern europe. this more recent geographic expansion of asf further increases the threat to the global swine industry (karger et al., 2019) . dr. garca snchez presented information on genes involved in immune evasion and those hypothetically involved in attenuation of virulence of the genotype i parental asfv nh/p68. based on the information obtained, the research team generated putative live attenuated vaccines (lav) prototypes by constructing recombinant nh/p68 viruses lacking specific genes and containing markers for diva tests (gallardo et al., 2018) . a bottleneck for the production of live attenuated virus vaccines has been the lack of permanent cell lines able to sustain productive virus infection. in the studies presented, porcine alveolar macrophages (pam) were used to propagate the viruses. the results showed that naturally attenuated asfv nh/p68 strain induced full protection against both homologous (genotype i) lisbon 60 (l60) and heterologous (genotype ii) armenia07 virulent strains. the recombinant viruses carrying specific deletions were all fully protective against parental homologous (genotype i) lisbon 60 (l60) strain but only slightly protective against the heterologous (genotype ii) circulating armenia07 strain. more studies are required to assess the basis for the lack of heterologous protection of the recombinant vaccine strain, which could be related to the cell line used to produce the vaccine (snchez et al., 2019) .meagan deming (institute of human virology; center for vaccine development and global health, baltimore, united states) analyzed the response to hepatitis b vaccines in an aging population and its dependence on route of injection (weinberger et al., 2008; williams et al., 2012; de lalla et al., 1988) . fifty-two healthy adults (65-82 years; mean age 72 years), seronegative for hepatitis b (hbv), were recruited and enrolled by the senieur protocol to select a strictly healthy population (ligthart et al., 1984) . these seniors were randomized to receive an alum-adjuvanted recombinant hepb vaccine, either subcutaneous (sc) or intramuscular (im) injection, with the inoculum site guided by computerized tomography (ct) imaging. the immunological response, expressed as anti-hbs antibody titers at day 210, demonstrated that volunteers who received their vaccinations im were over three-times more likely to be responders to the hbv vaccine than volunteers receiving sc vaccinations (54% versus 16%, p = 0.004) (ikeno d et al., 2010) . the low seroconversion rate even in the im group showed a progressive decline with increasing age of the cohort and was associated with significantly lower igg2 and igg1 isotypes suggesting a marked shift in th1 responses. moreover, the percentage of seniors that showed t-cell mediated responses was significantly reduced and also lower in intensity compared to young adults (arnold et al., 2011) . this study confirmed that sc inoculation sites markedly impair seroconversion rates probably related to the inoculation in the sc fat. these data show qualitative and quantitative deficits in b and t cell responses to alum adjuvanted protein antigens, even in strictly healthy elderly cohorts (schillie et al., 2018) .abigail lowe (university of nebraska medical center, united states) turned the attention to the institutional preparedness for ethical review in scenarios of outbreaks (who, 2014) . clinical research during epidemics is crucial to build an urgent response and, yet, requires thoughtful oversight by research ethics committees to ensure the protection of vulnerable subjects facing health uncertainties. to appropriately address the regulatory aspect should be cultivated in anticipation of epidemics and pandemics, rather than in response to them (alirol et al., 2017) . the university of nebraska medical center (unmc) institutional review board (irb) response during the 2014-2015 ebola epidemic provided an example of research ethics review under a rapid response model. this irb provided rapid review of multiple protocols during the epidemic, typically with 24 h or less from submission to approval. since then, unmc has been developing a centralized irb for two national networks, both focused on public health emergency research with a vision of establishing a rapid response resource for these networks (busta et al., 2017) .a new model is being developed to adapt it for research networks in order to pave a way for clinical research including early drug development for novel pathogens that may emerge in future outbreaks. this review model will be tested for multi-site research within the us; however, there is also a need to explore models for international public health emergency research. this process is complex from regulatory, as well as, operational perspectives and will only succeed with close collaborations by broad stakeholders.jordi figuerola (estacin biolgica de doana -csic, spain), albert osterhaus (research center for emerging infections and zoonoses (riz), university of veterinary medicine hannover, germany) and amelia nieto (centro nacional de biotecnologa -csic, spain) presented their views on the one health concept, taking into account the fields of wildlife, ecology, as well as, veterinary and medical infectious disease disciplines. figuerola highlighted the fundamental contribution of wildlife and environment (including climate change) to emerging and re-emerging zoonotic diseases, including some examples on mosquito borne flaviviruses like west nile virus (rizzoli et al., 2015) , as well as, non-infectious diseases. he emphasized the need to further research on how organisms interact and how they interact with their environment as a cornerstone to understand infectious disease dynamics. osterhaus covered aspects of emerging diseases in wildlife, livestock and companion animals, and the role they play in emerging human infections. subsequently he highlighted the need to prioritize syndrome surveillance and diagnostic platforms in humans and animals, as well as, the increasing role of novel molecular technologies in pathogen discovery (kruppa et al., 2018) . in addition, he stressed that these priorities must be coupled with platforms offering mathematical modelling capacity, animal models and pathogenesis studies for new infections. moreover, all these aspects should be accompanied by investment in therapeutics discovery and preventive intervention strategies. he finally emphasized a key point of the one health concept, which is communication among experts, politicians, stakeholders and society (reperant et al., 2015) . nieto focused specifically on one of the most devastating zoonoses in human history: influenza. she presented recent results showing that the heart should be considered a new target of influenza a viruses in addition to lung, especially by strains of high pathogenicity. in addition, she discussed the need for novel developments of most effective, ideally universal, influenza vaccines, as well as, more effective antivirals with low escape potential.after their presentations, the roundtable was open to all delegates and several interventions took place. some focused on the issue of communication. most contributors agreed that scientists in general are not the best advocates to communicate hazards associated with emerging and re-emerging diseases to animals and humans alike. moreover, we are still in a reactive framework (acting once the disease is present) and should rather move towards a preventive and preparedness strategy, that ideally prevents interspecies transmission of pathogens to occur, and if not successful provide the tools for early detection and intervention strategies. consequently, confronting emerging epidemics at the source and from the onset is paramount to control global infectious disease prevention and mitigation scenarios.availability of adequate resources in 'peacetime' was another hot topic, since investment in a preventive and preparedness scenario should be done in preparation for emerging infections, and not 'when the house is on fire'. unfortunately, both at national and the international levels, current reality shows a generally reactive rather than proactive willingness to invest in preventive and preparedness scenarios. the title of the roundtable ("one health: fact or fiction?") was intentionally provocative. the impact of deadly infectious diseases is far different when comparing developed and developing countries, which further emphasizes the lack of a global, coordinated and effective agenda on one health. interestingly, the concept one health has been highlighted regularly in the scientific literature (more than 1800 peerreviewed articles), but only few manuscripts propose methodologies to measure the true impact of the implementation of this concept. moreover, only few suggested quantitative indicators to follow, but no common methodology proved to be available (baum et al., 2017) . therefore, and concluding the round-table discussion, much effort is needed by scientists, administration, politicians, stakeholders and citizens to truly implement the one health concept at a global level.johan neyts, rega institute for medical research, university of leuven, belgium, started the session by giving an overview of the antiviral agents now available for the treatment of infections with hiv, hbv, hcv, influenza and rsv infections. dr. neyts pointed out that for many other viruses that cause life-threatening infections and many of which are considered emerging and/or neglected pathogens, there are no drugs available. he then described the robotized lab-in-a-box automated platformed in a bsl3+ environment for high-throughput screening now installed at the rega institute.dr. neyts presented the current state of rega institute's development of potent antivirals against flaviviruses (such as dengue), alphaviruses (such as chikungunya) and enteroviruses as well as against noroviruses, the hepatitis e and the rabies virus. several excellent molecular targets for the selective inhibition of viral replication (and that have remained largely unexplored) have been identified, such as the non-structural protein ns4b of flaviviruses, the capping machinery of alphaviruses and the 2c helicase of enteroviruses. the rega institute now has molecules that target the nsb4 of the dengue virus with panserotype antiviral activity in the low nm to pm range. dr. neyts also reported that the anti-flu compound favipiravir (t705), also active against flavi-, arena-, bunya-, and filoviruses, protects mice from infection with chikungunya virus (chikv). a new class of chikv inhibitors, targeting viral capping active in the low microm range have now also been described (delang et al., 2016; gigante et al., 2014) .as for entero/rhinoviruses, besides the target for capsid binders like pocapavir (thibout et al., 2012) , the researchers at the rega institute have found a novel druggable pocket formed by the viral proteins vp1 and vp2 in the virus capsid and have now identified analogs targeting this pocket with broad spectrum activity (abdelnabi et al., 2019) . also described was a novel class of tryptophan dendrimers targeting the capsid five-fold vertex were found to inhibit ev-a71 replication at low nanomolar to high picomolar concentrations in vitro (sun et al., 2019) . a lead compound in the series (madal385) prevented binding and internalization of the virus but did not, unlike classical capsid binders, stabilize the particle. dr. neyts stated that also potent inhibitors of the enterovirus virus helicase are under way. other viruses for which antiviral substances are tested for at the rega institute include diarrhea causing viruses like human norovirus (for which zebra fish larvae has been found to be a replication model) and rota virus, rabies virus, and hepatitis e virus.raymond schinazi of emory university school of medicine presented his recent efforts to develop hbv capsid effectors that may offer an option to aid in a combination therapy aimed at curing chronic hepatitis b virus (hbv) infections. this virus affects over 250 million people globally and causes 686,000 deaths worldwide per year. hbv persists due to the formation of covalently-closed circular dna (cccdna)the viral minichromosomein the nucleus of hepatocytes, and current nucleoside analogs and interferon therapies have a low rate of cccdna clearance and require lifelong treatment (schinazi et al., 2018; schinazi and asselah, 2017; boucle et al., 2016) . dr. schinazi's group has identified the compound glp-26, a novel and potentially best-in-class glyoxamide derivative, affecting hbv nucleocapsid formation and replenishment of the cccdna pool. the drug has an ec 50 in the low nm range with a therapeutic index of > 10,000. in a humanized mouse model stably engrafted with human hepatocytes and infected with hbv, glp-26 displayed a major effect on hbeag secretion and hbsag in addition to a promising pre-clinical profile. more interestingly, long term combination treatment with entecavir (etv) in this model induced a four 10 log decrease in viral loads and viral antigens reductions that were sustained for up to 12 weeks after ceasing treatment. dr. schinazi also briefly describe the activity of novel norovirus protease inhibitors which were also interestingly effective against certain enteroviruses at nm levels. enterovirus protease has some similarity with norovirus and coxsackievirus protease.mara jess prez prez, instituto de qumica mdica (iqm) consejo superior de investigaciones cientficas (csic), spain argued that antiviral drug development has particular characteristics when compared to other therapeutic fields in drug discovery. as an example, it is indicated that phenotypic screening is still one of the main strategies do identify novel classes of antiviral agents while for other therapeutic areas target-based or fragment-based screening has often become more relevant (murcko, j., 2018; brown and bostrom, 2014) . once a hit with antiviral properties has been identified, its optimization to become a lead is a multiparameter process, that can also be determined by the mechanism of action of the compound. dr. prez prez' group's own experience in triazolopyrimidines as inhibitors of chikv replication was presented to illustrate how proactive and collaborative efforts among academic groups can lead to the identification and optimization of antivirals exploring a new mechanism of action (gigante et al., 2014; delang et al., 2016; gigante et al., 2017; gomez sanjuan et al., 2018) .esteban domingo, centro de biloga molecular severo ochoa (csic-uam), spain, discussed the development of antiviral resistance. the evolution of viruses involves two major steps: (i) intra-host (shortterm) and (ii) inter-host (long-term) evolution.step (i) is influenced mainly by random genome variations and quasispecies dynamics, and its description is based on mutant spectrum analyses.step (ii) is guided by the multifactorial epidemiological fitness and transmission-associated random drift of genomes, and its description is based on phylodynamic approaches (geoghegan and holmes, 2018; domingo and perales, 2019) . how events in step (i) influence events in step (ii) is an open question. selection of mutants resistant to antiviral agents, one of the major problems in antiviral therapy, occurs at step (i) and its consequences are felt in steps (i) and (ii).several mechanisms of selection of mutants resistant to antiviral agents have been identified including amino acid substitutions termed ras (resistance-associated substitutions) at the viral protein targeted by the antiviral agent, and antiviral resistance mediated by high viral fitness, documented with hepatitis c virus (hcv). both mechanisms affect standard inhibitors and mutagenic agents active in lethal mutagenesis . intra-host selection of resistant mutants affects treatment efficacy and the choice of rescue treatments. resistant mutants can acquire epidemiological relevance, therefore affecting step (ii) of virus evolution. epidemiological dominance of resistant mutants may render ineffective the relevant antiviral agents, a problem with similarities to antibiotic resistance in bacteria. possible approaches to minimize selection of escape mutants inspired in quasispecies dynamics will be suggested.leo poon, (the university of hong kong), reviewed the emerging influenza viruses like h5nx and h7n9 circulating in southeastern china. these viruses continue to reassort with different avian influenza viruses and spread to other geographical locations via wild birds. dr. poon reported on a study of 96 low pathogenic avian influenza virus genomes detected from wild bird samples collected from 2010 to 2017. their phylogeographic analysis indicated several independent transregional reassortment events during the period. all of these reassorted viruses acquired at least one segment from avian influenza viruses found in north/south america.yungmee jee (national institute of health, south korea) reported on the middle east respiratory syndrome coronavirus (mers-cov) outbreaks in 2015 and 2018 in south korea. she emphasized the lessons learned from their experience, which were as follows: a single, missed case may trigger a huge, nationwide outbreak. the first line of defense is not the thermal scanner at the airport, but doctors in the community clinics/hospitals. superspreading events may occur in healthcare settings, especially at the emergency department. early detection and isolation are critically important. aggressive strategy for quarantine maybe necessary, especially when a large number of individuals are exposed in the health-care settings.enric mateu (department de sanitat i anatoia animals, universitat autonoma de barcelona, spain), described the virulence of and immunity against porcine reproductive and respiratory syndrome virus (prrsv) as two sides of the same problem. he emphasized that the genetic basis for the differences in virulence is multigenic and is related to (i) the damage caused by the virus, (ii) the damage caused by the immune response of the pig and, (iii) the interaction of the virus with the functionality of the immune system. neutralizing antibodies, cellmediated immunity, ability or disability to induce type i interferon from macrophage and plasmacytoid dendritic cells, make the complexity of the disease outcome.3.8. influenza surveillance in cameroon, monitoring hepatitis b virus in rural districts of india, virus evolution, three-dimensional cell culture infection models and new targets for antiviral intervention dr. richard njouom (centre pasteur of cameroon, yaounde, cameroon) showed data of influenza surveillance in cameroon for the last 10 years. although influenza virus strains circulate in the country all year round, larger prevalences were observed in the rainy season, with a major peak between september and december. both types of influenza (a and b) were detected every year, although the a (h3n2) strain was the most prevalent when all data were considered. unfortunately, the surveillance system revealed that in many seasons, the influenza vaccine compositions available were not a good match for the types and subtypes that circulated in cameroon.dr. shyam kottilil (institute of human virology, university of maryland, baltimore, usa) presented their impressive efforts in monitoring hepatitis b virus (hbv) in western districts of arunachal pradesh (india). as part of this gvn-lead program, researchers interviewed > 11,800 patients and collected > 11,500 samples for hbv testing. they found high hbv seroprevalences in most of the studied communities (4.8-12.9%), particularly in the nyishi and miji tribes. an interesting observation was the abundance of c/d recombinant genotypes, which had been previously found only in the neighboring tibet, probably a consequence of migration across the chinese border.two studies on virus evolution were presented by drs. dieter hoffmann (technische universitt mnchen, munich, germany) and richard scheuermann (j craig venter institute, la jolla, usa). dr. hoffmann and colleagues studied norovirus evolution in chronically infected patients using next-generation sequencing. they had previously shown that norovirus capsid gene sequences evolved quickly and accumulated non-synonymous mutations reflecting positive selection (hoffmann et al., 2012) . sequentially appearing mutations correlated with structural changes that may lead to a decreased antibody binding. interestingly, dr. hoffman's group has now reported that in infected individuals, progression of the infection associates with increased concentrations of capsid-specific antibodies.the presentation by dr. scheuermann concentrated on enterovirus evolution. an enterovirus (ev) d68 outbreak in the summer of 2014 coincided with a spike in the number of cases of polio-like acute flaccid myelitis/paralysis (afm). subsequent outbreaks in 2016 and 2018 raised concerns about the possibility of ev d68 being a new public health threat. comparative genomics analysis showed the emergence of new ev d68 lineages in recent years. cell culture and animal studies revealed that these emerging viruses have acquired the ability to infect and kill neuronal cells and cause paralysis in mice. virion binding and cell entry limit the neuronal infectivity of older isolates.basic research was represented by the work of dr. heinz ellerbrok (robert koch institut, berlin, germany) who developed new three-dimensional cell culture infection models based on a biological extracellular matrix (decellularized equine pericardium) with primary human keratinocytes (koban et al., 2018) . using these models for studying antiviral susceptibility in cowpox virus infection, ellerbrok and colleagues showed that the inhibitory potency of host-directed epidermal growth factor receptor-blocking molecules such as gefitinib and cetuximab was considerably higher in three-dimensional cell culture models than in conventional two-dimensional models, suggesting that the classical monolayer cell cultures could underestimate the potential inhibitory effect of an undetermined number of antiviral drugs.dr. luis menndez-arias (centro de biologa molecular severo ochoa, madrid, spain) presented new data on how hiv-1 reverse transcriptase (rt) connection subdomain mutations and non-nucleoside rt inhibitors modulate polypurine tract (ppt) removal during initiation of plus-strand dna synthesis (betancor et al., 2015) . using different hiv-1 and hiv-2 rt variants, this study showed that major determinants defining the correct cleavage site at the ppt/u3 junction of the hiv genome reside at the connection subdomain between positions 342-351. these observations together with the fact that nevirapine, doravirine and efavirenz alter the efficiency of the ppt/u3 cleavage and impair the initiation of (+)-strand dna synthesis, suggest that this step of reverse transcription could become a specific target for antiretroviral intervention.in 2019 the 6th gvn short course took place in baltimore, july 29-august 2, training to date, a total of 90 junior scientists from every continent.the gvn is currently developing the "gvn academy" initiative, which is an investment in a small group of outstanding mid-career virologists. for our pilot program, the idea is to match a selected number of outstanding early and mid-career from low-and-middle-income countries virology researchers with our senior leaders in the field to provide a series of mentoring and networking opportunities.the gvn is also working on the development of regional gvn chapters to shift towards a flexible, global organization. although the gvn is headquartered in baltimore, it is believed that gvn presence needs to be truly global and therefore each gvn center needs to meet specific geographic challenges found particularly in southeast asia, south america, and africa. this year, gvn has established the africa gvn regional unit, in a meeting co-organized by dr. pontiano kaleebu, director, uvri and dr. glenda gray, president, mrc south africa. the meeting took place in entebbe, uganda and helped delineate collaboration as well as plan for future joint training initiatives.during 2019 gvn has continued to provide public education and expert perspectives on current topics, such as the ebola outbreak in the drc.under the anticipation and preparedness task force umbrella, several virus watch groups have been established, meeting regularly to discuss recent advances and findings in the field, monitoring viruses and virus research to ensure its efficacy and reinforce the gvn capacity.we are in the process of organizing the gvn's 12th international meeting in medellin, colombia. this will be a unique opportunity to increase collaborations between the south american regional gvn and gvn centers from other parts of the globe.plans are underway for the south east asia regional gvn kickoff meeting. this is an effort lead by drs. sharon lewin and linfa wang.gvn will continue fostering collaborations among its members, for example through joint grant applications and implementing various activities from the anticipation and preparedness task force and well as the virus watch groups.in 1990, the u.s. congress passed the global change research act of 1990. this act required, in part, that periodic national assessments be conducted of the potential consequences of climate variability and change on the nation's health. the first u.s. national assessment of the potential consequences of climate variability and change was completed in 2000 (national assessment synthesis team, u.s. global change research program 2001) and was the culmination of a national process of research, analysis, and dialogue about the coming changes in climate and their impacts, and what americans can do to adapt to an uncertain and continuously changing climate. the goal of the assessment was to address four questions (dressler et al. 1998 ): what are the current environmental stresses and issues that form the backdrop for potential additional impacts of climate variability and change?  how might climate variability and change exacerbate or ameliorate existing problems?  what coping options exist that can build resilience to current environmental stresses and also possibly lessen the impacts of climate change?  what are the priority research and information needs (near and long term) that can better prepare managers, policymakers, and the public to reach informed decisions related to climate variability and change?the executive summary of the health sector assessment (hsa) was published in 2000 (patz et al. 2000) and the results for the different health outcomes were published in 2001 greenough et al. 2001; gubler et al. 2001; mcgeehin and mirabelli 2001 ; national assessment synthesis team, u.s. global change research program 2001; rose et al. 2001 ). the hsa focused on five categories of health outcomes: temperature-related morbidity and mortality, the health impacts of extreme weather events (e.g., storms and floods), health outcomes associated with air pollution, water-and food-borne diseases, and vector-and rodent-borne diseases. each outcome team sought to address how climate change might affect the burden of disease, identify specific strategies and measures needed to effectively adapt, and clarify key knowledge gaps that must be filled to better understand the possible impacts of climate variability and change on human health . the integrated assessment approach that was used reviewed a wide range of literature on climate and health, relied on the expert judgment of the health sector team and those with whom they consulted, and incorporated, where available, some limited modeling of the projected impacts of climate on health. analyses of the roles of population vulnerability and adaptation were woven throughout the assessment.the primary goal of this review was to update the hsa results using the previous conclusions as a baseline of knowledge and a reference point for the review of the literature published since the end of the initial literature review (approximately the end of 1998) through mid-2004. the update was guided by the following questions:  do the data and conclusions in the recent literature generally confirm or contradict the findings of the first hsa?  does the recent literature provide evidence of climate-sensitive health outcomes, either adverse or advantageous, that were not identified in the first assessment?  to what extent have the research needs and data gaps identified in the first assessment been addressed through research or other actions in the intervening years?in this update we focused on reviewing publications since the hsa that were concerned directly with the potential health impacts of climate variability and change in the united states, along with publications that provided information on implemented adaptation measures. we generally focused on publications that specifically addressed the health outcomes of interest in the united states to limit sources of uncertainty that would need to be accounted for in drawing conclusions (e.g., relevance of results from europe to the united states). exceptions were made if no comparable u.s. study was identified for a health outcome of interest. we identified relevant reports and publications from electronic reference databases using combinations of key words developed from the health outcome categories, limited by date. the following databases were searched: medline (www.nlm.nih.gov), biosis (www.biosis.org), social sciences index (scientific.thomson.com/products/ssci), enviroline (library.diolog.com/bluesheets/ html/b10040.html), and meteorological and geoastrophysical abstracts (www2.lib.udel. edu/database/mga.html). we filtered the results of individual searches using a series of boolean pairings to identify, for example, heat mortality studies published since 1998. the search terms and pairing strategies used to identify the initial pool of literature are summarized in table 1 .the initial searches, in most cases, returned hundreds of publications for each health outcome area, even after searches were refined to eliminate categories that were clearly outside the project scope. for example, thousands of publications were initially identified using the key words "temperature" and "food-borne illnesses," but most of these publications focused on risks and strategies for safe food preparation instead of the potential impacts of climate variability and change.publications that we ultimately reviewed were identified through multiple levels of screening. in the first screening, potential references were reviewed based on the title, listed key words, and whether the publication was in english. from this screening, we obtained the abstracts for potentially relevant publications and screened them to identify publications that appeared to provide information on the impacts of climate variability and change on one or more of the health outcomes categories of interest, or the implementation of adaptation measures. if the abstract suggested that a publication might provide useful information, or the title or key words supported such a conclusion when an abstract was not available, the publication was obtained and reviewed.a note on definitions used: "climate" is the average state of the atmosphere and the underlying land or water in a particular region over a particular time scale. "climate variability" is the variation around the mean climate and includes seasonal variations and irregular events such as the el nio/southern oscillation. "climate change" operates over decades or longer and occurs as a result of both internal variability within the climate systems and external factors (both natural and anthropogenic). "adaptation" encompasses the strategies, policies, and measures undertaken now and in the future to reduce potential adverse health effects. "adaptive capacity" refers to the general ability of institutions, systems, and individuals to adjust to potential damages, to take advantage of opportunities, and to cope with the consequences. the primary goal of building adaptive capacity is to reduce future vulnerability to climate variability and change.current health status and trends in the united states. the hsa (patz et al. 2000) noted a number of population subgroups that are likely to be more vulnerable to the adverse impacts of a changing climate, including the very young (i.e., < 1 year of age), older adults (i.e., those  65 years of age), and immunocompromised individuals. these groups are often at the greatest risk for climatesensitive health outcomes because they are more sensitive to vector-, food-, and water-borne diseases, have limited capacity to acclimatize to thermal extremes, and have reduced ability to undertake appropriate behavioral changes when exposed to thermal extremes and extreme weather events. therefore, we reviewed u.s. population projections and public health sector trends to evaluate the potential future changes in the vulnerability of susceptible groups to the health impacts of climate change. table 2 summarizes u.s. population estimates for various age groups from 2000 to 2100 (u.s. census bureau 2002) . most notable is the anticipated increase in the size and proportion of the total population accounted for by older adults. by 2100, projections suggest that there will be approximately 100 million more citizens  65 years of age than in 2000. the combined share of the population that will be composed of the very young and older adults is projected to increase from about 15% to > 25%. the anticipated increase in these age groups suggests, all else equal, that the u.s. population will become increasingly vulnerable to the health impacts of climate change.poverty, which was identified as a risk factor but not defined in the hsa, is generally determined at the family level by comparing estimates of income with thresholds that vary according to family size and composition. poverty increases vulnerability to climate-sensitive health outcomes directly by reducing the capacity to adapt to changing conditions and is often positively correlated with increasing susceptibility to climate-sensitive health outcomes. because the conditions associated with being poor may change over time, the future risk associated with being poor also may change. for example, if the future incomes of the poorest americans rise sufficiently such that air conditioning becomes a standard feature in their homes, this group could have increased resilience to heat events. as a result, the degree of risk associated with being poor hurricanes or tornadoes or floods or heat waves or precipitation or rainfall or snowfall set 4human health or public health or morbidity or mortality or (sensitive or vulnerable) populations or hospitalizations or diseases or vulnerability set 5mental health or psychological or emotional or posttraumatic stress set 6publication year = 1999:2004 set 7 (set 1 or set 2 or set 3) and (set 4 or set 5) and set 6 set 8 (food-borne or water-borne or insect-or rodent-or mosquito-borne) diseases set 9dengue or malaria or encephalitis or west nile or plague or giardia or hantavirus or leptospirosis or cryptosporidiosis set 10 set 1 and set 4 and (set 8 or set 9) and set 6 set 11water pollution or water quality or toxic algae or marine diseases set 12set 1 and set 4 and set 11 and set 6 adaptation options for addressing health effects, effectiveness of implemented health adaptations set 1 adaptation or preparedness or emergency planning or management or mitigation or prediction set 2 (climate or global) and (change or variability) set 3weather or (extreme or severe) events set 4hurricanes or tornadoes or floods or heat waves or precipitation or rainfall or snowfall set 5public health or human health set 6publication year = 1999:2004 set 7set 1 and (set 2 or set 3 or set 4) and set 5 and set 6 will reflect not only a changing climate but also changes in the number of people living in poverty and their associated standard of living, both of which are uncertain.another group the hsa identified as being more vulnerable to climate-sensitive health outcomes is individuals who are immunocompromised. this group includes persons with weakened immunity as a result of chronic diseases (e.g., hiv/aids, certain cancers) or drug treatment (e.g., transplant patients). the roughly 344,000 people living with hiv/aids as of december 2001 provides a lower bound estimate of the current immunocompromised u.s. population (centers for disease control and prevention 2001). projecting future trends in the immunocompromised population is difficult because of the need to account for the cumulative impacts of changes in population, behavior, and medical technology. for example, future medical advances could increase or decrease the size of this population; it would decrease if cures are found for diseases such as hiv/aids and would increase if treatments keep more individuals alive for longer.there has been no substantial change in overall mortality trends since the hsa. heart disease, malignant neoplasms, cerebrovascular diseases, and chronic lower respiratory disease continue to be the top four causes of death, accounting for between 63 and 66% of all deaths over the period 1998-2002 (national center for health statistics 2004). however, these trends may change with the growing obesity epidemic. in 1991, the highest prevalence of obesity on a statewide level was 15-19%; only four states reported a prevalence rate in this range, and no state reported a rate of  20% (centers for disease control and prevention 2004). by 2002, 18 states reported obesity rates of 15-19%, 29 states reported rates from 20-24%, and 3 states had rates > 25%. although this trend is not related to changes in climate, it is noteworthy because the obese may be at increased risk of some climate-sensitive health outcomes (e.g., temperature-attributable morbidity and mortality).the ability of the u.s. health care system to respond to an increase in the burden of climatesensitive outcomes will play a critical role in determining the net health impact of climate change. in this regard, there have been at least two significant developments since the release of the u.s. national assessment. first, the recognition of the critical role played by the public health system in protecting the nation's health has increased, which has led to a significant increase in the commitment of resources to the public health sector, particularly public health surveillance and training (staiti et al. 2003) . this shift is the product of many factors, including the terrorist attacks of september 11, the anthrax attacks in 2001, the fear of bioterrorist attacks (staiti et al. 2003) , and the continued spread of introduced illnesses such as west nile virus. in addition, the 2003 sars (severe acute respiratory syndrome) outbreak highlighted how quickly diseases can spread from one region to another, the importance of improving public health systems in many developing countries, and the importance of timely and comprehensive public health surveillance systems (levine et al. 2003) .the second development is that medicare coverage is now being offered for prescription medications. given medicare's focus on the elderly, this change may improve the health status of the elderly and increase the financial resources available to this segment of the population, improving their adaptive capacity. to the extent that public health programs and preventive medicine receive additional funding, there is the potential that the general health status of the u.s. population could improve, which would, in general, reduce vulnerability to climate change.for each health outcome, we present a brief summary of the conclusions and identified data/research gaps from the hsa, to clarify the baseline it established between climate change and these outcomes, before presenting the results from the recent literature. the results of the hsa were published in environmental health perspectives. the executive summary was published in 2000 (patz et al. 2000) and the results from the individual health outcomes assessed were published in 2001 greenough et al. 2001; gubler et al. 2001; mcgeehin and mirabelli 2001; rose et al. 2001 ). in addition, described the process and products of the hsa.temperature-related morbidity and mortality. for the hsa, mcgeehin and mirabelli (2001) assumed that an increase in global average temperatures would increase the severity and frequency of heat events and the morbidity and mortality attributable to these events. the authors concluded that this would result in a net increase in temperature-related morbidity and mortality because any ameliorating impact of increasing temperature on winter mortality rates would not be great enough to offset the projected increase in mortality attributed to heat events.the data gaps identified (mcgeehin and mirabelli 2001) included the need to determine the significance of changes in alternative measures of temperature (e.g., daily minimum, daily maximum) on the risk of experiencing an adverse health outcome and the need for research on increases in morbidity during extreme temperature events. of particular interest was research on the efficacy of heat response plans. the authors also noted that further research is needed on effective urban design to mitigate heat retention and urban heat islands, to facilitate adaptation planning. finally, they noted that the development and widespread adoption of standard methods for recording heat-attributable health outcomes would greatly aid epidemiologic investigations and increase public awareness of these risks.the substantial research into the morbidity and mortality impacts of temperature completed since the hsa has mostly confirmed the initial conclusions. comprehensive literature reviews (e.g., basu and samet 2002) continue to conclude that elevated temperatures increase the risks of morbidity and mortality, that these risks vary by location, and that a number of socioeconomic factors (e.g., age, poverty) can affect an individual's health risk during a heat event. other publications (e.g., greene et al. 1999; smoyer et al. 2000) continue to build evidence for site-specific relationships between combinations of meteorologic conditions and increased daily mortality through synoptic climate modeling studies. similarly, a number of studies (e.g., curriero et al. 2002; davis et al. 2003a davis et al. , 2003b ) support prior conclusions regarding the existence of regional differences in the vulnerability of u.s. populations, with populations in the northeastern and north-central regions at the highest risk.few new studies evaluated the projected impacts of climate variability and change on the frequency and severity of future heat events. patz and lindsay (1999) supported the hsa conclusion that the future is likely to bring an increase in the frequency of excessive heat events, and meehl and tebaldi (2004) projected that future heat waves would be more frequent and intense and would last longer.in contrast, robinson (2001) argues that, by definition, the future frequency of excessive heat events should not change because these events are defined based on comparisons to typical conditions (i.e., only some percentage of summer days can have "excessive" heat conditions within a given time frame). although this does not address whether the typical conditions in these events may change over temporal and geographic scales, robinson suggests that if the frequency of exceeding a particular temperature threshold increases, the threshold should be revised for defining excessive heat events. however, this does not address the possible situation of temperatures exceeding the capacity to adapt or the fact that different population subgroups (e.g., outdoor vs. office workers) may have different definitions of what excessive heat is.several recent studies (e.g., davis et al. 2002 davis et al. , 2003a davis et al. , 2003b ) examined u.s. trends in mortality attributable to elevated temperatures at several locations. collectively, these studies argue that there has been a declining trend in heat-attributable mortality in u.s. cities from the 1960s through the 1990s, although important regional differences remain (e.g., elevated mortality in northeastern and northern interior cities). an interpretation of these results is that estimates of future temperatureattributable mortality that fail to account for this trend, and instead use some central tendency estimate, will overestimate the mortality impact of future heat events. these studies can be viewed as an argument that there is an adaptive trend in the united states that will minimize the future health impacts of extreme heat events and that climate change will have little impact in shaping future mortality in u.s. cities (davis et al. 2004 ). sheridan and dolney (2003) reported results contradicting the hsa's conclusion that residing in urban areas elevated one's health risks during heat events, partly as a result of the urban heat island effect. sheridan and dolney (2003) failed to find a statistically significant difference in the percentage increase in daily mortality and the level of urbanization using data from ohio for 1975-1998. although not conclusive as a single result, the study identifies a relevant area for future research on shaping adaptive responses by drawing attention to the risks faced by rural populations during heat events.two studies (hennessy 2002; keatinge and donaldson 2001) focused on how the impacts of temperature and air pollutant concentrations are controlled for in epidemiologic models. the authors' reviews found no clear bias in previous studies. their general conclusions were that care needs to be taken in modeling these relationships because temperature and pollution levels are often highly correlated, and controls for each need to be incorporated into models to avoid overstating impacts for one of the factors.with respect to the data gaps initially identified, there has been research into the efficacy of extreme heat response plans. ebi et al. (2004) , palecki et al. (2001) , and weisskopf et al. (2002) concluded that heat response plans have most likely helped reduce the incidence of heat-attributable mortality. in addition, significant research into the role that urban design plays in determining urban temperatures has been completed through efforts such as the u.s. environmental protection agency's urban heat island reduction initiative (u.s. environmental protection agency 2006). there is ongoing research as to how best to characterize and model the health risks posed by meteorologic conditions (e.g., synoptic climate approaches or the use of specific meteorologic measures). although specific criteria have been established to determine when a death may be attributable to extreme heat (donoghue et al. 1997) , little progress has been made in having these criteria widely adopted.health effects related to extreme weather events. greenough et al. (2001) reviewed the literature on the potential health impacts of changes in the frequency and intensity of extreme weather as a result of climate change and provided detailed descriptions of the health risks associated with floods and storm surges, tornadoes, hurricanes, droughts, and fires. the authors concluded that increases in the frequency and severity of extreme precipitation would directly affect flooding and increase the incidence of associated adverse health outcomes. there was less certainty about the health impacts of changes in other extreme weather events that would be attributable to climate change. the main research needs identified centered on improving regional data and projections of the future frequency and severity of extreme events. in addition, greenough et al. (2001) noted a need for more epidemiology studies of the long-term impacts of extreme events and more accurate assessments of vulnerability and adaptation strategies.many of the recent publications summarized the health impacts and explored the successes and failures of warning and response systems for specific extreme weather events, particularly tornadoes and hurricanes. we identified no new publications that estimated changes in the future frequency and severity of extreme events in the united states. kunkel et al. (1999) reviewed trends in extreme events in the united states but stopped short of making projections. similarly, pielke and downton (2000) found that flooding in the united states might have increased, whereas easterling et al. (2000) found increases in minimum temperatures and extreme precipitation that may have increased the number of deaths from flooding and excess heat. blindauer et al. (1999) examined the range of health outcomes associated with the potential health impacts of blizzards. their conclusions confirmed the finding that blizzards elevate the incidence of myocardial infarction (i.e., heart attacks). several studies (curriero et al. 2001; hunt 2002; kistemann et al. 2002) examined the potential health impacts of extreme precipitation events, focusing on their potential to affect contaminant loading to water systems. the results are summarized further below.a large number of publications evaluated in the second screening step focused on the short-and long-term mental health effects of extreme events [e.g., increases in diagnoses of posttraumatic stress disorder (ptsd) following severe floods or hurricanes]. although the mental health impacts of these events were described as "controversial" in greenough et al. (2001) , further research has confirmed that extreme events can increase ptsd (e.g., hajat et al. 2003) . publications in this general area were not reviewed given resource constraints.as noted in the hsa, projecting the number and intensity of extreme weather events in climate models must improve to refine estimates of the potential health impacts of these events. continued research and development of regional climate models that have much higher grid cell resolution (e.g., 50 km 2 ) than general circulation models (with a resolution typically of several hundred square kilometers) holds promise for enhancing future regional scale forecasts of extreme weather events.health effects related to air pollution. in the hsa, concluded climate variability and change were likely to increase health risks from increased fungal growth and particulate-transported fungal spores. for the other airborne pollutants, particularly ozone and particulate matter, the authors concluded that it was uncertain how future pollutant concentrations would respond to climate change. ambient concentrations of air pollutants generally are the result of the interaction between meteorologic conditions, natural systems, and human activities. the net effect on human health was uncertain because uncertainty exists with respect to the magnitude or nature of change in one or more of these components (e.g., changes in the hydrologic cycle, winds, mixing heights, human response). identified research gaps included the need for development of sophisticated meteorologic models that can estimate chemical and spatial relationships, specific meteorologic variables, and future locations and nature of human activities (i.e., anthropogenic emissions). in addition, the recurrent need for more regionally appropriate output from climate models was cited.in our review, we identified no publications that credibly challenge long-standing conclusions that increases in the concentration of airborne pollutants would increase morbidity and premature mortality. this general conclusion is consistent with the increase in the range of nonfatal outcomes that have been associated with changes in air pollutant concentrations and expansions in the populations viewed as being at risk. as an example, an area of ongoing regulatory interest and active research concerns the potential for exposure to ambient air pollutants to increase the incidence of low-birth-weight deliveries (e.g., chen et al. 2002; ritz and yu 1999; wilhelm and ritz 2003) ; research results in u.s. study populations are inconclusive.recent studies examined the potential impact of climate variability and change on airborne allergen concentrations and reached conclusions similar to those of that increased co 2 and higher temperatures generally increase the growth rate of allergen-producing plants (e.g., ragweed) and the production of pollen (ziska and caulfield 2000; ziska et al. 2003) . d' amato et al. (2001) also concluded that air pollution might facilitate the penetration, and the depth of penetration, of allergens into the lungs, thus increasing the risk of these allergens.additional studies explored the impacts of climate change on urban heat islands and their climate change and health impacts in the united states environmental health perspectives  volume 114 | number 9 | september 2006 effects on ambient concentrations of ozone. taha (2001) projected increases in peak ozone concentrations in los angeles and sacramento, california, by linking output from general circulation models to future emissions inventories and the air pollution models used to evaluate air quality compliance. related research examined the effect on ambient ozone concentrations of measures to reduce urban heat islands. sailor (2003) , taha (1997) , and taha et al. (2000 taha et al. ( , 2002 found modeling changes in urban albedo and vegetative cover both increased and decreased ozone concentrations, depending on the location and scenarios considered. the divergent results reflect the strong influence in these models of assumptions about a number of factors affecting ozone formation and resulting ambient concentrations, including the direction of prevailing winds, photochemical mixing, and reaction heights following the implementation of albedo and vegetation changes designed to address the urban heat island. these uncertainties highlight some of the difficulties in projecting future pollutant concentrations under different climate change scenarios.the overall conclusions from recent research support the hsa's conclusions that climate variability and change are likely to affect ambient air pollutant concentrations, but the direction and magnitude of the change remain uncertain.water-and food-borne diseases. in the hsa, rose et al. (2001) concluded an increase in the frequency and severity of extreme precipitation events attributed to climate change would increase the risk of contamination events, which would increase the risk of waterand food-borne illnesses. although several factors affected this result, critical elements included the increased transport of diseasecausing organisms during extreme precipitation events and limits in the existing infrastructure for conveying and treating wastewater and sewage to avoid contamination events (e.g., problems with combined sewer overflows). critical research needs identified in the hsa included improved capacity and coordination of disease surveillance systems to accurately quantify the burden of food-and water-borne disease in the population, further evaluation of local contaminant source-receptor relationships to aid risk assessments, and identification of adaptation alternatives. as with other health outcomes assessed, a critical data gap was the need to improve regional models of climate variability and change at a spatial scale that could be incorporated into regional/national health impact models (e.g., local hydrologic models).recent studies examining the potential impacts of climate variability and change on the risks and incidence of water-and foodborne illnesses strongly support the conclusions of rose et al. (2001) that the risk of water-and food-borne illness will likely increase with climate change. specifically, curriero et al. (2001) and kistemann et al. (2002) found that extreme precipitation events increase the loading of contaminants to waterways, and casman et al. (2001) concluded that climate change could increase the risk of illness associated with cryptosporidium parvum. d'souza et al. (2004) addressed the relationship of food-borne illness in response to changes in ambient temperature in australia and found an association between increases in the lagged monthly mean temperature and increases in the number of notifications of salmonellosis infections in five australian cities. the authors also noted that following current food preparation and storage recommendations could offset any climate change-induced increase in risk.additional research is needed to clarify the burden of water-and food-borne illnesses on a pathogen-specific basis and to better understand the associations between these illnesses and ambient temperature to project potential increases in risk attributable to climate change.vector-and rodent-borne diseases. in the hsa, gubler et al. (2001) were uncertain about the cumulative impacts of climate change on vector-and rodent-borne illness because of limitations in the available climate models. some of the climate scenarios projected that the temperature threshold for ticks that carry rocky mountain spotted fever in the southeastern united states could be crossed with increasing temperatures, potentially leading to more cases. gubler et al. (2001) also expressed uncertainty about the impacts of climate change on rodent-borne illnesses because of a lack of available research and because of the potentially different impacts that could result from climate change as opposed to increased climate variability; the latter could result in population explosions and crashes that could increase disease risk. for mosquito-borne illnesses, gubler et al. (2001) concluded that increasing average temperatures would generally reduce the u.s. population's susceptibility to epidemics, assuming increased amounts of time would be spent indoors in air-conditioned environments. however, gubler et al. (2001) also noted that an increase in the frequency and severity of water-related extreme weather events (i.e., floods and hurricanes) could alter existing conditions governing human-mosquito interactions in large parts of the united states, potentially increasing mosquitohuman contact.the research needs identified in the hsa focused primarily on developing a better understanding of the populations of mosquitoes, ticks, and rodents and their sensitivity to shortand long-term fluctuations in their habitats. in addition, the need for additional information regarding the dynamics of disease transmission to humans was viewed as a critical element in assessing vulnerability and identifying adaptation strategies. these needs reflected a lack of understanding of how recent and historical climate variability has affected the incidence of vector-borne diseases.only a limited number of recent studies address the potential response of vector-and rodent-borne illnesses to climate change in the united states. these studies focus almost entirely on the possible impacts on host populations and generally support the findings of the hsa. specifically, mclean (2001) and subak (2003) concluded that conditions associated with climate variability and change could increase tick populations and the incidence of lyme disease. zeil (2004) reported an association between the increased climate variability associated with the el nio events and rodentborne outbreaks of hantavirus. however, kovats et al. (2001) and zeil (2004) cautioned that with natural reservoirs in animal populations, the emergence or reemergence of diseases involves complex interactions. therefore, care should be taken when attributing an increased incidence of vector-and rodent-borne illnesses to climate variability and change. these cautions highlight the continued need to improve understanding of the population dynamics of the various vector and rodent populations that can transmit illnesses to humans.overall, the first hsa concluded that "multiple levels of uncertainty preclude any definitive statement on the direction of potential future change for each of the health outcomes assessed" (patz et al. 2000) . the literature published since the hsa supports this conclusion, as well as conclusions specific to each health outcome considered. however, this does not mean that there has been no improvement in our understanding of the potential effects of climate variability and change on population health in the united states. for example, recent studies have refined our understanding of the mortality-heat stress relationship and quantified the impact of urban heat islands on ambient temperatures. similarly, continued development and expansion of morbidity and mortality data sets and advances in epidemiologic modeling techniques have refined the quantitative exposure-response relationships for a number of other health outcome areas. climate change is expected to increase morbidity and mortality risks from climatesensitive health determinants and outcomes such as extreme heat events and flooding. a larger and relatively older u.s. population in future years will increase overall vulnerability to health risks, depending on the effectiveness of identifying, implementing, and monitoring appropriate adaptation measures.that the new literature does not identify a change in the range of climate-sensitive health outcomes should not be surprising. the selected health outcomes have long been the focus of epidemiologic research in the united states, with associations between changes in weather factors and increased morbidity and mortality relatively well described. however, data gaps still exist that, until resolved, will limit the ability of any assessment to provide a definitive conclusion about the net health impact of climate variability and change in the united states. perhaps most important, the continued lack of reliable local and regional climate change projections limits the ability of researchers to quantify the attributable burden of diseases due to climate change. at the same time, quantifying by how much adaptive capacity is likely to reduce impacts also is uncertain. until reliable quantitative estimates of both impacts and adaptive capacity are developed, the net impacts of climate change on human health will inevitably be described as uncertain.literature published since the first hsa does not provide enough additional information to change the initial conclusion that the net health impact of climate change on the u.s. population is uncertain. this uncertainty reflects the need to evaluate the projected impacts of climate change in the context of changes in the vulnerability of the u.s. population and the efficacy of adaptation strategies and measures. for some health outcomes, such as heat events and flooding, climate change will likely increase morbidity and mortality risks. in addition, aging of the u.s. population is expected to increase its overall vulnerability. however, the capacity of the united states to implement effective and efficient adaptation measures is assumed to remain high throughout this century, thus reducing the overall burden of climate-sensitive health outcomes. as additional research furthers our understanding of how the various determinants of climatesensitive health outcomes interact, our ability to project the future impacts of climate change more accurately will be enhanced.the pandemic diseases have been some of the most distressing happenings in the history of mankind. the black death sponged about one-third of the total european population and the spanish flu in 1918 affected more human beings than the entire victims of the 1 st world war (davis et al., 2018; decaro and lorusso, 2020; djalante et al., 2020; gould, 2009; hussain et al., 2020; kandel et al., 2020; keilman, 2019; liu et al., 2020d; malik et al., 2020; molineri et al., 2017; salam et al., 2020) . the epidemic outbreak of swine flu, zika, and ebola virus had caused worldwide panic, while the outbreak of novel coronavirus (ncov) and middle east respiratory syndrome (mers) caused severe loss of human life and economic value (altamimi and ahmed, 2019; bhowmick et al., 2020; chan et al., 2011; decaro and lorusso, 2020; hoogeveen, 2020; lin et al., 2018; liu et al., 2020d; paz and semenza, 2016; .human beings already facing significant global challenges of water scarcity, food security, and climate change (iqbal et al., 2018a; iqbal et al., 2019; iqbal et al., 2018b; yokomatsu et al., 2020) , came under a swear attack of epidemic covid-19 in december 2019, in wuhan, a city of china (burki, 2020; chinazzi et al., 2020; organization, 2020a) . initially, the virus was acknowledged by the chines health care administration as of january 07, 2020 (milln-oate et al., 2020) . the covid-19 also entitled as novel coronavirus causes severe respirational problems in effected patients (burki, 2020; chinazzi et al., 2020; organization, 2020b) .the virus spread from wuhan city of china and affected more than 210 countries and territories of the world (organization, 2020a; zu et al., 2020) . although, most of the novel covid-19 cases indicate mild symptoms and recover from this disease due to early precautionary measures and self-immunization systems (lai et al., 2020) . yet many cases are reported with severe symptoms which caused a high number of deceases in many parts of the world i.e. italy (15887), spain (13055), usa (9624), france (8078), uk (4934), iran (3739), china (3331), malaysia (62), india (118) hong kong (4), thailand (26), and pakistan (50) with a varying number of closed cases outcomes ranging from 0.4 to 50% (ji et al., 2020; surveillances, 2020) . j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f covid-19 spreading continuously and created one of the biggest panics of the 21st century with a lockdown of more than 6 billion people of the planet. the virus is considered as one of the most lethal invisible enemies known to the human being, where its fast transmission mechanism remains inadequately understood (altamimi and ahmed, 2019) . many contagious epidemics occur and wane away with a change in the weather. flu and other seasonal diseases such as norovirus vomiting bug, pneumonia come in winter. other diseases, such as typhoid and summer fever, be likely to peak for the period of the summer season. the infection of measles cases declines in the temperate climatic regions during the summer seasons, while the infection spread peaks in the tropical regions especially in the dry period (altamimi and ahmed, 2019; chan et al., 2011; darniot et al., 2018; davis et al., 2018; gould, 2009; jones, 2016; keilman, 2019; lee and chowell, 2017; merle et al., 2018; molineri et al., 2017; morin et al., 2018; paz and semenza, 2016) .the thrilling weather condition and influence of temperature variation also triggered the spread of the west nile virus in the european world (bhowmick et al., 2020; liu et al., 2020d; . researchers are interested in knowing whether there will be any similarity with the fast spread of covid-19 or otherwise. ever since it first identified in mainland china in the mid of december 2019, the virus has spread very abruptly, with the number of cases increasing more severely in cooler regions such as european and north american countries.many weather condition can be well-thought-out as the top forecasters of respiratory syndromes such as sars. hydro-meteorological variables can also have a direct association between coronaviruses and humans being via biological interaction. climate parameters may have a link with the fast transmission rate of covid-19 (armitage and nellums, 2020; auler et al., 2020; mndez-arriaga, 2020; o'reilly et al., 2020) . optimum climatic parameters such as temperature, wind speed, relative humidity, and precipitation can be considered as leading variable activating the existence and diffusion of the viruses. furthermore, weather changes and regional climate are also verily associated with the pneumonia fatalities (bhowmick et al., 2020; hoogeveen, 2020; liu et al., 2020a; liu et al., 2020b; ma et al., 2020; qi et al., 2020; schwartz, 2020; tobas and molina, 2020; wang et al., 2020; zambrano-monserrate et al., 2020; .numerous major pandemic outbreaks have occurred in the regions where the weather intensity is extremes, leading to rumor that the pandemic might begin to decline with the influx j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f of change in weather. generally, the largest contiguous syndromes outbreak in the regions of cooler weather, leading to the theories that high temperatures might begin to the tail of in the summer season. it remains uncertain whether or not high temperatures of certain degrees would successfully eradicate the covid-19, according to experts. in the meantime, covid-19 is a new virus and no research to prove these theories so far from validation. research on regional weather parameters and covid -19 is also quite limited. the following study opens new ways to understand and prevent the spread of covid-19 with its relation to climatic conditions and related parameters.the study is accompanied by the countries and territories of the entire world.computerized data of the covid-19 cases until 5 th june 2020 was obtained from the official health department sources of all countries as well as from the world info meter of covid-19 (https://www.worldometers.info/coronavirus/). figure 1 shows the heat maps of confirmed cases, death cases, cases per million population, and death per million population as of 5 th june 2020 over 210 countries and territories of the world. furthermore, data of death cases, closed outcomes cases, cases per million population were also obtained from similar sources. regional daily and monthly average climatological parameters of each country were obtained from the concerned meteorological stations and different international organizations to include world meteorological organization (https://www.wmo.int/datastat/wmodata_en.html), nasa earth observatory (https://earthobservatory.nasa.gov/), nasa earth observations (neos) (https://neo.sci.gsfc.nasa.gov/), climate data guide (https://climatedataguide.ucar.edu/climatedata), climate data online (https://www.ncdc.noaa.gov/cdo-web/), global climate change (https://climate.nasa.gov/), and monthly climate reports ( nova). monthly average temperature and daylight hours were calculated by averaging the daily based value. furthermore, an overall average from january 2020 to may 2020 was calculated to find the correlation between climate parameters and covid-19 spread. a simple linear association of the reported cases of covid-19 and metrological parameters was drawn.journal pre-proof j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o fthe coefficient of determination (r 2 ) was applied to analyze the association among regional climatological parameters with average data of high temperature, low temperature and day light hours with total and death cases of covd-19 reported until 5 th june 2020. r 2 is an estimator used for the analyzing the mutual association among two different data sets. it indicates that how one set of data set is well associate the flow of other data sets. it shows the level of variability among data sets. the occurrence of total cases and death cases, on the timeline, reported in the different countries of the world is shown in figure 2 . the number of covid-19 cases increases at an exponential rate from the 1st case identification to the selected study period i.e., 5 th june 2020. hours respectively after drying on surfaces (artika et al., 2020; beeler and eichelberger, 2013; crisci et al., 2013; liu et al., 2020d; . human coronavirus (229e) on aerosolized shape is mostly less stable in high humidity and temperature (altamimi and ahmed, 2019; brugger and rubel, 2009; chan et al., 2011; gould, 2009; hoogeveen, 2020; li et al., 2018; liu et al., 2020a; liu et al., 2020c; lyth and holbrook, 2015; ma et al., 2020; mas-coma et al., 2020; morin et al., 2018; nicholson and munoz, 2018; otter et al., 2016; schwartz, 2020; sirisena and noordeen, 2014) .in the present study, the authors suggested that the covid-19 virus can stay alive after drying at a daily high temperature and in humid condition for at least two weeks. in a liquid substance, j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f sar-cov-2 can be stable up to 3 weeks at room temperature but can be killed easily at the high temperature of 56c up to 15 mints (abduljalil and abduljalil, 2020; chow et al., 2003; clark, 1993; lee and qureshi, 2013) . therefore, results revealed that coronavirus is a more stable coronaviruses (coverstone et al., 2019; keilman, 2019; li et al., 2018; liu et al., 2020b; otter et al., 2016; pattison, 2020; paz and semenza, 2016; yang and sarfaty, 2016) .conversely, to our study of covid-19 which outbreak in winter season in wuhan city, china, (altamimi and ahmed, 2019) reported that the fast spread of novel coronavirus, mers-cov which outbreak in summer season in riyadh is increased with high temperature, low wind speed, as well as the high ultraviolet index, and low relative humidity. (abduljalil and abduljalil, 2020; chan et al., 2011; chow et al., 2003; decaro and lorusso, 2020; lin et al., 2018; otter et al., 2016) . (casanova et al., 2010) found that viruses were inactive more rapidly at 20 c than 4c.furthermore, (de sousa et al., 2014) perform the test in the laboratory for coronavirus laboratory testing on coronavirus and revealed that virus was stable for 5 days on a smooth surface in between -25c to 22c but its visibility swiftly vanished at high temperature e.g. 38c and above. (van doremalen et al., 2020) also revealed that virus mers-cov was also not as active at high temperatures. moreover, many other studies revealed that moderate temperature range is optimum and feasible for coronavirus growth and expansion but in high temperature, was j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f harmful to it viability and also help in the reduction of its spreading (loeffelholz and tang, 2020) . therefore, further laboratory testing and experiments are also dire need to be done further strengthen of this myth (corman et al., 2012; de sousa et al., 2014; shahkarami et al., 2015) . inpakistan and many other countries are having long and hot summer so it might be a chance of less effected by covid-19.in nutshell, minimum temperature or below 3c in the winter season leads to high risk for its fast transmission in those countries, which are having long and cold winter. this provides very remarkable information for policymakers, may be covid-19 exist for a long time until the development of a proper and effective vaccine (liu et al., 2020c; ma et al., 2020; robert et al., 2019; schwartz, 2020; smith, 2019; tobas and molina, 2020) . there are some limitations, i.e.we did not analyze the results in subgroup bases, i.e. gender, different age ranges, due to maximum missing information worldwide. without a proper vaccine, social distancing is the only new norm adopted to reduce the transmission effect of covid-19. when a few cases of covid-19 have been reported than every country announces the lockdown and sop of social distancing. (yezli and khan, 2020) reported that the implementation of social distancing rules and regulations is a challenge due to its various norms of society, i.e. social and religious activities, annual hosting of various festivals, national and international festivals, and religious mass gatherings.moreover, it has been confirmed that the covid-19 can spread through droplets created by infected human coughing or sneezing or touching. to overcome the droplet infection rate, 1.83 m distance for social distancing is recommended, which is based on assumptions. however, no study was conducted yet on droplet transmission in the air (wind) and relative humidity (rh). (feng et al., 2020 ) validated computational fluid-particle dynamics (cfpd) model to simulate the transient transport, condensation/evaporation, and deposition of sars-cov-2 laden droplets (2 to 2000 m) emitted by coughs, with different environmental wind velocities (0 to 16 km) andrhs (40% and 99.5%). the social distances were maintained at 1.83 and 3.05 m (6 and 10 feet).the facial covering effect is also under investigation. numerical results revealed that microdroplets can travel in the air more than 3.05 m distance. rh also helped in increasing the droplet size. moreover, it is concluded that, within complex environmental wind and rh conditions, social distancing policy of 1.83 m (6 feet) is not sufficient to protect the person. coughing or sneezing droplets of an infected person can infect the other human in less than 5 seconds. therefore, a social distancing longer than 1.83 m (6 feet) needs to be considered. some countries i.e. australia, usa, italy, france, the uk, and europe having a high literacy rate and quality of life as compared to other under developing countries i.e. pakistan and india. without proper social distancing and wearing masks, per million effected cases and per a million deaths are less in pakistan and india because both countries have a high temperature in march-june as compare to other countries. australia is having a high population density at its habitat area because in the mid of australia, there is a desert and very less population density is there. on the other hand, populated areas are under moderate climate conditions, which cause a high/less number of covid-19 cases.this study explored the effect of native weather disorders on the fast spread of covd-19 worldwide. the novel coronavirus is convincingly influenced by the local weather conditions in the different parts of the world from their 1 st case identification to the 5 th june 2020. the spread of the covid-19 appears to be faster in cooler regions. the average temperature and daylight hours have shown a positive association towards the spread rate of covid-19. hence, regional meteorological parameters (aerosols, maximum and minimum temperature, day length, etc.) are amongst the contributors to the fast spread of coronavirus over most countries of the world. this study gives evidence that the fast spread of cases of covid-19 could diminish when the local weather conditions become warmer. most of the asian countries have a high temperature in may-june, they have shown less number of affected cases per million population i.e. vietnam,the pandemic diseases have been some of the most distressing happenings in the history of mankind. the black death sponged about onethird of the total european population and the spanish flu in 1918 science of the total environment 739 (2020) 140101 affected more human beings than the entire victims of the 1st world war (davis et al., 2018; decaro and lorusso, 2020; djalante et al., 2020; gould, 2009; hussain et al., 2020; kandel et al., 2020; keilman, 2019; liu et al., 2020d; malik et al., 2020; molineri et al., 2017; salam et al., 2020) . the epidemic outbreak of swine flu, zika, and ebola virus had caused worldwide panic, while the outbreak of novel coronavirus (ncov) and middle east respiratory syndrome (mers) caused severe loss of human life and economic value (altamimi and ahmed, 2019; bhowmick et al., 2020; chan et al., 2011; decaro and lorusso, 2020; hoogeveen, 2020; lin et al., 2018; liu et al., 2020d; paz and semenza, 2016; zhang et al., 2020) .human beings already facing significant global challenges of water scarcity, food security, and climate change (iqbal et al., 2018a; iqbal et al., 2019; iqbal et al., 2018b; yokomatsu et al., 2020) , came under a swear attack of epidemic covid-19 in december 2019, in wuhan, a city of china (burki, 2020; chinazzi et al., 2020; world health organization, 2020a) . initially, the virus was acknowledged by the chinese health care administration as of january 07, 2020 (milln-oate et al., 2020) . the covid-19 also entitled as novel coronavirus causes severe respirational problems in effected patients (burki, 2020; chinazzi et al., 2020; world health organization, 2020b) .the virus spread from wuhan city of china and affected more than 210 countries and territories of the world (world health organization, 2020a; zu et al., 2020) . although, most of the novel covid-19 cases indicate mild symptoms and recover from this disease due to early precautionary measures and self-immunization systems (lai et al., 2020) . yet many cases are reported with severe symptoms which caused a high number of deceases in many parts of the world i.e. italy (15,887), spain (13,055), usa (9624), france (8078), uk (4934), iran (3739), china (3331), malaysia (62), india (118) hong kong (4), thailand (26), and pakistan (50) with a varying number of closed cases outcomes ranging from 0.4 to 50% (ji et al., 2020; surveillances, 2020) .covid-19 spreading continuously and created one of the biggest panics of the 21st century with a lockdown of more than 6 billion people of the planet. the virus is considered as one of the most lethal invisible enemies known to the human being, where its fast transmission mechanism remains inadequately understood (altamimi and ahmed, 2019) . many contagious epidemics occur and wane away with a change in the weather. flu and other seasonal diseases such as norovirus vomiting bug, pneumonia come in winter. other diseases, such as typhoid and summer fever, be likely to peak for the period of the summer season. the infection of measles cases declines in the temperate climatic regions during the summer seasons, while the infection spread peaks in the tropical regions especially in the dry period (altamimi and ahmed, 2019; chan et al., 2011; darniot et al., 2018; davis et al., 2018; gould, 2009; jones, 2016; keilman, 2019; lee and chowell, 2017; merle et al., 2018; molineri et al., 2017; morin et al., 2018; paz and semenza, 2016) .the thrilling weather condition and influence of temperature variation also triggered the spread of the west nile virus in the european world (bhowmick et al., 2020; liu et al., 2020d; zhang et al., 2020) . researchers are interested in knowing whether there will be any similarity with the fast spread of covid-19 or otherwise. ever since it was first identified in mainland china in the mid of december 2019, the virus has spread very abruptly, with the number of cases increasing more severely in cooler regions such as european and north american countries. many weather condition can be well-thought-out as the top forecasters of respiratory syndromes such as sars. hydrometeorological variables can also have a direct association between coronaviruses and humans being via biological interaction. climate parameters may have a link with the fast transmission rate of covid-19 (armitage and nellums, 2020; auler et al., 2020; mndez-arriaga, 2020; o'reilly et al., 2020) . optimum climatic parameters such as temperature, wind speed, relative humidity, and precipitation can be considered as leading variable activating the existence and diffusion of the viruses. furthermore, weather changes and regional climate are also verily associated with the pneumonia fatalities (bhowmick et al., 2020; hoogeveen, 2020; liu et al., 2020a; liu et al., 2020b; ma et al., 2020; qi et al., 2020; schwartz, 2020; tobas and molina, 2020; wang et al., 2020; zambrano-monserrate et al., 2020; zhang et al., 2020) .numerous major pandemic outbreaks have occurred in the regions where the weather intensity is extremes, leading to rumor that the pandemic might begin to decline with the influx of change in weather. generally, the largest contiguous syndromes outbreak in the regions of cooler weather, leading to the theories that high temperatures might begin to the tail of in the summer season. it remains uncertain whether or not high temperatures of certain degrees would successfully eradicate the covid-19, according to experts. in the meantime, covid-19 is a new virus and no research to prove these theories so far from validation. research on regional weather parameters and covid-19 is also quite limited. the following study opens new ways to understand and prevent the spread of covid-19 with its relation to climatic conditions and related parameters.the study is accompanied by the countries and territories of the entire world. computerized data of the covid-19 cases until 5th june 2020 was obtained from the official health department sources of all countries as well as from the world info meter of covid-19 (https://www. worldometers.info/coronavirus/). fig. 1 shows the heat maps of confirmed cases, death cases, cases per million population, and death per million population as of 5th june 2020 over 210 countries and territories of the world. furthermore, data of death cases, closed outcomes cases, cases per million population were also obtained from similar sources. regional daily and monthly average climatological parameters of each country were obtained from the concerned meteorological stations and different international organizations to include world meteorological organization (https://www.wmo.int/datastat/wmodata_en.html), nasa earth observatory (https://earthobservatory.nasa.gov/), nasa earth observations (neos) (https://neo.sci.gsfc.nasa.gov/), climate data guide (https://climatedataguide.ucar.edu/climate-data), climate data online (https://www.ncdc.noaa.gov/cdo-web/), global climate change (https://climate.nasa.gov/), and monthly climate reports (nova). monthly average temperature and daylight hours were calculated by averaging the daily based value. furthermore, an overall average from january 2020 to may 2020 was calculated to find the correlation between climate parameters and covid-19 spread. a simple linear association of the reported cases of covid-19 and metrological parameters was drawn.the coefficient of determination (r 2 ) was applied to analyze the association among regional climatological parameters with average data of high temperature, low temperature and day light hours with total and death cases of covd-19 reported until 5th june 2020. r 2 is an estimator used for the analyzing the mutual association among two different data sets. it indicates that how one set of data set is well associate the flow of other data sets. it shows the level of variability among data sets.the occurrence of total cases and death cases, on the timeline, reported in the different countries of the world is shown in fig. 2 . the number of covid-19 cases increases at an exponential rate from the 1st case identification to the selected study period i.e., 5th june 2020. some countries show a very rapid increase in the covid-19 transformation despite their better socioeconomic condition and value of life. most of the cooler regions especially european and north american countries show a rapid increase in the covid spread. usa, italy, spain, france, germany, uk have a fast spread of covid cases than india, pakistan, bangladesh, indonesia, and malaysia despite their better quality of life. countries like pakistan, india, bangladesh, indonesia are relatively warm and humid countries (together they account for 25% of the world population) but have slow growth of covid-19 cases. the virus does not multiply outside the living bodies but the contagious virus may retain on different surfaces where the duration of retention of the virus is influenced prominently by local weather conditions. unclean surfaces, weather conditions, and human mass gatherings are notorious to be momentous vectors in the profligate contagions in the community and regions. the covid associated to human beings with the seasonal flu and common cold was testified to remain workable only for a short duration of 3 h on the different surfaces in an arid environment, though it remains workable for more duration in humid environment influenza and rsv viruses reported viable for 2 and 6 h respectively after drying on surfaces (artika et al., 2020; beeler and eichelberger, 2013; crisci et al., 2013; liu et al., 2020d; zhang et al., 2020) . human coronavirus (229e) on aerosolized shape is mostly less stable in high humidity and temperature (altamimi and ahmed, 2019; brugger and rubel, 2009; chan et al., 2011; gould, 2009; hoogeveen, 2020; li et al., 2018; liu et al., 2020a; liu et al., 2020c; lyth and holbrook, 2015; ma et al., 2020; mas-coma et al., 2020; morin et al., 2018; nicholson and munoz, 2018; otter et al., 2016; schwartz, 2020; sirisena and noordeen, 2014) .in the present study, the authors suggested that the covid-19 virus can stay alive after drying at a daily high temperature and in humid condition for at least two weeks. in a liquid substance, sar-cov-2 can be stable up to 3 weeks at room temperature but can be killed easily at the high temperature of 56c up to 15 min (abduljalil and abduljalil, 2020; chow et al., 2003; clark, 1993; lee and qureshi, 2013) . therefore, results revealed that coronavirus is a more stable pandemic that can transmit by indirect contact or fomites. moreover, this situation revealed that tainted surfaces can show a vital role in the fast diffusion of infection in the local community, isolation centers, and hospitals. the present study revealed that unswerving droplet transmission is a more dangerous and important route of virus broadcast from the infected carrier. moreover, fomites and environmental contaminated aerosols may perhaps play a foremost role in the fast-spreading of the virus. in nutshell, fomites may be a strong source of fast transmission of the virus. besides, to avoid from droplet transmission, frequent hand washing for at least 20 s is recommended by who (abduljalil and abduljalil, 2020; akkina et al., 2019; darniot et al., 2018; hoogeveen, 2020; kandel et al., 2020; lee and qureshi, 2013; lee and chowell, 2017; lin et al., 2018; merle et al., 2018; nicholson and munoz, 2018; nicola et al., 2020; segars et al., 2020; wang et al., 2020; zambrano-monserrate et al., 2020) .a present study, revealed that climate parameters i.e. high temperature, as well as higher relative humidity, have a significant effect on inactivation of covid-19 transmission while low relative humidity and low temperature support the prolong survival of covid-19 virus on infected surfaces (i.e. wood, metal, and glass) (brugger and rubel, 2009; chan et al., 2011; darniot et al., 2018; davis et al., 2018; gould, 2009; jones, 2016; li et al., 2018; lyth and holbrook, 2015; morin et al., 2018; paz and semenza, 2016; sirisena and noordeen, 2014) . furthermore, another study has shown that during the pandemic outbreak, the daily infected cases of covid-19 were 18.18 fold higher in days with a lower air temperature versus higher temperature days i.e. hong kong and another part of the world. collectively, this observation may be described that why some asian countries in the tropical region (at high temperatures with higher relative humidity) i.e. malaysia, thailand, and indonesia are less affected by a coronavirus. covid-19 virus can stay alive for two (2) weeks in low humidity and lowtemperature conditions which maybe guide the fast virus diffusion in the respective country as in hong kong which track down in subtropical zone (ahmadi et al., 2020; altamimi and ahmed, 2019; bhandari et al., 2020; bhowmick et al., 2020; liu et al., 2020c; robert et al., 2019; schwartz, 2020; smith, 2019) .moreover, other ecological aspects i.e. day sunlight, average maximum temperature, and the average minimum temperature had shown association with coronavirus pandemic disease outbreak transmission rate. the dynamic nature of this pandemic disease also involves multiple other factors i.e. out-door and indoor environment, physical properties of virus (i.e. shape, size), space, hygiene and genetic changes in different regions. some authors find changes in shape in the size of the virus in a different region of the world (hansen et al., 2015; kone et al., 2017; otter et al., 2016; sprygin et al., 2019; turnage and gibson, 2017) .figs. 3 and 4 show the association of meteorological parameter and covid-19 total and death cases. average low temperature, average high temperature and daylight hours show a stronger relationship with the total number of reported cases than death cases in different countries of the world. the study provides a picture of covid-19 cases against meteorological conditions globally. the study observed a positive linear correlation among total covid-19 cases and average high and low temperatures with a coefficient of determination of 0.4016 and 0.4668, respectively, while a linear correlation among total covid-19 death cases and average high and low temperatures with a coefficient of determination of 0.1987 and 0.3008, respectively. furthermore, a positive linear correlation was also observed among average daylight hours and total covid reported cases with a coefficient of determination of 0.3698 and death cases with a coefficient of determination of 0.4834. this association is supported by the previous studies which show the relationship between regional meteorological conditions and transmissions of different contagious diseases such as common cold flu and human coronaviruses (coverstone et al., 2019; keilman, 2019; li et al., 2018; liu et al., 2020b; ma et al., 2020; otter et al., 2016; pattison, 2020; paz and semenza, 2016; yang and sarfaty, 2016) . conversely, to our study of covid-19 which outbreak in winter season in wuhan city, china, altamimi and ahmed (2019) reported that the fast spread of novel coronavirus, mers-cov which outbreak in summer season in riyadh is increased with high temperature, low wind speed, as well as the high ultraviolet index, and low relative humidity.furthermore, we have explored the linear correlation between ambient temperature and infected total confirmed covid-19 cases with the help of the coefficient of determination model. the average daily temperature and daylight hours for the study period from 1st covid case detection to the 5th june shows the positive linear relationship in the different countries of the world, indicating that as the local weather conditions altered the transmission of the virus may be declined. previous studies have shown that local weather condition such as temperature, humidity, and precipitation is also a vital aspect in the existence and broadcast of other coronaviruses, like influenza viruses, retroviruses, mers, poxviruses, severe acute respiratory syndrome (sars), and paramyxoviruses (altamimi and ahmed, 2019; beeler and eichelberger, 2013; hansen et al., 2015; jones, 2016; kone et al., 2017; lee and qureshi, 2013; lee and chowell, 2017; li et al., 2018; lin et al., 2018; morin et al., 2018; otter et al., 2016; paz and semenza, 2016; salehuddin et al., 2017; yang and sarfaty, 2016) . previous studies were only confined to a single country and smaller region, but the following study analyzed the most countries of the world. some studies conducted in hong kong, beijing, guangzhou and taiyuan on sars cased and conclude that 16-28c temperature is optimum. while, other studies found the negative relationship of temperature and sars transmission in both countries beijing and hong kong during 2003 (abduljalil and abduljalil, 2020; chan et al., 2011; chow et al., 2003; decaro and lorusso, 2020; lin et al., 2018; otter et al., 2016) . casanova et al. (2010) found that viruses were inactive more rapidly at 20c than 4c. furthermore, de sousa et al. (2014) perform the test in the laboratory for coronavirus laboratory testing on coronavirus and revealed that virus was stable for 5 days on a smooth surface in between 25c to 22c but its visibility swiftly vanished at high temperature e.g. 38c and above. van doremalen et al. (2020) also revealed that virus mers-cov was also not as active at high temperatures. moreover, many other studies revealed that moderate temperature range is optimum and feasible for coronavirus growth and expansion but in high temperature, was harmful to it viability and also help in the reduction of its spreading (loeffelholz and tang, 2020) . therefore, further laboratory testing and experiments are also dire need to be done further strengthen of this myth (corman et al., 2012; de sousa et al., 2014; shahkarami et al., 2015) . in pakistan and many other countries are having long and hot summer so it might be a chance of less effected by covid-19.in nutshell, minimum temperature or below 3c in the winter season leads to high risk for its fast transmission in those countries, which are having long and cold winter. this provides very remarkable information for policymakers, may be covid-19 exist for a long time until the development of a proper and effective vaccine (liu et al., 2020c; ma et al., 2020; robert et al., 2019; schwartz, 2020; smith, 2019; tobas and molina, 2020) . there are some limitations, i.e. we did not analyze the results in subgroup bases, i.e. gender, different age ranges, due to maximum missing information worldwide.without a proper vaccine, social distancing is the only new norm adopted to reduce the transmission effect of covid-19. when a few cases of covid-19 have been reported than every country announces the lockdown and sop of social distancing. yezli and khan (2020) reported that the implementation of social distancing rules and regulations is a challenge due to its various norms of society, i.e. social and religious activities, annual hosting of various festivals, national and international festivals, and religious mass gatherings.moreover, it has been confirmed that the covid-19 can spread through droplets created by infected human coughing or sneezing or touching. to overcome the droplet infection rate, 1.83 m distance for social distancing is recommended, which is based on assumptions. however, no study was conducted yet on droplet transmission in the air (wind) and relative humidity (rh). feng et al. (2020) validated computational fluid-particle dynamics (cfpd) model to simulate the transient transport, condensation/evaporation, and deposition of sars-cov-2 laden droplets (2-2000 m) emitted by coughs, with different environmental wind velocities (0-16 km) and rhs (40% and 99.5%). the social distances were maintained at 1.83 and 3.05 m (6 and 10 ft). the facial covering effect is also under investigation. numerical results revealed that micro-droplets can travel in the air more than 3.05 m distance. rh also helped in increasing the droplet size. moreover, it is concluded that, within complex environmental wind and rh conditions, social distancing policy of 1.83 m (6 ft) is not sufficient to protect the person. coughing or sneezing droplets of an infected person can infect the other human in less than 5 s. therefore, a social distancing longer than 1.83 m (6 ft) needs to be considered. some countries i.e. australia, usa, italy, france, the uk, and europe having a high literacy rate and quality of life as compared to other under developing countries i.e. pakistan and india. without proper social distancing and wearing masks, per million effected cases and per a million deaths are less in pakistan and india because both countries have a high temperature in march-june as compare to other countries. australia is having a high population density at its habitat area because in the mid of australia, there is a desert and very less population density is there. on the other hand, populated areas are under moderate climate conditions, which cause a high/less number of covid-19 cases.this study explored the effect of native weather disorders on the fast spread of covd-19 worldwide. the novel coronavirus is convincingly influenced by the local weather conditions in the different parts of the world from their 1st case identification to the 5th june 2020. the spread of the covid-19 appears to be faster in cooler regions. the average temperature and daylight hours have shown a positive association towards the spread rate of covid-19. hence, regional meteorological parameters (aerosols, maximum and minimum temperature, day length, etc.) are among the contributors to the fast spread of coronavirus over most countries of the world. this study gives evidence that the fast spread of cases of covid-19 could diminish when the local weather conditions become warmer. most of the asian countries have a high temperature in may-june, they have shown less number of affected cases per million population i.e. vietnam, laos, pakistan, india, etc. this study suggest that along with proper management such as social distancing and hand washing, long summer may also slow down the spread of pandemic disease. this study provides useful inferences for health departments and decision-makers in defeating and understanding the fast spread of covid-19. the authors declare no conflict of interest.current information (as of may 15, 2020) point to the spread of covid19 starting from a food market in wuhan china in midnovember 2019. the epidemic initially spread mostly in china but has become a global pandemic by may with over 4 million official cases and 280 thousand deaths (worldmeters, 2020). the situation may also be worse than official statistics portray. for example, despite a massive screening and response campaign in china, li and colleagues estimate that 86% of early cases in china were undocumented (li et al., 2020). the situation in iran, another early epicenter, is instructive. the first official cases were reported on february 19th, 2020, in the city of qom (wikipedia, 2020). yet, later reports suggested the disease was likely circulating in iran as early as january 2020 (iran international, 2020). thus from february 19th on the spread of disease was very rapid according to official statistics. by march 20th some 19,644 cases and 1,433 deaths were recorded. the question in the minds of policy makers and public was: how far will this epidemic go and what policies should be put in place to control and mitigate the risks? the answers heavily depend on understanding the true magnitude of the epidemic.any underestimation is worrisome, but early in the exponential growth phase of an epidemic such errors could be extremely costly as those estimates drive the mobilization of public health resources and government responses. the risk of underestimation is partly driven by the characteristics of the disease such as a potentially large population of unrecognized patients with mild symptoms (at least 80% of the cases have symptoms not very different from common cold or flu) (novel coronavirus pneumonia emergency response epidemiology, 2020). as a result no consensus also exists on other parameters of the disease, such as fatality rate (fauci et al., 2020; wu and mcgoogan, 2020). moreover, the countryspecific variations in measurement and reporting may exceed those due to the nature of the disease. to illustrate, in the next section we provide a quick survey of various early clues related to the magnitude of epidemic in iran, which we then build on in our analysis.there have been a few clues from iran which may inform efforts to estimate the true cases. first is the number of cases identified among travelers arriving in other countries from iran. screening of passengers from highrisk countries in airports is more reliable than most countrylevel screening statistics. one study in preprint estimated 18,300 total cases of infected individuals in iran by february 25 (tuite et al., 2020). the method relied on estimation of cases in the whole country based on three diagnosed cases of infection upon individuals' arrival from iran in various international airports and the likelihood of such an incident given approximately 7500 daily outbound passengers from iran during those early days (fraser et al., 2009). this number was two orders of magnitude larger than official statistics at the time. later reports on the number of infected travelers from iran rose rapidly, to 97 cases by february 28 (radiofarda, 2020). an article in the atlantic, offered a series of backoftheenvelope calculations which, with strong simplifying assumptions, estimated 2 million accumulated cases of infected individuals by march 9th (wood, 2020).one may expect the death statistics to be more reliable. but test kits for identifying covid19 have been in short supply, and postmortem testing may not have been a priority of officials in iran. on february 24th a member of iran's parliament reported 50 deaths only in qom, a city of 1.2 million (wikipedia, 2020). several reports of government officials contracting the disease have also been released, including reports on infection of 20 member of the iranian parliament (a body of 270 members), as well as several deaths among officials (bbcpersian, 2020b). a bbc persian report on february 28th used interviews with an unspecified number of hospitals in iran to put the death from the disease at 210, an order of magnitude larger than official numbers at the time (bbcpersian, 2020a). another news agency quoted similar sources for a total of 416 deaths by march 1st (iran international, 2020) and 5000 by march 18th.we develop a dynamic simulation model of the spread of the disease in iran to estimate the likely trajectory of the disease that is consistent with the evidence summarized above. we start with the traditional seir (for susceptible, exposed, infectious, and recovered stocks representing population groups) model and incorporate feedbacks regulating endogenous changes in contact rate, screening, diagnosis, and reporting in response to risk perception and other relevant factors. thus not only reported statistics, but also the effective reproduction number (re), are endogenously generated and can change as people respond to the epidemic. we use this model, along with various strands of data, to weave together an estimate of disease trajectory early on, and offer projections for medium term future. keeping in mind the various uncertainties involved in this analysis, reflected in our wide uncertainty intervals (ui), we estimate over 916,000 (90% ui: 508 k, 1.5 m) cumulative cases of the disease in iran as of march 20th, with over 15,485 (90% ui: 8.4 k, 25.8 k) deaths. we thus estimate that only 2.1% of cases and 9.3% of deaths are officially attributed to covid19, with the rest going undetected. these results point to extreme gaps between official data and actual trajectory of disease, which may lead to slow response and underappreciation of risks of the diseases.the rest of the paper is largely focused on documenting the original estimates developed on march 20th. as a secondary goal we also consider their accuracy in light of the data and findings in the two months following original estimates. this latter exercise provides a window into the actual challenges and promises of conducting policyrelevant projections early in a crisis.figure 1 offers a simple representation of the model's structure. model equations, and parameter values are documented in appendix a. the model builds on the wellknown seir (susceptible, exposed, infectious, and recovered) framework. the model includes the infection reinforcing loop (r1) which creates the initial exponential growth in the number of cases. we divide the population of infected to early infected and late infected, and assume that early infected, while largely asymptomatic, might also be infective though at a lower rate (bai et al., 2020). the infected population will follow two different paths of recovery or death. a fraction of late infected are symptomatic (in the figure, the variable symptomatic late infected). to avoid proliferation of free parameters we use general population averages rather than disaggregating into population groups.to this basic epidemiological model we add two endogenous mechanisms. first, we formulate contact rate to be endogenously changing in response to perceived risk of infection (a function of death statistics). this feedback captures changes in social interactions, gatherings, selfisolation of suspected cases, and hygiene as well as governmentmandated closure of events, schools, and businesses in response to perceived risk. we assume public risk perception depends on the number of recent reported cases of death. this balancing feedback (loop b) can bring down contact rate, potentially enough to slow down the epidemic. second, we explicitly model the endogenous changes in screening and reporting of cases over time. here, the increased understanding of risks leads to mobilization of screening resources that expand the fraction of cases that are tested and thus will show up in the official statistics. we note that even with good screening many mild cases will go undiagnosed and will not be in official statistics.this analysis is focused on understanding the spread of the disease in its early phases, about one month after first diagnosed cases, and the core estimations in this paper are based on data only from that early period, until march 20th, 2020. we use time series data for official reports of death, recovered, and cumulative number of infection over time. we also use unofficial data points including four observations about the number of iranian passengers diagnosed with covid19 upon arrival in international airports, and three estimates aggregated by healthcare providers in iran and reported by bbc and iran international news agencies about total cases of death from covid19. the model includes three biological parameters (earlystage exposed period, average duration of illness, and fractional infectivity of earlystage exposed group) which we specify based on prior literature (li et al., 2020; novel coronavirus pneumonia emergency response epidemiology, 2020; wu and mcgoogan, 2020). population size and travel scope are also input using existing data. nine uncertain parameters remain that are estimated using the above data. three of the parameters are used to specify how official measurement and reporting relates to true values of infection and death, three parameters estimate public reaction to the reports, and two parameters are for mortality rate among two different groups of patients. finally, the arrival time of first cases of the virus is estimated as a separate parameter.our calibration method is based on forming a likelihood function for observing the actual time series data conditional on model parameters. we then conduct a markov chain monte carlo (mcmc) simulation to estimate the joint posterior distribution of the model parameters subject to observed data. we define a likelihood function for change over time (netinflow) of official reports on cumulative death, recovered and infection assuming they are count events drawn from modelpredicted rates (poisson distribution). we use a similar poisson distribution assumption for number of infected passengers and unofficial reports of death as well, since they both fit well into a count measure framework. the mcmc method searches over the feasible ranges for the uncertain parameters and accepts combinations that are consistent with the observed data. similar methods are used frequently in estimating dynamic models in this domain (li et al., 2020; wu et al., 2020). our prior experience with the use of mcmc methods in nonlinear dynamic models highlights the risk that uncertainty intervals do not capture model misspecifications and thus may be too tight. we therefore downscale the likelihood function to expand the uncertainty intervals (details and sensitivity in the online supplement) to err on the side of caution in assessing uncertainties and structural nuances not explicitly modeled. more details are reported in appendix a.we follow the procedure described in the modeling section and calibrate our model using multiple data sources and find uncertainty ranges using mcmc. figure 2a compares bestfitting simulation results for official confirmed death, recovered, and cumulative cases of infection against data. root mean squared percentage error values of reported recovered, death, and cumulative infected are 16%, 26%, and 5%, and root mean squared error values are 877, 116, and 794. simulation runs almost perfectly correlate with data. table a1 in the appendix a reports estimated parameters along with those adopted from the literature. figure 2b shows how simulation runs replicate unofficial statistics including the number of infected travelers diagnosed before air travel patterns changed substantially, and medical community's counts of cumulative death reported by media sources.we use the calibrated simulation model to estimate cumulative number of infected (panel c in figure 2), cumulative number of death (panel d), and current number of infected (panel e) until march 20, 2020, starting from december 31st, 2019 (day 0 in simulation). we find that total infected cases may have been closer to 916,000, than the reported 19,644 on march 20th. cumulative deaths, over 15,000, may also be an order of magnitude higher than official statistics and might have almost tripled in the last 10 days of the analysis. there is also much uncertainty in these numbers: our baseline estimate for cumulative infected may be as low as 508,000 and as high as 1.5 million (90% uncertainty interval). similarly cumulative deaths is between 8400 and 25,800 (90% confidence interval).the wide uncertainty intervals are partly due to the nature of the data: absent data on testing coverage in iran it is very hard to fully know the underlying diffusion patterns based only on the formal statistics. the travel and informal estimates of death partially address these limitations, but much uncertainty remains. our conservative assumption on downscaling the likelihood function may also have contributed to this wide interval. nevertheless, even our lower bound are 26 times the official statistics for total infections and 6 times larger than the death statistics.there are some glimmers of hope in our estimates as well. the drop in contact rate in response to perceived risk, which we have captured in our model, might have reduced re significantly, to just below 1 as of late march (panel f). that reduction (which was confirmed by later data), if sustained, would help bring down the number of new cases. thus, figure 2e shows the number of currently infected cases may well be reaching its peak at the end of the simulation.the epidemic seems to have raged with a reproduction number close to 2.72 (90% ui: 2.572.92 ui) for more than six weeks before the behavioral and policy interventions have slowed down the diffusion rate starting in late february. some of this drop may also be attributed to weather, but current research is mixed on the impact of weather (luo et al., 2020; wang et al., 2020; xu et al., 2020) so we did not include it in our estimation (but would explore it in the forward projection in the next sections). those factors, we estimate, brought down the aggregate contact rate to 26% (90% ui: 22%31%) of preepidemic levels by the date of analysis. this number may just succeed in bringing down the reproduction number below 1, which is the necessary condition for containment of the epidemic.whereas the case fatality rate in iran, based on official statistics until march 20th, is 18.4%, our estimated infection fatality rate is 3.7 (0.4)% (standard errors for estimates are in parentheses). this estimate is consistent with, and somewhat higher than, the 2.3% reported by wu and mcgoogan (2020) based on tracing confirmed cases in china. if correct, the toll of epidemic in iran would have been larger than that in most other countries by the estimation date, and limits to healthcare services may explain the increased death rate. this finding is reinforced by the limited coverage of testing in iran that is indicated in our estimation. many cases go unconfirmed, and at its maximum, formal testing is covering only 2.5 (0.9)% of infections. these estimates are consistent with qualitative media reports from iran on very limited availability of testing, the doctors' need for getting authorization before conducting tests, and the multiday delays in receiving test results that render them ineffective in the clinical decision making processes. we estimate that hospital sources of news organizations who have offered alternative versions of actual death statistics in iran have had a much wider coverage of true death statistics (42 (15)% of estimated true values). their count offers a lower bound for true deaths, is also close to our lower confidence bound, and suggests that the true number of cumulative cases, even with an infection fatality rate as high as 3.7%, would not be lower than 380,000. nevertheless, we estimate that even those medical community reports offer coverage significantly below 100%, consistent with the lessthanperfect coverage of hospital reports by media sources, and anecdotal evidence that hospital system has been overwhelmed in many hot spots of the disease and many patients have died at home and been buried with no testing or proper association of cause of death to covid19.the model used prior estimates from the literature for three important parameters: the total duration of illness (d = 14 days), the exposure (early infection) period ( = 4 days), and the fractional infectivity of the exposure period ( = 0.25). noting significant uncertainty in such estimates early in an epidemic, we assess our projections' sensitivity to these structural assumptions by reestimating the model for different values of each parameter. in this analysis we find a new set of bestfitting parameters and estimates for true cases given each different assumption on disease parameters. in table 1 results are summarized as percentage changes in key estimates (cumulative infections and cumulative death until march 20th, 2020) compared to baseline bestfitting projections.results suggest these structural parameters are important in identifying the true magnitude of the epidemic and may propagate additional uncertainty in our projections due to limited early data on their exact values. specifically, a smaller fractional infectivity during exposure period (), a longer exposure period (), or a shorter duration of illness all significantly increase the projections for total cases and deaths. reductions in the estimates are less significant when parameters move in the opposite direction, though a very high level of  would bring down the estimated cumulative cases notably. in lower values of , model calibration suggests earlier arrival of first cases of infection, which, in a few days, can make a difference in the number of lateinfected, and increase exposure rate. current evidence for transmission during early infection (exposure) period is rather limited, and thus our baseline projections for total cases may be somewhat conservative. nevertheless, given our conservative treatment of the uncertainty intervals all the bestfitting projections with different disease parameters remain within the 90% bounds of our baseline projections.we run the model until july 1st of 2020 under six scenarios (three alternative assumptions about the impact of seasonality times two policy measures). specifically, our scenarios about seasonality include no effect (status quo), moderate effect (infectivity of the virus decreases linearly from may 1st and halves by june 1st, then stays the same for the rest of the simulation), and very strong mitigating effect (infectivity of the virus decreases from may 1st to a quarter of its base value by june 1st, then stays the same for the rest of the simulation). for policy, our focus is on contact rate, and we include two conditions of status quo (i.e. only behavioral responses) and aggressive efforts to decrease contact rate by half what it would be otherwise. these six conditions provide intuitions for a potentially wide range of cases. both intervention and weather impacts are assumed to include rather strong options to inform the range of possibilities, and should not be interpreted as predictions. moreover, we also note that the wide cone of uncertainty in the baseline simulations will continue and expand in future projections.keeping the uncertainty considerations in mind (but not graphed due to clutter), figure 3 shows results based on bestfit parameters. if our best case scenario on the reduction of contacts and benefits of seasonality for containment materialize, the number of infected cases would be expected to peak soon after the analysis date at approximately 494,000 (90% ui: 274 k813 k), and will go down later on. this optimistic scenario will still lead to over a million infections and some 58,000 deaths (90% ui: 32 k97 k) by the end of june. the less aggressive scenarios point to continued spread of the epidemic at large rates. a reduction in contagion is realized only when reproduction number remains below one as a result of reduced physical contact, government interventions, and seasonality. among these three, the first (behavioral response) is endogenous to recent death rate. when death rate comes under control (due to the combination of all three factors), our model assumes the contract rate rebounds, weakening the first channel and increasing the transmission. economic pressures, normalization of death, and behavioral modeling after those not practicing distancing (or those already recovered and thus presumably immune) could all weaken the behavioral response when the perceived risks fade. the increased transmission would then, with a delay, bring up the death rate close to levels sustaining a reproduction number around one. this creates a strong attractor in the dynamics where in steady state contact rate is high enough to sustain the contagion but not so high to lead to the rapid infection of all the population. it may also lead to oscillations in peak transmission. therefore it is only with strong weather and/or government interventions that reduced reproduction number brings the epidemic under control. this dynamic offers a cautionary tale against declaring victory early in the fight against the epidemic. however the actual magnitude of such rebound effect is not known in this setting and our data offers no guidance on the relevant parameters. therefore these results are only qualitatively suggestive but not quantitatively reliable.this research was conducted under extreme urgency to inform decisions amidst crisis. the primary objective of the analysis was to understand the magnitude of the outbreak during early stages of infection when uncertainties are large and major decisions at stake. the main analysis of this paper was completed on march 20th 2020 and first reported publicly on march 27th on medrxiv preprint server. thus we intentionally leave those projections untouched to avoid posthoc justification and corrections that would cover the true uncertainties involved in real world modeling projects targeting fast evolving situations. furthermore, given that march 20th marks the end of the winter and beginning of persian new year, emerging annual reports can be used to assess some of our findings. in this section we summarize a few such tests and observations made based on findings post initial analysis.first, our estimates can be partially tested against official allcause mortality data which are reported seasonally by the iranian government. the data for winter 2020 were released on may 7th, during the final preparations of this manuscript. based on a regression analysis on the allcause mortality data we find that covid19 related deaths are likely 7.1 (95% ci: 3.8, 10.4) times more than official death counts for the disease (see appendix c). our simulationbased estimates, suggesting 10.8 (90% ci: 5.9,18.0) times more deaths than official data, are consistent with this new information.a second study informed the true magnitude of epidemic in one of the provinces of iran using antibody testing. specifically, testing for covid19 antibodies informs whether a person has been previously infected by the disease, offering estimates for cumulative infection when randomly conducted on a population. we have found one such study conducted on a random population of iran's guilan province (population of 2.5 million) (shakiba et al., 2020). these researchers estimate that 2133% of guilan residents were infected by late april. we did not simulate our model at the province level, but our march 20th estimate of 47 times undercounting, combined with 1090 confirmed cases in guilan (0.04% of the residents), gives an estimate of 2% prevalence at the end of winter. our model estimates about 50%100% growth in cases over the following month (see figure 3b), so our estimate of cumulative infections in guilan, at 3%4% for late april, are still five to ten times lower than this new study. these findings would suggest that a rather high fraction of cases were asymptomatic and/or not included in any of the data sources for infection that we used (official data and infected traveler counts). incidentally, if we assume that our estimates for infection were 7 times below true numbers, the infection fatality rate for covid19 in iran goes down to close to 0.5%, a number much closer to some recent estimates for this key parameter (basu, 2020).third, we can test model's capability in projecting confirmed cases. although prediction of official cases was not the purpose of the model, we present this outofsample test as an indirect way of assessing the model's predictive power. the model was calibrated with 30 days of data, and since the preprint, 55 days of more data on confirmed cases and deaths have become available, which we use to compare the model's predictive performance for official, reported cases. these results are provided in appendix b, and show that while qualitative trends are consistent, the model misses a major increase in the number of cases right after the first 30 days. confirmed death projections are closer to data. two mechanisms may explain this gap. first, our simple formulation for testing only tracks the fraction of cases tested, saturating that fraction at a maximum. that formulation is fine in capturing growth in test capacity during the rise of epidemic, but would underestimate cases when the growth slows down and milder cases can be found with the already enhanced test capacity. indeed since estimation we have found that initial test capacity in iran grew to about 6000 tests per day, stayed at that level for the later part of our estimates, and then jumped to 10,000 tests per day; similar increasing patterns of tests are seen across nations globally. thus, the testing formulation likely introduces undercounting in simulating official cases later in the epidemic, but this does not mean the model is underpredicting the actual infections and deaths.a second factor may explain why our model predicted an earlier peak, by about two weeks. iran's new year holiday season, nowruz, which starts on march 20th, is a major time of travel, family visits, and social interaction. those activities may well have increased contact rates in later march, but we decided against post hoc introduction of a nowruz parameter in the model. finally, we note that our model predicted a resurgence of the epidemic in early may due to reduced risk perception, which is consistent with a rise in cases in the real world in may. it is harder to fully assess the impact of these discrepancies on future estimation of true cases, had we decided to extend those estimates beyond the original timeline. nevertheless, it seems our model is somewhat conservative in predicting the reported infections and deaths after the estimation period, and a more explicit account of physical test capacity would add value in longer term projections.finally, upon the release of the first draft of the paper we have received reports from a few hospitals and officials in iran that confirm: a) unofficial death counts by hospital sources that continue to be about five times the official death statistics, and in some states of iran are close to our estimates; and b) the low sensitivity (false negative risk) of tests, at about 50%, when conducted by hospital staff. moreover, availability of tests even in major hospitals is limited, covering about 50% of those clinically diagnosed using other methods (often ct scans).it is important to note that some evidence from random testing in other countries (including iceland and germany) point to a very high asymptomatic fraction of patients, which would not be captured in any of our data sources and is consistent with our comparisons with the guilan study. furthermore, new evidence suggests we might have used underestimates for the delay between exposure to onset of symptoms (about 5 days), from onset to testing (another 5 days), and from testing to resolution (about 10 days) (lauer et al., 2020; linton et al., 2020). adjusting for these parametric assumptions would increase our estimated case count as discussed in the sensitivity analysis and may bring our overall estimates closer to the new evidence on the cumulative infections.in this paper we provide a more sobering picture of the covid19 outbreak in iran using a dynamic model that goes beyond official statistics. integrating data from various sources we suggest that the official statistics are at least an order of magnitude below actual spread of the epidemic, and even in optimistic scenarios the burden of disease will be large and lasting for many months. implementing and sustaining strong policies that target physical distancing offers the main hope for containing the epidemic until a vaccine becomes available.the gap between official statistics and our estimates may be due to various complications in measurement as well as policy choices. the availability of testing infrastructure has been a major bottleneck for detecting cases in iran. citizens with suspicious symptoms have had no easy way for getting tested; most tests are conducted on hospitalized patients, require specific authorization, and are processed in a few centralized labs adding significant delays to the process. not only mild cases are missed, but also many critical patients have been unable to access the care they need due to hospital congestion. the fact that majority of cases have mild symptoms similar to flu (wu and mcgoogan, 2020) adds to the risk of undercounting even if the testing capacity was ample. in fact many mild or moderately sick patients may have preferred to stay home than risk being infected upon visiting a congested hospital, further reducing demand for testing. finally, false negative test results seem to be common among covid19 patients in iran, with healthcare providers indicating sensitivity levels as low as 50% due to challenges in sample extraction and varying concentration of viral load over the course of disease.the problem of undercounting cases of infection and death is not limited to iran. due to the relatively long period of incubation, a considerable proportion of asymptomatic cases, significant fraction of false negatives in existing tests, and especially the limits on test capacity, the undercounting problem is common, but its magnitude would vary across different countries. even with ample test capacity, the undercounting of infection is likely large due to both the asymptomatic patients (estimated to be more than 40% (mizumoto et al., 2020; nishiura et al., 2020)) and those cases with false negative results (about 30% of positives in case of pcr based covid19 tests (fang et al., 2020)). for example a preprint paper estimates that in the us less than 10% of cases of infection were diagnosed until march 13 (pei and shaman, 2020). others have made similar claims about official data of china (li et al., 2020). the undercounting of deaths may be less in magnitude, but still very common. under significant strain, limited testing capacity may not be allocated to postmortem testing of suspected cases, and thus countryspecific routines for categorizing death in those cases may lead to large variations. we suspect this is a major reason why iran's official death counts may be significantly below the actual numbers. but other countries may have similar issues. for example a recent article estimates much higher number of deaths in italy than official numbers (stancati and sylvers, 2020). moreover, recent investigative reporting by financial times, new york times, wall street journal, and economist has used allcause death data of different countries and cities and estimated that globally, as much as 50% of covid19 death cases are missed (burnmurdoch et al., 2020). for example italy's excess death in march 2020 is 24,600, out of which only 13,710 is attributed to covid. jakarta (indonesia) had 3300 excess deaths in march and april, with only 381 attributed to covid. absent extended testing capacity, expanded postmortem testing, and random testing in the population, policymakers may face a significant undercount of existing cases and thus miscalculate their response. we hope that our proposed approach can be used for similar cases elsewhere to debias such estimates.methodologically, we faced important challenges to estimation and projection of sshaped behavior based on early data that are worth highlighting here. first, estimating sshaped curves before observing their inflection point can be unreliable. minor changes in the slope of the cumulative curve can significantly change the estimated future trajectory when simple curvefitting is pursued. overcoming this risk requires a more mechanistic model that is fitted to the flow (infections in this case) rather than cumulative stock, so that the slope is constrained by physical mechanisms determining the flow variable (e.g. the size of the susceptible population). the calibration should also properly weigh different data points so that the larger numbers during peak period do not overwhelm the signal from other periods. in our case we achieved this using poisson loglikelihood error. other promising alternatives may include negative binomial loglikelihood, among others. a second challenge is teasing out the various potential reasons for reduction in new infections. for example those may include a reduction in susceptible population, a change in contact rate due to social distancing, or exogenous changes such as weather. while mechanistically proper model specification can partially address this challenge, one needs to be cognizant of the uncertainty in estimated parameters, e.g. by using mcmc methods to identify the various combinations of those effects that are broadly consistent with the data.the problem is rapidly changing, and timely estimation is critical. therefore we have made several simplifying assumptions that readers should be aware of in interpreting our results. first, consistent with prior findings (rahmandad and sterman, 2008) we have focused on capturing behavioral feedbacks in contacts and testing and have adopted a formal estimation process, but have done so at the cost of abstracting away from much detail complexity and heterogeneity in populations and risks. we converged on the current model structure in an iterative process, attempting to keep the model simple and feasible to estimate, but not missing components that would qualitatively change the results. for example we tested the inclusion of healthcare capacity, test accuracy, and physical test capacity (rather than as a percentage of cases) and decided against including them explicitly because they did not change the conclusions qualitatively and our data did not offer reliable ways to estimate those effects beyond what is informed by our current structures. generally, a more detailed model may be appealing, but if the purpose is to offer quantitative estimates and projections, constraining additional model parameters during calibration would be a major constraint that should be weighed against the value of additional structure. second, during the early periods of infection, there is considerable uncertainty in most data sources. for example, infected passenger data, while useful, is a not a perfect data source for modeling. it can be argued that exposed to more travel, this population may be exposed earlier than a random sample. on the other hand, this is typically a higher income and more educated population that may be more aware of, and responsive to, infection risks. similar issues can be raised for informal death reports in the media, which are based on potentially limited samples of hospitals and may include subjective assessments of medical cases. such uncertainties are part of any emerging, fastmoving situation, and one should be cognizant of these factors in interpreting modeling results. third the model is scoped only around iran  we ignore potential effects of global spread of the disease on iran, including the risk of reintroduction of cases in future. forth, we assumed that the recovered population are immune during our simulation horizon. fifth, we ignore mutations in the virus which may change its contagiousness and case fatality rate. despite these limits we hope the paper offers an accurate assessment of the risks and scope of the epidemic for iran and beyond. we also hope other researchers build on this work using the publicly available data, models, and replication instructions provided in the online supplement.finally, we hope that the study contributes to the system dynamics modeling literature. there are a wide range of epidemic models with different levels of dynamic and detailed complexity (darabi and hosseinichimeh, 2020) and a large number of models have been built in response to covid19. while epidemic models with interesting and relevant feedback mechanisms could be built rather quickly, their results depend heavily on the parameters regulating the strength of contagion, behavioral response, testing, and other mechanisms. for example reputable research groups have offered models with forecasted cumulative deaths that vary significantly (ferguson et al., 2020; murray and ihme, 2020). without quantitative estimation methods, different models may point to starkly different conclusions, with little guidance on how to select the appropriate analysis. our contribution is to offer a modelbased estimation approach during an ongoing pandemic where data are uncertain and limited. this requires combining all sources of available data with different levels of uncertainty, each one, potentially an imperfect indicator of the reality, yet collectively providing a better picture. our datadriven approach is consistent with recent calls for detailed datainformed modeling approaches (sterman, 2018), and combining different methods and techniques to enrich dynamic modeling (duintjer tebbens and thompson, 2018; ghaffarzadegan and larson, 2018). we hope the methods used in this paper can be extended to a variety of other system dynamics applications where actionable insights rely on rigorous combination of feedback rich models and quantitative data.the sars-cov-2 pandemic represents an unprecedented public health, social and economic challenge. sustained local transmission is present in multiple countries, in all continents, and the implications in terms of morbidity and mortality are expected to be severe (1, 2) . the role of seasonal and geographic climate variations in modulating the transmission of the virus has received increasing attention. studies using a regression framework have found a role for temperature, relative and specific humidity in the transmission of sars-cov-2 (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) , suggesting that cold, dry conditions increase the transmission of the virus. however, with limited data on the current epidemic, these early-stage results are inevitably inconclusive. furthermore, the relative importance of climate drivers when compared to high population susceptibility during the pandemic stage of an emerging infection such as sars-cov-2, has not been fully characterized.climate affects the transmission of several directly-transmitted pathogens (8) . specific humidity (the mass of water vapor in a unit mass of moist air) has been shown to be important for influenza transmission in both laboratory settings (9) (10) (11) , and in population-level studies (12) . respiratory syncytial virus (rsv), a childhood pathogen, has also been found to be dependent on specific humidity (13) and exhibits latitudinal correlations with climate (14) . for both influenza and rsv, low specific humidity increases transmission and epidemics tend to peak in the wintertime in northern latitudes. however, other directly-transmitted infections exhibit different patterns (15) , with enteroviruses, for instance, often peaking in the summer months (16).prior work on climate and directly-transmitted diseases has typically considered endemic infections, such as seasonal influenza or rsv. emerging pathogens, in contrast, have distinct dynamics driven by high population susceptibility (17) .a key question is the extent to which seasonal and geographic climate variations are relevant in the pandemic phase of an emerging infection. here we build on known features of endemic human coronaviruses and other directly-transmitted infections to probe this question. although we do not yet know the climate sensitivity of sars-cov-2 transmission directly, data exists on four other coronaviruses that currently circulate in human populations. two of these coronaviruses, hcov-hku1 and hcov-oc43, are of the same betacoronavirus genus as sars-cov-2 (18) .we use data on hcov-hku1 and hcov-oc43 from us census regions to understand the potential climate dependence of betacoronavirus transmission (19). we fit a susceptible-infected-recovered-susceptible (sirs) model to case data of hcov-hku1 and hcov-oc43 where the fitted parameters include the climate dependence of transmission and the length of immunity following infection. all other parameters are fixed, based on values from kissler et al. 2020 (18) . motivated by the climate-dependence of influenza and rsv, we posit that transmission depends on specific humidity: we use population-weighted average climatology of specific humidity over 2014-2020 taken from the era5 reanalysis dataset (20) , with population data from (21) . we note that specific humidity is dependent on temperature via the clausius-clapeyron relation and results using both variables have been found to be equivalent for other diseases (13) . after fitting the model parameters, we run simulations of the sars-cov-2 pandemic under three scenarios. in the first scenario we assume sars-cov-2 has the same sensitivity to climate as preliminary evidence suggests that climate may modulate the transmission of sars-cov-2. yet it remains unclear whether seasonal and geographic variations in climate can substantially alter the pandemic trajectory, given high susceptibility is a core driver. here, we use a climate-dependent epidemic model to simulate the sars-cov-2 pandemic probing different scenarios based on known coronavirus biology. we find that while variations in weather may be important for endemic infections, during the pandemic stage of an emerging pathogen the climate drives only modest changes to pandemic size. a preliminary analysis of non-pharmaceutical control measures indicates that they may moderate the pandemic-climate interaction via susceptible depletion. our findings suggest, without effective control measures, strong outbreaks are likely in more humid climates and summer weather will not substantially limit pandemic growth. influenza, based on a prior model from laboratory studies (9, 12) . in the second and third scenarios, we assume sars-cov-2 has the same climate dependence and length of immunity as hcov-oc43 and hcov-hku1 respectively. while we assume the climate dependence is the same as these three infections, our simulations use r 0 based on current estimates of sars-cov-2 (18, 22) . we first consider the seasonality of the endemic betacoronaviruses. figure 1 shows the average seasonal pattern of endemic betacoronaviruses, oc43 and hku1, for different regions in the us. cases of both diseases increase as specific humidity declines (fig. s1). we therefore assume that to some extent transmission will decline with specific humidity, however, the extent of the decline is yet to be determined. we characterize the link between specific humidity and the transmission of sars-cov-2 using plausible estimates derived from the two endemic betacoronaviruses as well as influenza. figure 1a shows different potential functional forms for the climate-transmission relationship. changes to specific humidity modulate r0 between a maximum wintertime value and a hypothesized lower bound, taken from prior studies (18, 22) . in the extreme cases, transmission (r 0 ) either rapidly declines as specific humidity increases or has no relationship with specific humidity. the highlighted influenza relationship is based on laboratory studies using the guinea pig animal model (9) (10) (11) , and later used to predict influenza epidemics in human populations (12) . in this case r 0 values correspond to sars-cov-2 estimates.the other two scenarios in fig. 1a correspond to the relationship between climate and oc43 and hku1 transmission. we evaluate the functional form of this relationship by fitting our climate-driven sirs model to us case data for the two infections ( fig. 1 , b and c, and figs. s2 and s3). our results (fig. 1 , d and e) suggest a somewhat wide range of climate dependency for the two coronaviruses, with hku1 having a much steeper response to specific humidity then oc43. strong seasonal forcing has been linked to biennial outbreaks, as observed for hku1 ( fig. s2 ), in other respiratory pathogens (13) and implies endemic dynamics driven by herd immunity; however this inference may be complicated by cross-protection from other circulating strains (18) . while there is some uncertainty in our estimates, simulating a pandemic outbreak using a range of climate-transmission dependencies allows us to explore a wide plausible range of potential climate effects.we simulate a pandemic invasion for all locations (fig. 2 , a and c) and focus on the results for nine exemplar cities (fig. 2 , c to e) each with a very distinct mean and seasonal cycle of specific humidity ( fig. s4 ). we stress that these initial simulations explore only the interaction of the epidemic (sirs) model clockwork and seasonality in transmission; they do not address complexities of demography, control and other environmental factors. in fig. 2 , c to e, we show the evolution of the simulated pandemic, holding population constant, for northern hemisphere, southern hemisphere and tropical locations. the model assumes the outbreak starts at the same time and no control measures are in place, revealing only the effect of climate on pandemic size and duration. for the northern hemisphere locations, we do not see any substantial difference in pandemic size across all three scenarios, despite very different climates in new york, london and delhi. in the influenza and hku1 scenarios, tropical locations experience a more sustained, lower intensity pandemic than the northern hemisphere. these scenarios represent a stronger dependence on climate than oc43, such that the lack of really dry conditions (low specific humidity) in tropical regions means these locations do not experience the high transmission rates of the higher latitudes. however, the outbreak in the tropical cities remains significant, and factors we do not explore here, such as population density, could further exacerbate the size of the epidemic.we also simulate the pandemic in a range of southern hemisphere locations (fig. 2d) . we see only minor delays in the peak of southern hemisphere locations relative to the northern hemisphere (fig. 2b) , despite the six-month shift in specific humidity seasonality between the two hemispheres ( fig. s4 ). for the oc43 scenario, pandemics are temporally aligned across all locations and of similar magnitude. a stronger climate response for influenza and hku1 parameters leads to slight regional differences. it is worth noting that our different scenarios also reflect a range of immunity lengths. the size of the pandemic peak is not affected by changes in immunity length ( fig. s11 ), but the timing of latter stage outbreaks is partially dictated by this parameter. the differential timing of secondary peaks in the influenza and hku1 scenarios, which have a similar climate-dependence, is driven by this variability.during the pandemic stage of an emerging pathogen the lack of population immunity, i.e., high susceptibility, is a crucial driver. to illustrate this in the general case, we run our simulation model for different climates (represented by the seasonal range of humidity values a location experiences) and different levels of population susceptibility, using the mean specific humidity and seasonality of new york. figure 3 , a to c, shows the results in terms of the size of the pandemic peak. while humidity range does modulate pandemic size, population susceptibility exhibits a much steeper gradient. for novel pathogens, such as sars-cov-2, the proportion of the population susceptible to infection may be close to 1. to illustrate the potential longer term behavior of the pandemic, we plot a typical pandemic trajectory on the si phase plane (fig. 3d) . the initial pandemic trajectory (red) is relatively independent of seasonal forcing. this then gives way to the endemic attractor (blue) which oscillates around the equilibrium of the unforced model (green). these longer term dynamics show a much stronger signature of seasonal forcing than the initial pandemic phase (figs. s9 and s10). figures 3e and 4 show a preliminary exploration of the impact of non-pharmaceutical control on the epidemic trajectory. in fig. 3e , we show the si phase plane where the hku1 parameters of r0 are artificially controlled for a six month period to r 0 = 1.1. in this scenario, the control measures result in a moderate reduction in peak incidence as the outbreak is shifted to the summer months, however, high susceptibility still results in a substantial numbers of cases. in fig. 4 , we explore the interaction between the climate and control measures in more detail. we consider four scenarios: climate-dependencies based on oc43 and hku1 as well as control measures where r0 = 1.1 or 1.3, representing limited transmission. for each scenario we vary the length of the control measure and the location, however for simplicity we assume all control measures start at two times, four weeks and six weeks after the disease is introduced. we note that these control measures are simplified test cases and do not represent the local heterogeneity and efficacy of current controls, which is yet to be determined. these results show change to peak incidence, changes to number infected are shown in fig.  s5 .for all control scenarios we assume a degree of transmission during the control period, such that r0 > 1, resulting in an increase in population immunity over time. in the scenarios where r 0 = 1.3, immunity builds faster and control measures work to reduce the pandemic peak after several months. in the r 0 = 1.1 scenario more time is required for population immunity to build such that the pandemic peak is reduced across all locations. in this scenario, as susceptibility declines, the climate plays a more substantial role in determining pandemic peak size (fig. 4, a and b) . when r 0 = 1.1 in both the hku1 and oc43 scenarios, releasing control measures close to the month of maximum transmission may result in a larger pandemic peak compared to the no control scenario, particularly in the higher latitudes where transmission likely increases in the winter (fig. s6 ).more broadly, our simulated control measures imply that the key determinant of reduced peak incidence is the extent to which population immunity builds over the control period, demonstrated by the higher efficacy of the r0 = 1.3 control scenario in mitigating peak incidence. the climate plays a complex role in tuning the efficacy of potential control efforts, resulting in differential outcomes depending on location, however population susceptibility remains a fundamental driver. further exploration of these complexities may be necessary when evaluating location-specific controls. the timing of introduction and the efficacy of local control measures as well as factors such as population density and contact patterns could also shape future outcomes.serological surveys, at the local level, will be important for tracking the build up of immunity over time. moreover, implementing control measures buys crucial time while vaccine and other treatments are developed.there are several caveats to interpreting these results. primarily, these simulations do not address location specific factors such as spatial and social mixing patterns, contact networks, population density and the specifics of control timing and efficacy. in particular, our results apply most closely to relatively well-mixed epidemics in large cities. rural areas (with potentially lower r0; see figs. s7 and s8), may have a more delayed initial epidemic with complex consequences for ensuing interactions with climate drivers. our model also does not account for potential cross-protection from other coronavirus infections (18) . cross-immunity may contribute to the seasonality of endemic coronaviruses, meaning estimated climate drivers could be even weaker than we suggest and our main findings, conservative (16, 23). finally, results from influenza and rsv suggest that high precipitation may play a role in driving transmission (13, 24) , particularly in tropical locations. due to limited data on betacoronaviruses from tropical locations, we have not been able to confirm whether a rainfall signal exists. precipitation effects and other drivers such as schooling may also impact the epidemic trajectory, particularly post-pandemic. we further test for the sensitivity of our results to changes in core parameter values (materials and methods and figs. s7 to s11). these analyses suggest our results are qualitatively robust to variations in climate dependency and weather fluctuations.our results suggest that while climate may play a role in modulating detailed aspects of the size and timescales of a pandemic outbreak within a particular location, population immunity is a much more fundamental driver of pandemic invasion dynamics. although our hku1 scenarios presents a modest role for climate in terms of shifting the timing and intensity of the pandemic, a scenario with oc43 parameters is equally likely. in terms of the sars-cov-2 pandemic, our results imply that both tropical and temperate locations should prepare for severe outbreaks of the disease and that summertime temperatures will not effectively limit the spread the infection. however, this does not mean the climate is not important in the longer term. endemic cycles of the disease will likely be tied to climate factors and seasonal peaks may vary with latitude (figs. s3, s9, and s10). a more detailed understanding of climate drivers as well as immunity length will be crucial for understanding the implications of control measures. furthermore, weather and near-term climate forecasts could be helpful for predicting secondary outbreaks after the initial pandemic phase has passed.www.sciencemag.org (page numbers not final at time of first release) 6 . size and color of the circle represents the size of peak incidence (within two years of pandemic start) relative to the no-control scenario. white crosses show month of maximum climate-driven transmission i.e., lowest specific humidity.explanatory mechanisms: a) differences in population density, lifestyle, and interaction patterns create variations in reproduction number. b) risk perception, behavioral change and policy responses alter transmission rates endogenously. c) testing is prioritized based on symptoms and risk factors, so detection rates depend on both testing rates and current prevalence. d) limited hospital capacity is allocated based on symptoms, influencing fatality rates. e) weather may have a role in transmission (7) while age, socio-economic status, and pre-existing conditions impact severity (8, 9) , with the poor and minorities suffering disproportionately (10) .prior research has addressed different parts of this puzzle, including estimating the infection fatality rate (ifr) in well-controlled settings (11) or using statistical extrapolation (12) , assessing the asymptomatic fraction in smaller populations or through random testing (13, 14) , and estimating prevalence using random antibody testing in highly affected cities and regions (15) . yet we lack a global view of the pandemic that is both consistent with these more focused findings and simultaneously explains the large variance in official cases and fatality across different countries.in this paper we build and estimate a multi-country model of the covid-19 pandemic at global scale. our model captures transmission dynamics for the disease, as well as how, at the country level, transmission rates vary in response to risk perception and weather, testing rates condition infection and death data, and fatality rates depend on demographics and hospitalization. estimating this model using data from every country with more than 1000 cases for which testing data is available, we infer some of the key characteristics of covid-19 pandemic globally and inform how alternative control policies may have played out across the globe.we use a multi-country modified seir model to simultaneously estimate the transmission of covid-19 in 84 countries. the model tracks community transmission, excluding the global travel network and instead separately estimating the date of introduction of patient zero for each country. within each country, the core of the model tracks the population through susceptible, pre-symptomatic, infected pre-testing, infected post-testing, and recovered states. basic transmission dynamics reflect a classical seir process, with a baseline transmission rate, incubation period, and duration of infection. building on this basic structure the model explicitly represents the dynamics of covid testing, including demand for tests, sensitivity of pcr based testing, and allocation of test capacity between positive and negative cases, as well as the dynamics of hospital system capacity, both with concomitant effects on transmission and mortality. it also endogenously generates population-level behavioral and policy responses due to the perceived risks and government intervention.infected people and those with other risk factors (e.g. hospital workers) or similar symptoms due to other illnesses. we assume, based on prior research (16) , that infected individuals are potentially tested on average 5 days after the onset of symptoms. on any given day, individuals with more severe symptoms get priority for testing. following (17) , this prioritization exerts a selection effect that results in different average severity of covid in the tested vs. untested infected populations. we also assume a 30% false negative rate for pcr-based covid tests (4, 5) . a positive test results in reduced contact rates for tested individuals, changing the transmission rates endogenously. thus the model tracks various mechanisms generating the observable measures: a daily reported infection rate that combines the total positive results from each day's tests with daily post-mortem infection confirmations, and a daily reported death rate of confirmed cases. unobserved parameters, such as ifr and asymptomatic fraction, can then be estimated by fitting the model against data for observables.we estimate the effective hospital capacity for each country as a function of total hospital beds available, modified for population density. this modification approximates the effect of geographic heterogeneity in demand for hospital capacity -in larger and less densely populated countries, geographic heterogeneity in the progression of the epidemic means that some areas (e.g. new york city) may be overwhelmed with demand even when other parts of the country have unused hospital capacity. as with testing, hospital capacity is allocated between more severe covid cases (both those tested and those not tested) and demand from non-covid patients. hospitalization can reduce the mortality rate for covid patients, while other determinants of fatality rates are the severity of symptoms and the age distribution of the population (8, 9) .each country also exhibits a response to the perceived risk of covid. the response is endogenously driven by a weighted combination of reported and actual hazard of infection. perceived risk drives reduction in contact rate and hence transmission rates through non-pharmaceutical interventions such as social distancing measures. specific government policies are not explicitly represented, but treated as part of this endogenous risk response. different countries could vary in their risk perception, response time, as well as the magnitude of their response based on the perceived risk.overall each country is represented by a system of ordinary differential equations tracking seven population stocks (susceptible, pre-symptomatic infected, infected pre-testing, and four groups of infected post-testing -positively tested or not  hospitalized or not) and a state variable for perceived risk. the model also includes multiple additional state variables for measurement and accounting of e.g. deaths and recoveries.model parameters are specified based on prior literature and formal estimation. main parameters adopted from the literature include incubation period (5 days (8, 16) ), onset-to-detection delay (5 days (16) ), sensitivity of pcr-based testing (70% (4, 5) ), and post-detection illness duration (10 days (8) ).we estimate the remaining parameters using a maximum likelihood approach. using testing rate time series and various country-level data points (e.g. population, hospital capacity, comorbidities, age distribution), the model endogenously simulates confirmed new daily cases and deaths over time and matches them against observed data by maximizing the likelihood of observing those data given the model parameters. we use a negative binomial likelihood function to accommodate excess dispersion in infection and death flows compared to more common gaussian specifications. where data on mean) are 2.2% (9.4% for median across countries, med) and 8.4% (med: 10.2%) for cumulative infections and deaths, respectively. r-square values exceed 0.9 for 56% of 336 country-specific cumulative and incidence time series. our projections are also consistent with excess mortality data, where available (see appendix s4). main findings include estimated parameters of covid-19 epidemics across countries, as well as trajectories of key measures. for estimated parameters we report a) the mean of most likely values across countries (mean); b) the standard deviation of those values (std), which quantifies variability of the underlying concept across countries; and c) the mean of country-level interquartile ranges (miqr), which captures the inherent uncertainty in parameter estimates for each country. the model brings together infection, testing, risk perception, behavioral and policy responses, hospitalization, and fatality using data from across the globe. here we focus on three main results.first, the magnitude of epidemic is widely under-reported with much variation globally. we estimate the asymptomatic fraction to be 55% (mean; std: 0.6%; miqr: 3.7%). combined with a sensitivity of 70% (4, 5) for pcr tests, the fraction of infections that could potentially be identified without mass testing is limited to 32%. most countries do not reach this upper bound, however, and testing is the binding constraint. figure 2 -a reports the ratio of estimated to reported infections and deaths, ranging between 2.4 and 157 for infections and 0.65 to 27 for deaths. in our sample of 84 countries (total population of 4.675 billion), we estimate total infections at 88.5 (85-95.3, 95% credible interval (ci)) million and 600 (ci: 586-622) thousands by june 18 2020, 11.8 and 1.48 times larger than reported numbers respectively. under-counting has been larger earlier in the epidemic. for example, usa faced peak infection rate (of 395 thousands per day) when detection rate was less than 10% of daily new cases. the most affected countries (based on percent infected) to date include ecuador (18%), peru (16.6%), chile (15.5%), mexico (8.8%), iran (7.9%), qatar (7.3%), spain (7.1%), usa (5.3%), uk (5.2%), and netherlands (4.8%) (see figure 1-b) . despite the order-of-magnitude under-reporting of cases, however, herd immunity due to infection remains far from reach (figure 2-b) . the closest a a b. cc-by-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. (which was not certified by peer review)the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted june 26, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.24.20139451 doi: medrxiv preprint country has come to herd immunity is chile, which at its peak infection rate was 194 (ci: days away from infection of 80% of its total population. second, we quantify both significant heterogeneity, and notable consistency, across countries in terms of basic parameters of the epidemic. the estimated initial reproduction number re ranges between 1.24 (indonesia) and 10.28 (iran), with the median of 4.5 (iceland) (re estimates include significant uncertainty; see figure s6 for details). even absent endogenous reductions in contact due to realized risk, these initial rates may be higher than longer-term levels for most countries because of early exposures happening in denser social networks. cross-country variations also reflect differences in population density, cultural practices, hygiene, as well as the timing of infection and thus early preparedness. we find support for the impact of weather on reproduction number, with the multiplier (rw) developed by xu and colleagues (7) explaining transmission rates closely (rw 0.76 ). we estimate the global infection fatality rate (ifr) to have been 0.68% (ci: 0.64%-0.70%), with a wide range (figure 2 -c) between 0.14% (ci: 0.12-0.16; qatar) and 2.08% (ci: 1.73-2.28; italy). the variations in ifr are primarily due to demographics with elderly having much higher risks (9) . hospital availability and treatment effectiveness provide a second mechanism affecting fatality rates. we find that hospitalization can bring down risk of death to 39.5% (std: 17.8%; miqr: 7.9%) of baseline. the model explains much variability in ifr with minimum country-level variability in basic fatality parameters. nevertheless, the quality of fit deteriorates in a handful of countries. for example, a ratio of simulated to reported deaths below one in a handful of countries signals that the model expected fewer deaths than observed. notably, we find it hard to reconcile, using only the model's mechanisms, the low fatality rates in qatar, singapore, and thailand relative to infection statistics, and high fatality rates in belgium and france.third, testing regulates transmission dynamics though a few mechanisms. by providing early warning, testing sets in motion the behavioral and policy responses essential to reducing transmission rate and controlling the epidemic. the exponential nature of contagion amplifies small early differences, such that a few days' difference in response time can lead to large differences in peak infection and final epidemic size. behavioral and policy responses to changes in infection risk are adopted rapidly, on average reducing effective contact (and thus transmission) rates in 13.5 (std: 7.1; miqr: 3.8) days. those responses are relaxed when risks attenuate, though down-regulating risk perception is slower (mean: 70.0; std: 31.2; miqr: 49.2 days). given limited data on rebounds in infections to date, how quickly perceived risk is downgraded is a major source of uncertainty in projecting the future of the pandemic. we also find that those with a positive test reduce their infectious contacts to a fraction of the original level (mean: 11.8% of original contact rate; std: 2.3%; miqr: 11.0%). these reductions are especially important because asymptomatic individuals are estimated to be less infectious than symptomatic ones (mean: 28%; std: 0.68%; miqr: 2.4%). finally, by regulating infection rates through the previous two channels, testing also 'flattens the curve', allowing a larger fraction of those in need of medical care to be hospitalized. together, these mechanisms create an early race between testing and the spread of infection ( figure 3 ). when infection is ahead, detection is compromised (moving up into the darker shades in figure) , responses lag further, and exponential infection growth can overwhelm hospital capacity. high early test capacity and its rapid expansion (moving to the right in the figure), brings the epidemic to light, activates policy responses, and allow for control. 4 (panels a and b) shows one alternative testing scenario and counter-factual trajectories of pandemic to date. in this scenario, all countries shift their testing rates from baseline to 0.1% of population per day (a rate currently achieved by multiple countries, e.g. usa, australia, in figure 3 ). the shift happens on march 11, 2020 (the date covid-19 was officially designated as a pandemic). such enhanced testing would have reduced total cases from 88.5 millions to 53.2 (ci: 50.5-59.6) millions. corresponding reduction in deaths would have been from 600k to 403k(ci: 377k-438k).by making additional assumptions on future testing and responses, the model can inform future trajectories. we explore a few projections out to spring 2021 that exclude vaccine and treatment availability. figure 4 (panels c and d) shows projections under three scenarios: i) using the current country-specific testing rates and response functions moving forward; ii) if enhanced testing (of 0.1% per day) is adopted on july 1 st 2020p; and iii) if sensitivity of contact rate to perceived risk is set to 8 (approx. 70 th percentile of estimated value across countries), leaving testing at current levels. contrary to the impacts of early differences in testing ( figure 4-a) , the reductions in future cases from additional testing (ii) are rather modest (from 1.55 in i to 1.37 billions in ii), because recognition of epidemic is no longer the bottleneck to response. both these scenarios project a very large burden of new cases in the fall 2020, with hundreds of millions of cases concentrated in a few countries estimated a b c d . cc-by-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. (which was not certified by peer review)the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted june 26, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06. 24.20139451 doi: medrxiv preprint to have insufficient responses given perceived risks (primarily india, but also bangladesh, pakistan, and usa). in contrast, changes in response policies would make a major difference. scenario iii brings down future cases sharply, to as low as 153 (ci: 147-170) millions (cumulatively) by the end of winter. across scenarios, we find that the infection rate in each country usually peaks and then stabilizes at a lower and slowly declining linear rate, in some cases after damped oscillations (i.e. second waves). these (approximately) steady-state infection rates are at levels that motivate just enough policy and behavioral response to bring effective reproduction number re to 1. faster rates lead to exponential growth, raise alarms and bring down contacts; slower ones lead to relaxation of policies bringing the reproduction number back up to 1. those post-peak infection rates vary widely across countries and depend on risk perception parameters, time constants, and contact sensitivity to risk, as well as weather and susceptible population size. in this scenario we shift both testing and contact sensitivity to perceived risks to arguably more realistic values between current ones and those in scenarios ii and iii in figure 4 -c. specifically, on july 1 st 2020 we shift test rates to a value 20% between the current rates and 0.1% per day (which increases testing in most countries and reduces it in a few). similarly, sensitivity of contacts to perceived risk is shifted to 20% of the way between estimated country-level values and a high value of 8. resulting infection and death rates at the end of this period reflect the post-peak burden of the disease discussed above and are estimated at 0.01% (ci: 0.005-0.045) and 7.9e-5% (ci: 4.4e . appendix s4 provides projections for all countries. note that projections are highly sensitive to assumed testing, behavioral, and policy responses in the scenario. as such they should be interpreted as indicators of potential risk and not precise predictions of future cases; more rigorous testing and reductions in contacts in response to risk perception will significantly reduce future cases while laxer response and normalization of risks can lead to overwhelming breakouts. to enable empirical estimation and considering limits to data availability at a global scale, the model includes important simplifications and uncertainties that should temper the interpretation of the results. first, by analyzing an aggregate, country-level model, we abstract away much heterogeneity, from social networks to super-spreaders and local events. moreover, we offer no explanation for the underlying heterogeneity in reproduction numbers across countries. second, lacking hospitalization data across the world, the model's hospital sector includes additional uncertainty. similarly, our estimated behavioral and policy response functions do not tease apart the impact of various determinants such as national and local policies, business and event closures, use of personal protective equipment, reductions in physical interactions, and a host of other contributors. thus, results are not informative about the effectiveness of specific policies, and extrapolation of response function in future scenarios includes unknown uncertainties. for example, if normalization of risk reduced response magnitude in the second wave, our projections would miss that and prove optimistic. finally, absent explicit travel network our results would under-estimate the risk of the reintroduction of the disease in locations that have contained the epidemic.this paper provides a systemic view of the covid-19 pandemic globally. by incorporating testing capacity and prioritization, hospitalization, and risk perception and responses into an epidemiological model, we are able to closely match widely varying country-specific trajectories of the epidemic. our model explains the observed heterogeneities primarily through three pathways. first, estimates point to much variance in initial reproduction numbers across countries. this heterogeneity is not surprising given that reproduction number is very much a function of human behaviors and interaction is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. (which was not certified by peer review)the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted june 26, 2020. . environments. nevertheless, our study was not designed to tease out the sources of that heterogeneity, an important task that requires other types of data and analysis. second, the course of the epidemic is also significantly impacted by risk perception and behavioral and policy responses that vary notably across different countries. finally, we show that differences in testing rates play an important role in shaping those trajectories.despite those variations, we also find much that is consistent across the globe: a) we estimate that just over half of the infections are asymptomatic, consistent with detailed estimates from smaller samples (1, 13, 14) . b) we estimate that asymptomatic individuals are about a third as infective as symptomatic patients. c) in our model, hospitalization brings down fatality substantially, highlighting the crucial importance of keeping cases below hospital capacity. d) we find an average global infection fatality rate close to 0.68%. this is consistent with growing evidence on ifr (11, 28) . our estimates for ifr change predictably with age, and require few other predictors and no country-specific factors to stay consistent with the data. e) an order of magnitude under-reporting of cases is the norm across most countries, with a few percent of population already infected across many nations; nevertheless, herd immunity remains distant. f) finally, absent notable improvements in country level responses or breakthroughs in vaccination or treatment, the outlook for the epidemic remains grim, with most nations settling into a steady state of cases and deaths that, while below their peaks, are troublingly large. 20 . cc-by-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. (which was not certified by peer review)the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted june 26, 2020. the model simulates the evolution of covid-19 epidemic, risk perception and response, testing, hospitalization, and fatality at the level of a country. here we explain key equations and structures in each sector, followed by complete listing of model equations and parameters in s5.the model is a derivative of the well-known seir (susceptible, exposed, infectious, recovered) framework for simulating infection dynamics. figure s5 provides an overview of key population groups and the population movements among them 1 . . we assume demand for testing and hospitalization are driven by symptoms, so all asymptomatic patients will be in the latter category.1 in the equations below we use short-hands to simplify mathematical notations. the full model documentation uses full variable names. table s1 provides the mapping between the short-hands and the full names, as well as the sources and equations for those variables and parameters discussed below.. cc-by-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted june 26, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.24.20139451 doi: medrxiv preprint from these infectious categories, resolution flows (r) take individuals to either recovered (r) or dead (d) states, with corresponding subscripts u, c, ch, and uh for stocks and uu, uhch etc. for flows. given the differences in severity and potential survival extension due to hospitalization, we distinguish between resolution delay for those in hospital (hospitalized resolution time; h) and those not hospitalized (post-detection phase resolution time; r). we use first order exponential delays for all lags, though sensitivity analyses showed very little impact of using higher order delays.the infection rate (rsp) controls the flow from s to p and depends on infectious contacts (ci), fraction of total population (n) that is susceptible, and weather effect on transmission (w). the latter is a function of rw, the country-level projections for impact of weather on covid-19 transmission risk year-round developed by xu and colleagues (7) and a parameter, sensitivity to weather (sw), to be estimated:infectious contacts depend on the reference force of infection (), various infectious sub-populations (and their relative transmission rates; ma for asymptomatic and mt for confirmed), and contacts relative to normal (fc), which captures behavioral and policy responses as a fractional multiplier to baseline infectious contacts:in this equation we separate various stocks (of i and p) into asymptomatic (a superscript) and symptomatic (s superscript). that distinction is treated analytically using a zero-inflated poisson distribution that is discussed in the next section. in light of evidence on the short serial interval for covid-19, likely below the incubation period (29, 30), we do not distinguish the infectivity of pre-symptomatic individuals from those post onset. contagion dynamics start from patient zero arrival time, t0, another estimated parameter. the key mechanisms regulating the population flows among these stocks are discussed below, and a schematic of important relationships is provided in figure s6 .five parameters are estimated in the equations discussed above. one of them (sw) is global (i.e. assumed identical across countries; see the estimation section below for details on the distinction between global and country-specific parameters) and the remaining four are country-specific: , mt, ma, and t0.. cc-by-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted june 26, 2020. covid-19 infection varies in acuity, from asymptomatic to life-threatening. acuity of disease affects notonly baseline fatality risk, but also testing and hospitalization decisions which impact official records of infection and fatality rates. since movement between population groups via testing or hospitalization is itself a function of acuity, to allow for consistent inference of mean acuity across different population groups, we use an analytical framework to track acuity levels. this framework, which we adapted from prior research (17) , obviates the need to disaggregate the population by different acuity levels (which would prohibitively raise the computational costs for estimation).specifically, we represent acuity using a zero-inflated poisson distribution. this distribution combines two subpopulations -one with poisson-distributed acuity levels with mean covid acuity (c), and another additional asymptomatic fraction with zero acuity, which is the zero-inflated component. the sum of those with zero acuity from the poisson part of the population and the second group is the total asymptomatic fraction (a). we assume this asymptomatic group is not given priority in testing or hospitalization, and is not at risk of death. thus they will always follow the     pathway. the pathways for the remaining population depend on acuity and its impacts on testing, hospitalization, and death. note that the concept of acuity defined here only needs to have a monotonic relationship with tangible symptoms and risk factors and it does not have a one-to-one relationship with any real world measure of acuity, and as such is better seen as a mathematical construct that informs modeling rather than a real-world variable with clinical definition.from this framework two parameters, a and c, are estimated as country specific parameters with limited variability across countries. . cc-by-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted june 26, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.24.20139451 doi: medrxiv preprintthe testing sector reads the active test rate (tt) for each country as exogenous input data (see appendix s3for pre-processing details for this data). a fraction of this total test rate, typically small, is allocated to postmortem testing of covid-19 victims who have not been previously confirmed (post mortem tests total, tpm). specifically, of the deaths of unconfirmed infectious individuals (whether hospitalized or not), a certain fraction of fatalities screened post mortem (npm) will be identified true post-mortem tests. we anchor the npm to fraction covid death in hospitals previously tested (ndch). the rationale for this anchoring is that on the margin if there are many unidentified covid patients in hospitals, the chances are that the system lacks enough testing capacity and thus post-mortem testing should also be less thorough:we experimented other functional forms with a free parameter connecting the two constructs, but following our conservative estimation principle decided against including that free parameter in the final model. we feared that absent clear observables to identify this additional parameter (e.g. on country-specific policies regulating post-mortem testing) the degree of freedom would improve the fit but potentially for the wrong reason.the where the multiplier recent infections to test (mit), captures the sensitivity of negative test demand to recent infection reports.to allocate the available tests (tnet) between these two sources of demand, we use an analytical logic that allocates testing based on acuity of symptoms. the basic idea is that through self selection and screening by testing centers, people who have more symptoms or other signals that correlate with covid infection (e.g. high exposure risk) are more likely to be tested. we assume each unit of acuity increases the likelihood that an individual gets tested, based on a variable prob missing symptom, pms. this variable represents the probability that each acuity unit fails to convince the testing decision process to test a given individual, i.e.how selectively and sparingly tests are conducted. specifically, in this model an individual with k acuity units is tested with probability:we assume the negative test demand is coming from a population with a poisson-distributed, unit average acuity level (n=1) for symptoms of non-covid influenza-like illnesses. the test demand from covid . cc-by-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted june 26, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.24.20139451 doi: medrxiv preprint patients also comes from a poisson distribution of acuity, but with mean c. with the poisson distribution and given a level of  and pms, one can calculate the fraction of each demand source that would be tested:we therefore need to find the pms that allows test supply to match demand that is satisfied, specifically, by solving the following equation for pms*:having solved for p*ms (numerically), we analytically calculate the average acuity level for those positively tested (cp: average acuity of positively tested ) and those either not tested or having received a false negative result (cn). specifically, if test sensitivity was 100%, the average acuity for those not tested would be:the acuity level for those tested could then be found based on the conservation of total acuity across those positively tested and those not. starting with this basic specification we further account for the sensitivity of covid test (st) to calculate the values of cp and cn. we parametrize sensitivity at 70%, which is the estimated sensitivity for the pcr-based tests used as the primary diagnosis method of current infections of covid-19 (4, 5) .overall, the testing rates that are determined by solving for * , combined with sensitivity of tests, inform the fraction of covid positive individuals transitioning from pre-detection (ip) to confirmed vs. unconfirmed states (ic or ich vs. iu or iuh), while the calculated  values inform the likelihood of hospitalization and fatality rates, as discussed next.the testing sector includes the following two country level parameters that are estimated: nst, mit.the hospitalization sector of the model starts with each country's nominal hospital capacity (hn) in total hospital beds. in practice, geographic variation in hospital density and demand creates imperfect matching of available beds with cases of covid-19 at any point in time, e.g. because some potential capacity is physically distant from current covid hotspots. this imperfect matching means some of the nominal hospital capacity is effectively unavailable at any time, especially in larger, less densely populated countries. we therefore calculate effective hospital capacity (he) by considering geographic density of hospital beds (bed per square kilometer; dh):where the * represents a large reference hospital density of 6.06 beds per km 2 (which is the value of for south korea). the parameter sdh (impact of population density on hospital availability) is estimated.effective capacity is allocated between potential hospital demand (hcd) from covid-19 cases and the regular demand for hospital beds from all other conditions (which we assume equals pre-pandemic effective hospital capacity). we assume that covid-19 patients will have higher priority for hospitalization compared to regular demand. specifically, we assume that fraction of regular demand allocated (mhr) would be the . cc-by-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted june 26, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.24.20139451 doi: medrxiv preprint square of that for covid demand (mhc), = 2 , and solve the resulting hospital capacity allocation problem analytically:we determine the covid demand for hospitalization based on a screening process similar to that for testing. two types of covid patients may seek hospitalization: those with confirmed test results and those without.the former are more likely to seek hospital treatment. we first calculate a parameter analogous to pms in the testing sector that informs the demand from confirmed covid patients for hospitalization. this parameter, the pmas confirmed for hospital demand (pmhc) is determined based on acuity level of confirmed (ct) and reference covid hospitalization fraction confirmed (rh), an estimated parameter capturing the overall need for hospitalization among covid patients:for unconfirmed covid patients we scale the analogue of this parameter (pmhu) based on how much priority non-covid patients generally receive:this formulation ensures that: 1) confirmed covid patients are more likely to be hospitalized, but also that 2) if there is ample hospital capacity (mhr~1), then confirmed and unconfirmed covid patients will receive similar priority for the same level of acuity. in short, the pm. values determine hospital demand by confirmed and unconfirmed covid patients, which add up to hcd. the latter determines the fraction of hospital demand that is met. analogous to the testing sector, this fraction along with demand determines the flow of individuals from the pre-detection (ip) state to hospitalized vs. non-hospitalized states (ich or iuh vs. ic or iu). matching demand to allocated capacity also allows us to calculate the realized probability of missing acuity signal at hospitals (p*m) for confirmed and unconfirmed patients. as in the testing sector, those probabilities let us approximate for the expected acuity levels for covid patients in and out of hospital, as well as tested vs. not-tested, i.e. ct, ch, u, and uh. these average acuity levels in turn inform fatality rates for each group.the hospital sector includes two country level estimated parameter with limited variation across countries: sdh and rh.for patients in each of the u, c, ch, and uh groups we specify the infection fatality rate (f), as:the parameter base fatality rate for unit acuity (fb) sets the baseline for fatality rate. sensitivity of fatality rate to acuity (sf) determines how fatality changes with estimated acuity levels; more severe cases are expected to have higher fatality rates. hospitalization reduces fatality rates, expressed as the relative impact of treatment on fatality rate (shf). the function incorporates the impact of age distribution on fatality rates. for age effect, we calculate a risk factor for each country based on its age distribution and the relative fatality risks for covid patients in different ages documented in prior work (9) . we normalize this factor . cc-by-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted june 26, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.24.20139451 doi: medrxiv preprint against its value for china where the original study was conducted. given the well-established impact of age on fatality, this factor is directly multiplied into the infection fatality equations.overall, the fatality sector includes three parameters that are estimated at the country level, with limited variance across countries, those are: , , and .note on comorbidities and fatality: we also explored including three comorbidities but found the estimates unreliable and therefore they are not included in the main specification of the model. those comorbidities include obesity, chronic disease, and liver disease. the effects we explored for each were: (.) = (.) (.) , where we used the following country-level indicators from the world health organization (23), normalized by the average across all countries (d(.)):for obesity: prevalence of obesity among adults, bmi 30 (age-standardized estimate) (%)for chronic health issues: probability (%) of dying between age 30 and exact age 70 from any of cardiovascular disease, cancer, diabetes, or chronic respiratory disease for liver disease: liver cirrhosis, age-standardized death rates (15+), per 100,000 populationin equation 3 we noted that contacts relative to normal (fc) regulates infection rates. this factor ranges between a minimum (min contact fraction; cmin) and 1 as a function of the relative utility from normal activities (un) compared to utility from limited activities (ul) in light of additional risks associated with normal activity patterns:the utilities from normal and limited activities are specified as . cc-by-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted june 26, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.24.20139451 doi: medrxiv preprint overall, the risk perception and response sector includes the following five country-specific parameters that are estimated: cmin, ru, rd, , and wr.table s1 summarizes the main equations discussed in appendix s1, providing the mapping between full variable names and the short forms. it also includes all estimated model parameters, as well as those specified based on prior research. table s1 -mapping between full variable names and their short form for the subset of variables and parameters discussed in s1. also included are equations explained above and sources for other variables. is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted june 26, 2020. . . cc-by-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted june 26, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.24.20139451 doi: medrxiv preprintthe model we estimate is nonlinear and complex, and any estimation framework is unlikely to have clean analytical solutions or provable bounds on errors and biases. therefore, in designing our estimation procedure, we set out to be conservative. specifically: we use a likelihood function that accommodates overdispersion and autocorrelation (negative binomial); we utilize a hierarchical bayesian framework to couple parameter estimates across different countries which reduces the risk of over-fitting the data; and we use the conceptual definitions of parameters and their expected similarity across countries to inform the magnitude of that coupling across countries. compared to more common choices in similar estimation settings, these choices tend to widen the credible regions for our estimates and reduce the quality of the fit between model and data. in return, we think the results may be more reliable for projection, more informative about the underlying processes, and better reflective of uncertainties in such complex estimation settings.the model is a deterministic system of ordinary differential equations with a set of known and unknown parameters. the known parameters are those specified based on the existing literature and do not play an active role in estimation. the unknown parameters can be categorized into those that vary across different countries and those that are the same across all countries (i.e. general parameters). the estimation method is designed to identify both the most likely value and the credible regions for the unknown parameters, given the data on reported cases and deaths (and for a subset of countries, the excess deaths). this is done through a combination of estimating the most likely parameter values in a likelihood based framework, and using markov chain monte carlo simulations to quantify the uncertainties in parameters and projections.we first introduce the 3 different components of the likelihood function we use: the fit to time series data, the random effects component coupling country-level parameters, and the penalty for excess mortality. then we explain the implementation details.define model calculations for expected reported cases and deaths for country i as ij(t) (with index j specifying cases and deaths) and the observed data for those variables as yij(t); the country-level vector of unknown parameters as and the general unknown parameters as . note that vector includes several parameters, each specifying an unknown model parameter, such as impact of treatment on fatality, or total asymptomatic fraction, for country i. the model can be summarized as a function f that produces predictions for expected cases and deaths for each country given the general and country-specific parameters:we use a negative binomial distribution to specify the likelihood of observing the y values given  and . specifically, the logarithm of likelihood for observing the data series y given model predictions ( ,) is:where (dropping time index for clarity):. cc-by-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted june 26, 2020. summing the lt function over time provides the full (log) likelihood for the observed data given a parameterization of the model. the negative binomial likelihood function includes two parameters,  and  which determine the mean and the scaling/shape of the observed outcomes. the second parameter, , provides the flexibility needed fit outcomes with fat tails and auto-correlation. this parameter could itself be subject to search in the optimization process. specifically, we assume that:thus we create a (set of) country specific parameter(s) ( ) and two general parameters ( ) which should be estimated along with the conceptual model parameters. the country level scale ( ) implicitly assesses the reliability and inherent variability in country level reports, and the general ones inform the variability in case data vs. deaths. we augment the vectors  and  to include these scaling parameters as well.up to this point we have not included any relationship among country specific parameters, . this independence assumption would allow parameters representing the same underlying concept to vary widely across different countries. such treatment, by providing more flexibility, enhances the model's fit to historical data. however, it ignores the conceptual link that exists for a given parameter across countries, potentially allowing the model to fit the data for the wrong reasons (i.e. using parameter values that do not correspond to meaningful real world concepts). the result would likely be less reliable and also not robust for future projections. we therefore define a hierarchical bayesian framework to account for the potential dependencies among model parameters. specifically, we assume the same conceptual parameters (e.g. impact of treatment on fatality), across different countries, are coming from an underlying normal distribution with an unknown mean (to be estimated) and a pre-specified standard deviation. this assumption is similar to the use of "random effect" models common in regression frameworks, though we deviate from canonical random effect models by pre-specifying the standard deviation. in fact it is possible to estimate the standard deviation across countries as well (and to obtain better fits to data), but adding those degrees of freedom ignores qualitatively relevant insights about the level of coupling across different countries for each parameter, and thus results may fit the data better but for the wrong reasons. for example, some parameters, such as patient zero arrival time, could be very different across countries, whereas parameters reflecting innate properties of the sars-cov-2 virus itself (e.g. total asymptomatic fraction (a)) or those determining fatality (e.g. base fatality rate for unit acuity (fb)) should be very similar across different countries. allowing the model to determine the variance for the latter will lead to better fits: the model can find baseline fatality rates that easily match fatality variations across countries, and would expand the corresponding variance parameter accordingly. however, as a result the estimation algorithm will have too easy a job: it will not require a precise balancing between hospitalization, impact of acuity on fatality, and post-mortem testing decisions to fit fatality data. thus, the estimates may well be less informative, or further from true underlying processes and the general characteristics of the disease which we care about. the implementation of this random effect introduces another element to the overall likelihood function:here ik represents the k th parameter for country i, and  is the (estimated) average across countries for the k th parameter. k is the pre-specified allowable variability for the k th parameter across different countries.. cc-by-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted june 26, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.24.20139451 doi: medrxiv preprint specifying these standard deviations adds a subjective element to the estimation process. however, we note that subjective elements are ultimately indispensable in any modeling activity: from specifying the model boundary to the level of aggregation, use of various functional forms, and choice of likelihood functions, these choices are built on subjective assessments that experts bring to a modeling project. absent our conceptually informed variability factors, we would need to make the assumption that country-level parameters are independent, or that our complex estimation process would correctly identify the true dependencies among those parameters. we think both those alternatives are inferior in the chosen method. so here we focus on transparently documenting and explaining those assumptions. table s2 summarizes the estimated model parameters, their estimated values (mean across countries and mean of inter-quartile range) and the assumed variability factor (k) for each. sw sensitivity to weather 0.765 (global parameter so the other metrics do not apply) *given the wide range and potential long tail for these parameters the log10 transformation is used in specifying the dispersion penalty (equation 27) and variability factors are reported as 10  , where  is used in equation 27. ** these parameters are expected to be less variable across countries and thus are assigned small variability allowances compared to their mean.. cc-by-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted june 26, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.24.20139451 doi: medrxiv preprint finally, we include a likelihood-based penalty term to allow model predictions be informed by excess mortality data collected by various news agencies and researchers for a subset of countries in our sample. these data provide snapshots of excess mortality (compared to a historical baseline) for a window of time in each country. subtracting from total excess mortality the covid-19 deaths officially recorded in that window offers a data point for excess mortality not accounted for in official data (ei). we can calculate in the model the counter-part for this construct: the simulated mortality that is not included in the simulated reported covid-19 deaths (  ). there is uncertainty in these excess mortality data: the historical baselines used by various sources do not adjust for demographic change, excess mortality may be due to factors other than covid-19, and some of it may be due to changes in healthcare availability and utilization motivated by covid-19 but not directly attributable to the disease (for example when surgeries are delayed, hospitalization is avoided, or heart conditions are ignored). excess mortality may also be reduced due to reduced traffic accidents (in light of physical distancing policies) and pollution related deaths. given these uncertainties, we use the following penalty function to keep the simulated unaccounted excess mortality close to data:this penalty could be seen as a likelihood coming from the probability distribution ( ) = should be attributed to covid-19 deaths, but that there is significant uncertainty around this, so some 20% variation across this figure is quite plausible (70%-110% of data). however, numbers outside of this range start to impose increasingly large penalties, so that very large deviation becomes unlikely.combining these three components, we obtain the full likelihood function used in the analysis:for each country we include the lt component from the first day they have reached 0.1% of their cumulative cases to-date, or a minimum of 50 cumulative cases. this excludes very early rates that are both unreliable and which, given very small estimated model predictions for infection, could lead to unreasonably large likelihood contributions.the model includes a large number of parameters to be estimated: a general parameter for the impact of weather, 2 general parameters for , and 21 parameters for each country that are coupled together based on the random effects framework described above. out of those 1 parameter is for and the rest are informing various features of disease transmission, testing, hospitalization, and risk perception and response. with a sample of 84 countries, this would lead to about 1800 parameters to be estimated. a direct optimization approach to this problem suffers from potential risk of getting stuck in local optima, and direct use of mcmc methods to find the promising region of parameter space suffers from the curse of dimensionality. we therefore designed the following 4-step procedure to find more reliable solutions to both problems.1) we estimate the model with the full parameter vector for a smaller number of countries with larger outbreaks (3-5 countries). we use the powell direction search method implemented in vensim simulation software for this step. the method is a local search approach though it has features that allows it to escape local optima in some cases. we restart the optimization from various random points in the feasible parameter space and track the convergence of those restarts to unique local peaks. we stop this process when we are repeatedly landing on the same local peaks in the parameter . cc-by-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted june 26, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.24.20139451 doi: medrxiv preprint space. this procedure showed that local peaks do exist, but they are not many; for example within 100 restarts we may find 2-4 distinct peaks. this provides a coherent set of starting points for  and  for next steps.2) we go through iterations of the following two steps: a) conduct country-specific optimizations with 50 restarts to find the vector of i given the  and  from first optimization or from the step b. b)conduct a global optimization, including all countries but fixing i and optimizing on  (and  ;though that is simply the mean across country level parameters from previous round). we stop when iterations offer little improvement from one round to the next (less than 0.05% improvement in loglikelihood). 3) we conduct a full optimization allowing all parameters (i,  and  ) to change, starting from the point found in the last iteration of step 2. this step finds the exact peak on the likelihood landscape which is the best-fitting parameter set for the model. 4) for the mcmc, theoretically one should conduct the sampling from all model parameters in the full model. however, our experiments showed that the large dimensionality of the parameter space requires an infeasible number of samples to achieve adequate mixing and ensure reliable credible regions for parameters and projections. to overcome this challenge we note that the parameters of different countries are connected to each other only through  and  , and these general parameters are rather insensitive to dynamics in each country. the insensitivity is due to the fact that a single country only contributes about 1% to the general parameters' values, and within a typical mcmc the country-level parameters often can't change more than 10% before the resulting samples become highly unlikely. therefore, one can conduct an approximate country-level mcmc by fixing the general parameters at those from step 3, and only sampling from the i for each country. the mcmc algorithm used is one designed for exploring high dimensional parameter spaces using differential evolution and self-adaptive randomized subspace sampling (19) . using this method we obtain good mixing and stable outcomes (robin-brooks-gelman psfr convergence statistic remaining under 1.1) after about 600,000 samples (the burn-in period). we continue the mcmc for each country for 1 million samples and then randomly take a subsample of those points after the burn-in period for the next step. 5) the resulting subsamples for different countries from step 4 are assembled together to create a final sample of parameters for the full model to conduct projections and sensitivity analysis at the global scale. uncertainties in the handful of global parameters is not identified in this procedure, but can be quantified by assessing the sensitivity of the global likelihood surface to changes in those parameters.the process above is automated using a python script that controls the simulation software (vensim). we conduct the analysis using a parallel computing feature of vensim on a windows server with 48 cores. after compiling the simulation model into c++ code (which speeds up calculations significantly), and using a simulation time step of 0.25 days, it takes about 20 hours to complete the estimation for 84 countries. full analysis code is available online at https://github.com/tseyanglim/covidglobal.. cc-by-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted june 26, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.24.20139451 doi: medrxiv preprint s3-data pre-processing getting contemporaneous, comprehensive, national-level data on covid-19 is a challenge. the most widely-cited data aggregators, such as the johns hopkins center for systems science and engineering's covid-19 database (31) , ourworldindata portal (3), and the us-focused covid tracking project (21), get their data from the same few official sources, such as the us centers for disease control and prevention (cdc), the european cdc (ecdc), and the world health organization (who). these official agencies in turn get their data from national and subnational public health authorities, which ultimately rely on reports from hospitals, clinics, and private and public health labs.as a result, idiosyncrasies in the ground-level data collection processes permeate virtually all sources of aggregate data. most notably, data collection involves time lags, which can differ from source to source. daily death counts could reflect the date of actual death or the date a death is registered or reported; different uk government sources, for instance, use each of these metrics. 2 daily infection or case counts could include the total new cases reported on a given date, or the total cases confirmed from that date; the latter would result in some 'backfill' whereby case counts for previous days can continue to increase for some time as delayed confirmations come in. daily counts of tests conducted could report samples collected, samples processed, results reported, or a mix of these; the us cdc, for instance, reports a mix of testing by date of sample collection and date of sample delivery to the cdc. 3 aside from differences in unit of measure (people vs. tests vs. samples), there may be different time lags involved as well. in addition to these idiosyncrasies, testing data in particular is also patchy for many countries, even as testing has become more widespread. the who does not report country-by-country testing, nor does the jhu covid map outside the us. furthermore, there are sometimes irregular delays in the reporting of test results, which can create occasional unexpected spikes in reported numbers of tests, infections, or both. 4 depending on the specifics of how daily infection and test counts are reported, there can in some cases be a disjunction between the two. because confirmed case counts largely depend on positive test results, test and infection counts should be correlated -ceteris paribus, a day with a lot of samples collected for testing should see more confirmed cases attributed to it, while a day with no sample collection should see no cases. but since cases may not be reported by the date of the test, and tests may not be reported by the date of sample collection, officially reported numbers can get out of sync in either direction. this problem is most salient when there are clear weekly cycles in daily rates. in most of the world, particularly western countries, daily test rates are far lower on weekends than during the week. as a result, infection numbers show a clear weekly cyclical component as well. but the weekly cycles in testing and infection numbers for a given country do not always line up. our model explicitly accounts for the effect of testing on reported infections, but we do not explicitly model the country-level idiosyncrasies of reporting and how they vary between test data and infections. instead we account for any such lags in pre-processing of the data to align testing and case data.the weekly cycle occurs in many countries' death rate data as well, where it presents a different problem. a weekly cycle in testing is a behaviourally realistic part of the data-generation process, as many labs, clinics, or other testing sites for instance may be closed on weekends. as testing provides the window on the state of confirmed infections, a comparable cycle in confirmed cases is to be expected as well. by linking case confirmations to testing, our model explicitly accounts for this limited visibility on the true state of the epidemic. however, a weekly cycle in death rates almost certainly reflects different limitations of the data-2 https://blog.ons.gov.uk/2020/03/31/counting-deaths-involving-the-coronavirus-covid-19/ 3 https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/cases-updates/previous-testing-in-us.html 4 see e.g. https://www.wcvb.com/article/massachusetts-coronavirus-reporting-delay-due-to-quest-lab-itglitch/32288903# . cc-by-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted june 26, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.24.20139451 doi: medrxiv preprint generation process, typically to do with hospital staffing, 5 which we do not explicitly model. as such we need to address any weekly cycle in death rates through data pre-processing as well.to deal with these challenges, we developed a multi-step algorithm to pre-process our data before feeding it into the model for calibration. the algorithm is described below. it was implemented in python, largely using the pandas and numpy packages, and the code is available in full at: https://github.com/tseyanglim/covidglobal.the algorithm proceeds country-by-country, following these steps on each country. 1) examine daily cumulative test data; if data are insufficient (6 or fewer data points), drop country from the dataset.2) interpolate any missing daily cumulative test data points using a piecewise cubic hermite interpolating polynomial (pchip) spline. if the first reported infection is before the first reported cumulative test, also extrapolate cumulative tests back to the date of first reported infection. a. extrapolation to the date of first reported infection is necessary since both in the model and, to a large extent, in reality, reported infections require testing for confirmation. b. pchip spline interpolation yields a continuous monotonic function with a continuous first derivative, thus avoiding generating any anomalous rapid change in daily test rate. c. we used the implementation of pchip interpolation from the widely used scipy package for python. 6 3) calculate daily test rate as daily cumulative tests less the preceding day's cumulative test total:4) examine the original daily cumulative test data to estimate how much of the calculated daily test rate is based on interpolated vs. original data. a. daily test rates calculated based on mostly original data should be expected to include any weekly cycles or occasional irregularities that would also be reflected in daily infection counts. conversely, daily test rates calculated from cumulative test counts that are largely interpolated would not be expected to fully reproduce any such cycles or irregularities, since the interpolation produces a relatively smooth function. b. as a rule of thumb, we examine the cumulative test data for the second half of the time from the first test to the latest test. if fewer than half the days in that window have original cumulative test data, we consider the test data to be 'sparse', requiring further processing. 5 it may be argued that there are weekly cycles in large-scale human behaviour that may drive some true weekly cyclicality in the true rates of infection and death, and as such it may be wrong to consider such cycles to be artefacts of the datageneration process. however, we find this unlikely for a few reasons. first, weekly cycles in human interactions, largely driven by the work and school week and weekend, will have been significantly attenuated by widespread adoption of social distancing measures around the world. second and more importantly, variation in incubation period and time before development of symptoms means that any true cyclicality in the timing of initial infection will be further attenuated in the timing of symptom development. by the same logic, wide variability in the delay from symptom development to death means there should be minimal cyclicality, if any, in the timing of deaths, meaning any such cycles visible in the data are due to measurement and reporting lags. 6 https://docs.scipy.org/doc/scipy/reference/generated/scipy.interpolate.pchipinterpolator.html . cc-by-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted june 26, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.24.20139451 doi: medrxiv preprint 5) if the test data are not sparse, account for any potential lag or other reporting delay differences between daily test rate and daily infection rate using a time-shift algorithm to estimate any such lags or delays from the data and shift the test rate time series accordingly. the time-shift algorithm ensures that any weekly cycles present in the daily infection rate data are reflected in the daily test rate data and aligned as best as possible on date, thereby accounting for the fact that model-generated reported infections depends on testing but with no time lag between test and result. a. first, identify the weekly component of the time series of daily infection rate and daily test rate using a seasonal-trend decomposition based on loess (stl) procedure. 7 i. stl deconstructs time series data into several components, including a trend and a seasonal component over a specified period (weekly, in this case) as well as a residual. stl is an additive decomposition, and has the advantage of allowing the seasonal component to change over time (rather than being a fixed pattern repeated exactly across the whole time series). ii. we used the stl implementation from the statsmodels package for python. 8 b. shift the time series over a one-week range (from -2 to +4 days of lag between test and infection reporting), calculating the cross-correlation between the weekly seasonal component of the daily infection rate data and the daily test rate data for each time shift. c. identify the time shift within this range that maximizes the cross-correlation between the infection rate and test rate data, and shift the test rate data accordingly.6) if the test data are sparse, the spline interpolation will generally cut out some of any weekly cyclicality that may be present. visual inspection of daily test rates for countries with sparse test data also shows large, irregular spikes in reported tests are not uncommon, without necessarily having concomitant irregular spikes in reported daily infection rates. as such, rather than attempting to eliminate differences in reporting lags through the time-shift algorithm described above, we instead apply a data-smoothing algorithm to both daily test rate and daily infection rate, in order to reduce any cyclicality and irregular spikes. this smoothing allows the calibration of the main model to focus on matching the underlying trends in the data.in all cases, whether daily cumulative test data are sparse or not and whether infection and test rate data are smoothed or not, since weekly cycles in death data are reflective of reporting lags not captured in the model, daily death rate data is smoothed using the same algorithm.8) the smoothing algorithm used is designed first to conserve the total number of reported cases (tests, infections, or deaths), and second to preserve some degree of variation in the time series, as some noise may be informative and retaining some is important to the calibration of the model. a. starting from when the time series of daily rate (test or infection) exceeds a specified minimum value (5/day), calculate the rolling mean of the daily rate, using a centred moving window of 11 days. b. calculate the residual between each day's data point and the rolling mean for that day, and divide by the square root of the rolling mean, to get an adjusted deviation value:i. dividing by the square root of the rolling mean reflects a heuristic assumption that each daily rate (of infections, deaths, or tests) behaves as a poisson process (stdev of pois() =  0.5 ). 7 is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted june 26, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06. 24.20139451 doi: medrxiv preprint ii. the functional result of this adjustment is that both absolute and relative magnitudes of deviations from the rolling mean are given some weight -large relative deviations when absolute values are small (and data are noisier) are not ignored, but neither do they outweigh larger absolute (but smaller relative) deviations that occur when the mean is large, which is important since most of the time series data are growing significantly over the time horizon of the model. c. calculate thresholds for identifying dips and peaks in the data based on the median of the adjusted deviations,  one median absolute deviation (mad) of the adjusted deviations:i. using the median absolute deviation to determine thresholds for peaks and dips is robust to outliers in the deviations, which do arise occasionally in the data. ii. a threshold width of one mad is relatively narrow for outlier detection, but by inspection of the data, is about right for identifying most of the peaks and dips caused by weekly cycles in test, infection, and death rates, as well as larger outliers. d. once thresholds are calculated, iterate through the data points in the time series first forward in time from oldest to newest, filling in any 'dips' (data points with adjusted deviations below the lower threshold), then backward in time from newest to oldest, smoothing out any 'peaks' (data points with adjusted deviations above the upper threshold) that remain. repeat the process until all data points' adjusted deviations are within the originally calculated thresholds for the time series. i. we infer that the underlying processes generating dips and peaks are somewhat different. dips are generally the result of weekly cycles in the data, e.g. lower rates of testing or longer lags in death reporting that occur on weekends. peaks arise to some extent due to the same weekly processes, e.g. some deaths that occur on weekends only being recorded at the start of the next week. however, some peaks, especially larger ones, may result from irregular random delays in reporting, such as large batches of tests being held up due to logistical issues and then getting processed all at once. as such the smoothing procedure for dips vs. peaks is slightly different.e. the dip-filling step fills a fraction of each dip (specified as a smoothing factor) by redistributing data counts based on a multinomial draw from the subsequent few days following each dip. i. first, calculate the amount to fill based on the deviation and the smoothing factor specified, in this case 0.67:ii. calculate the amount redistributed from each of the following few (7) days +1 , +2 ,  + , = 7, based on a multinomial distribution as follows:where +1 , +2 ,  +7 are calculated as: iii. this formulation allows some redistribution from any of the subsequent few days whose adjusted deviations exceed the focal day's adjusted deviation, but with more redistribution from days with higher adjusted deviations.. cc-by-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted june 26, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.24.20139451 doi: medrxiv preprint f. the peak-smoothing step similarly redistributes a fraction of each peak, specified by the smoothing factor, to the preceding several days based on another multinomial draw.i. first, calculate the amount to redistribute similarly to the dip-filling step:ii. calculate the amount redistributed to each of the preceding several (14) iii. this formulation redistributes peaks to preceding days based on the calculated rolling mean counts of those days, on the assumption that the irregular delays that generate random spikes in counts are essentially random and equally likely to affect any given unit of data over a several-day span. as such, the probability that a unit showing up in a spike due to such delays comes from a given preceding day is simply proportional to the expected count for that day, as approximated by the rolling mean. g. by filling dips first before smoothing peaks, the combined algorithm largely addresses any peaks that are due primarily to weekly cycles during the dip-filling stage, such that remaining peaks that get smoothed tend to be the larger, irregular ones.. cc-by-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted june 26, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.24.20139451 doi: medrxiv preprint table s3 reports two quality of fit metrics for different countries and different time series. the first four columns report mean absolute error normalized by mean (maen) and the last four report the r-squared measures. errors for cumulative infection and deaths are followed by those for the new cases and deaths (flow variables). . cc-by-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. (which was not certified by peer review)the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted june 26, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.24.20139451 doi: medrxiv preprint figure s7 shows the visualization of fit between data and simulations for all the countries in our sample. these graphs include data and model outputs for reported new cases (blue; left axis in thousands per day) and deaths (red; right axis in thousands per day) starting from the beginning of the epidemic in each country until june 20. figure s7 -comparison of data and simulation. new cases in blue (left axis, in thousands per day) and new deaths (red, right axis).. cc-by-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. (which was not certified by peer review)the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted june 26, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.24.20139451 doi: medrxiv preprintestimates for true cumulative cases (blue; left axis in millions) and deaths (red; right axis in thousands) across different countries up to june 20 are reported in figure s8 . figure s9 shows the ratio of estimated excess deaths, i.e. covid-19 fatalities not reported as such, to reported excess deaths, i.e. deaths over historical baseline not accounted for by reported covid-19 deaths, for the countries for which such data are available.. cc-by-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. (which was not certified by peer review)the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted june 26, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.24.20139451 doi: medrxiv preprint figure s9 -ratio of estimated excess deaths to reported excess deaths.. cc-by-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. (which was not certified by peer review)the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted june 26, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.24.20139451 doi: medrxiv preprint figure s10 shows the initial reproduction number (re) occurring in each country. reproduction numbers are changing dynamically and transient dynamics may lead to larger than equilibrium numbers if maximum re values were used. we therefore use the 90 th percentile of simulated reproduction number in this graph. also note the large credible intervals for these estimates, partly coming from changes in what is included in the 90 th percentile (sometimes it includes the highest values and sometimes it does not), as well as the inherent uncertainty when both reproduction number and behavioral and policy responses are estimated: one can have smaller initial re and smaller response functions, or larger values for both, and stay consistent with the data. figure s10 -maximum reproduction number re for each country's outbreak . cc-by-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. (which was not certified by peer review)the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted june 26, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.24.20139451 doi: medrxiv preprint parameter estimates figure s11 reports most likely estimates for the vector of country-specific parameters (i). the figure also includes 95% credible intervals for these parameter estimates.. cc-by-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. (which was not certified by peer review)the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted june 26, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.24.20139451 doi: medrxiv preprint . cc-by-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. (which was not certified by peer review)the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted june 26, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.24.20139451 doi: medrxiv preprint figure s11 -parameter estimates and 95% credible regions for country-specific parameters.. cc-by-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. (which was not certified by peer review)the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted june 26, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.24.20139451 doi: medrxiv preprint . cc-by-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. (which was not certified by peer review)the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted june 26, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.24.20139451 doi: medrxiv preprint figure s12 reports country-level projections for new cases and deaths based on the following assumptions (consistent with those reported in figure 2 -d in the main paper). we shift both testing and contact sensitivity to perceived risks to arguably more realistic values between current ones that capture some improvements but not a completely different behavior. specifically, on july 1 st 2020 we shift test rate to a value 20% between the current rates and 0.1% per day (which increases testing in most countries and reduces it in a few). similarly, sensitivity of contacts to perceived risk is shifted to 20% of the way between estimated country-level values and a high value of 8 that is. figure s12 -country level projections until spring 2021. daily cases (in thousands, blue, left axis) and daily deaths (red, right axis) are graphed.. cc-by-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. (which was not certified by peer review)the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted june 26, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.24.20139451 doi: medrxiv preprint646 deaths in china at the start of the decade. the mortality rate for 2019-ncov is not as high (approximately 2-3%), but its rapid propagation has resulted in the activation of protocols to stop its spread. this pathogen has the potential to become a pandemic. it is therefore vital to follow the personal care recommendations issued by the world health organisation.  2020 elsevier espaa, s.l.u. and sociedad espaola de medicina interna (semi). all rights reserved.en diciembre de 2019 se identificaron en wuhan (china) una serie de casos de neumona originados por un nuevo coronavirus. este nuevo coronavirus tiene distintas denominaciones: 2019-ncov segn la oms y sars-cov-2 segn el comit internacional de taxonomia de virus. la enfermedad que lo causa se ha denominado 2019-ncov 1 . el 7 de enero de 2020, el nuevo coronavirus fue anunciado oficialmente por las autoridades chinas como el agente causal de dichas infecciones 1 .los coronavirus son virus envueltos de arn de sentido positivo no segmentados que pertenecen a la familia coronaviridae y al orden nidovirales, y se distribuyen ampliamente en humanos y otros mamferos, originando mltiples afecciones que van desde una gripe comn hasta la muerte 2 .hasta el 13 de febrero de 2020 varios casos han sido registrados. segn la organizacin mundial para la salud (oms): se han reportado 46.997 casos a nivel global, de los cuales 46.550 (99,04%) han sido confirmados en china, y de esos han muerto 1.368 (2,93%), lo que la convierte en una enfermedad catalogada como emergencia de salud pblica a nivel mundial 3, 4 .en el siguiente link se puede observar el mapa actualizado en tiempo real de la situacin mundial de los casos del coronavirus con incidencia y localizacin: https:// gisanddata.maps.arcgis.com/apps/opsdashboard/index. html#/bda7594740fd40299423467b48e9ecf6los coronavirus se pueden diferenciar en 4 gneros: alfa, beta, delta y gamma, de los cuales hasta el momento se sabe que los coronavirus de tipo alfa y beta infectan a los humanos 5 , provocando enfermedades que van desde el resfriado comn hasta afecciones ms graves, como el sndrome respiratorio de oriente medio (mers-cov) y el sndrome respiratorio agudo severo (sars-cov), que caus miles de muertes en 2002 6, 7 . cuatro de los hcov (hcov 229e, nl63, oc43 y hku1) son endmicos en todo el mundo y representan del 10 al 30% de las infecciones del tracto respiratorio superior en adultos 5 .estructuralmente los coronavirus son virus esfricos o pleomrficos, cuyo dimetro vara de 80-120 nm. diversos anlisis por microscopia electrnica han identificado la superficie del virin, descubriendo que son estructuras organizadas por proyecciones que a su vez estn constituidas por trmeros de la glicoprotena viral s (spike) 8 . adicionalmente, se han identificado otras proyecciones cortas formadas por dmeros de las protenas he (hemaglutinina-esterasa), la cual se ha observado en algunos beta-coronavirus 9 . por su parte, la envoltura viral se encuentra reforzada por la glicoprotena de membrana (m) (la ms abundante en la superficie del virin), que se encuentra embebida en la membrana por 3 dominios transmembranales 10 . otro componente estructural del virin es la protena de envoltura (e), una protena de un tamao pequeo que es altamente hidrofbica y que se encuentra en una proporcin menor que las dems 11 . las protenas virales de los coronavirus se encuentran embebidas en una membrana lipdica que es originada de la clula infectada. internamente, la partcula viral est constituida por una protena adicional conocida como nucleoprotena (n), la cual se une al arn viral en una estructura helicoidal similar a una cuerda con cuentas, protegiendo as al arn de su degradacin ( fig. 1a) 8 .el genoma de los coronavirus es de arn de hebra sencilla no segmentado y de polaridad positiva (+ssarn), que cuenta con un tamao de 27 a 32 kilobases. el arn genmico presenta modificaciones como poliadenilaciones en la regin 3' terminal; en cambio, la regin 5' terminal contiene una estructura tipo cap 12 . dentro de este arn existen mltiples marcos de lectura abiertos (6) (7) (8) (9) (10) (11) . el primer orf codifica para aproximadamente 16 protenas no estructurales, mientras que los orf restantes codifican para protenas accesorias y no estructurales ( fig. 1b) 13 .los anlisis de las secuencias del genoma del 2019-ncov en comparacin con sars-cov son bastante similares, sin embargo, existen ciertas diferencias como la falta de la regin codificante para la protena 8 a en 2019-ncov, por lo que podra tener una implicacin en una menor patognesis en comparacin con el sars-cov 14 .una incgnita que contina siendo investigada es el reconocimiento del origen zoontico de dicho virus, pero debido a su estrecha similitud con los coronavirus de murcilago, es probable que estos sean el reservorio primario del virus, pues con la reaparicin de esta nueva clase de coronavirus se realizaron diversos estudios y se descubri que el 2019-ncov es un 96% idntico a nivel del genoma a un coronavirus de murcilago; el mismo estudio revel que dicho virus pertenece a la especie de sars-cov 15 . es as como se especula que el sars-cov se transmiti a los humanos de animales exticos en mercados en el brote de hace 18 aos 15 , mientras que el mers-cov se transmiti de los camellos a los humanos 16 . los informes documentaron que muchos de los primeros pacientes identificados tenan como factor comn el contacto con un mercado de mariscos y animales, sin embargo, otros no establecieron contacto con dicho lugar en ningn momento, lo que evidencia la infeccin limitada de persona a persona despus de identificar grupos de casos entre familias, as como la transmisin de pacientes a trabajadores de la salud 17 . a su vez, un estudio publicado recientemente estim que un 95% de los casos de infecciones por 2019-ncov en wuhan presentaron sntomas antes del 12 de enero de 2020 18,19 , dato que asociado a su perodo de incubacin sugiere una alta posibilidad de riesgos de propagacin de la enfermedad relacionada con los viajes 20 el diagnstico de la enfermedad se ha hecho como una neumona inducida por virus con base en los sntomas clnicos que observaron en los pacientes, similares a los de otros virus respiratorios, a su historia de exposicin con otras personas con el virus, y la historia de visitas a zonas afectadas 7, 27 . a su vez, un estudio detallado de los primeros 99 pacientes atendidos en el hospital wuhan jinyintan, que se llev a cabo del 1 al 20 de enero de 2020, arroj que de los 99 pacientes con neumona 2019-ncov, el 49% tenan antecedentes de exposicin al mercado de mariscos de huanan y el 51% tenan enfermedades crnicas. la edad promedio de estos pacientes fue de 55,5 aos, incluidos 67 hombres y 32 mujeres, y el perodo de incubacin del virus se estim en entre 7 y 14 das 27 . los pacientes estudiados tenan manifestaciones clnicas de fiebre (83%), tos (82%), dificultad para respirar (31%), dolor muscular (11%), confusin (9%), dolor de cabeza (8%), dolor de garganta (5%), rinorrea (4%), dolor en el pecho (2%), diarrea (2%), nuseas y vmitos (1%). segn el examen por imgenes, el 75% de estos pacientes presentaron neumona bilateral, el 14% mostr moteado mltiple y opacidad en vidrio esmerilado y el 1% tena neumotrax. igualmente, el 17% desarroll sndrome de dificultad respiratoria aguda, y de ellos el 11% empeoraron en un corto perodo de tiempo y murieron por insuficiencia orgnica mltiple 23, 28 . a su vez, los leucocitos estaban por debajo del rango normal en el 9% de los pacientes y por encima del rango normal en el 24%, y el 38% de ellos tenan neutrfilos por encima del rango normal. por su parte, los linfocitos y la hemoglobina estuvieron por debajo del rango normal en muchos pacientes, y las plaquetas estaban por debajo del rango normal en el 12% de ellos y por encima del rango normal en el 4%; 43 de estos pacientes tenan diferentes grados de anormalidad de la funcin heptica, con alanina aminotransferasa (alt) o aspartato aminotransferasa (ast) por encima del rango normal; y un paciente tena dao grave de la funcin heptica 28, 29 .considerando los sntomas clnicos de los pacientes, cmo se sabe cuando hablamos de un caso sospechoso, un caso probable o un caso confirmado de 2019-ncov? segn la oms: un caso sospechoso es un paciente con infeccin respiratoria aguda grave (fiebre, tos, y que requiere ingreso al hospital) y sin otra etiologa que explique completamente la presentacin clnica, y un historial de viaje o residencia en china durante los 14 das antes del inicio de los sntomas; o en su lugar, un paciente con alguna enfermedad respiratoria aguda y al menos uno de los siguientes puntos durante los 14 das previos al inicio de la aparicin de los sntomas: a) contacto con un caso confirmado o probable de infeccin por 2019-ncov, o si b) trabaj o asisti a un centro de atencin mdica donde pacientes con 2019-ncov confirmado o probable y pacientes con enfermedad respiratoria aguda estaban siendo tratados. por otra parte, un caso probable es un paciente cuyas pruebas para 2019-ncov no son concluyentes o se da positivo usando un ensayo para coronavirus y sin evidencia de laboratorio de otros patgenos respiratorios. finalmente, hablamos de un caso confirmado cuando el paciente tiene resultados de laboratorio positivos para la infeccin 2019-ncov, independientemente de los signos y sntomas clnicos 30 .entre las principales prioridades para facilitar las intervenciones de salud pblica en los pacientes se encuentra el diagnstico de laboratorio. en el caso de una infeccin +model rce-1815; no. of pages 7 covid-19, una emergencia de salud pblica mundial 5 respiratoria aguda, la rt-pcr se utiliza comnmente para identificar virus causales de secreciones respiratorias 30, 31 . la prueba para la deteccin de la secuencia del gen de la envoltura viral ha sido implementada eficazmente por 35 laboratorios, sin embargo, el algoritmo diagnstico emplea otras secuencias del genoma viral para confirmar positividad para 2019-ncov al detectar secuancias del gen de la arn polimerasa viral y la nucleoprotena 32 .otras muestras a recolectar son: a) extraccin de arn de muestras clnicas con el sistema magna pure 96. b) material respiratorio (nasofarngeo e hisopo orofarngeo en pacientes ambulatorios y esputo [si se presenta] y/o aspirado endotraqueal o lavado broncoalveolar en pacientes con enfermedad respiratoria severa) 33 . c) suero para pruebas serolgicas, muestra aguda y muestra convaleciente (adicional a materiales respiratorios) 33 los objetivos de las pruebas de diagnstico son detectar las causas frecuentes de neumona temprana, para apoyar actividades de control de enfermedades y trabajar con laboratorios de referencia que pueden realizar la deteccin de pancoronavirus y secuenciacin dirigida 31 .las recomendaciones estndar dictadas por la oms para prevenir la propagacin de la infeccin incluyen: lavarse las manos regularmente, especialmente despus del contacto con personas enfermas o su entorno, cubrirse la boca y la nariz al toser y estornudar, cocinar bien la carne y los huevos, evitar el contacto cercano con cualquier persona que presente sntomas de enfermedades respiratorias (tos y estornudos), evitar viajar a las ciudades y reas afectadas, y evitar el contacto cercano con animales vivos o muertos de granja o salvajes. en el caso de los viajeros con sntomas de infeccin respiratoria aguda, deben practicar la etiqueta de la tos (mantener la distancia, cubrirse la boca al toser y estornudar con pauelos desechables o ropa y lavarse las manos adecuadamente) 7, 34, 35 .aquellas personas que hayan tenido contacto con casos de pacientes que hayan sido catalogados como probables y/o confirmados de 2019-ncov deben ser monitorizados durante 14 das desde el ltimo contacto que tuvieron con ellos sin proteccin y deben limitar los traslados a lugares fuera de su lugar de residencia para evitar una posible propagacin.una de las medidas preventivas ms utilizadas es el uso de cubrebocas, pero pueden detener la propagacin? las mascarillas quirrgicas para el pblico no son una proteccin 100% efectiva contra los virus o bacterias transportadas en el aire, dado que no cuentan con un filtro de aire adecuado y dejan los ojos expuestos, y aunque podran ayudar a reducir el riesgo de contraer el virus mediante estornudos o tos ajenos, lo ptimo es el uso de los respiradores que tienen un filtro de aire especializado, ya que estn diseados especficamente para proteger a una persona contra partculas potencialmente peligrosas que se encuentren en el aire, es decir, las mascarillas ffp, de las cuales existen 3 tipos: mascarilla ffp1: filtra aproximadamente el 78% de las partculas del aire, por lo que protege de residuos no txicos y no fibrognicos de polvo o aerosoles, y previene la inhalacin de residuos y olores molestos.  mascarilla ffp2: filtra aproximadamente el 92% de las partculas del aire, y protege de residuos no txicos y elementos fibrognicos, evitando la inhalacin de fluidos txicos de polvo, aerosoles y humos.  mascarilla ffp3: filtra el 98% de las partculas del aire, protegindonos frente a tipos venenosos y txicos de polvo, humo y aerosoles, as como bacterias, virus y esporas de hongos.la oms recomienda que para procedimientos de aislamiento o con posible generacin de aerosoles infecciosos (tuberculosis, sarampin, varicela, sras. . .) se haga uso de un respirador con una eficiencia de filtracin de al menos el 95% para partculas de 0,3 m de dimetro, lo que equivale a una mascarilla n95 segn la normativa americana niosh, pero como la normativa americana no equivale a la europea, este nivel de proteccin para la poblacin en general se encuentra entre la ffp2 y ffp3.en general, el uso de mscaras solo se recomienda cuando existe exposicin con pacientes con enfermedades respiratorias, como es hospitales y consultorios. se deben seguir estrictamente los lineamientos de uso de las mscaras, cuando se expone la persona a pacientes infectados, pues la mala manipulacin y contacto de las manos con los ojos y con el lado externo de la mscara aumentan los riesgos.cualquier persona que haya tenido contacto con enfermos y que cumpla las caractersticas clnicas de la enfermedad se convierte en un caso sospechoso y debe ser confirmado mediante pruebas de laboratorio 30 . la oms solicita que las autoridades nacionales denuncien casos confirmados de nueva infeccin por coronavirus dentro de las 24 h de identificacin, proporcionando el conjunto mnimo de datos del paciente 30 . en el caso de mxico, ante la presencia de signos y sntomas de la enfermedad, puede comunicarse a la unidad de inteligencia epidemiolgica y sanitaria (uies), las 24 h del da, los 7 das de la semana, al nmero 800 0044 800. en espaa deben comunicarse en madrid con el ministerio de sanidad al nmero de telfono 91 596 10 00 o al instituto nacional de gestin sanitaria, al 91 338 00 00.entre tanto, numerosos laboratorios de investigacin en la actualidad buscan un tratamiento que elimine la infeccin por el mers-cov, ya sea con medicamentos que ya formen parte de la industria farmacutica y sean empleados para otras enfermedades, o bien buscando nuevas alternativas ms especficas del virus, pues no se dispone actualmente de vacuna alguna ni de tratamiento especfico, aunque hay varias vacunas y tratamientos especficos en fase de desarrollo.a pesar del poco tiempo, se prev que haya una vacuna lista para probar en animales aproximadamente en un mes, y en 3 meses podra estar lista para las personas. por ahora, el tratamiento es nicamente de apoyo y depende del estado clnico del paciente 36 .los antivirales de amplio espectro, como el remdesivir, el lopinavir/ritonavir y el interfern beta, han demostrado ser prometedores contra el mers-cov en modelos animales y se est evaluando su actividad contra el actual 2019-ncov 36 . adems, cientficos del centro de investigacin de vacunas del instituto nacional de alergias y enfermedades infecciosas de washington dc han utilizado enfoques de plataformas de vacunas de cido nucleico para contrarrestar la afeccin 37 .la oms se encuentra colaborando con especialistas en salud pblica y sanidad animal, clnicos y cientficos internacionales, para reunir e intercambiar datos cientficos que permitan conocer mejor el virus y la enfermedad que provoca; un ejemplo de estos datos son la identificacin de las nuevas rutas de secrecin en pacientes infectados. de igual manera, se han enfocado en determinar las prioridades de respuesta a los brotes, las estrategias teraputicas de tratamiento y los enfoques de la atencin clnica. existen anlisis que sugieren que algunos anticuerpos monoclonales especficos de sars-cov pueden ser efectivos para neutralizar el 2019-ncov.ciertamente, es tarea de todos contribuir para detener los brotes que han surgido en tan poco tiempo; por ello se aconseja a la poblacin en general que siga todas las recomendaciones para prevenir el contagio, y aunque los nmeros fuera de china son relativamente bajos en comparacin con los nmeros dentro de ella, cada pas debe estar preparado para cualquier situacin relacionada con este virus.todos los autores declaran que no existieron conflictos de intereses.the new coronavirus, called 2019-ncov, is a new type of virus that was first identified in wuhan, china, in december 2019 (ghinai et al. 2020) . the 2019-ncov is from same family as severe acute respiratory syndrome (sars), communityacquired pneumonia (cap), and other common colds. the 2019-ncov is a relatively large virus with a size of about 1-2 nm and is from a group of enveloped virus family, containing a positive-sense single-stranded rna (fehr and perlman 2015; ebrahimi et al. 2020) . the virus is transmitted through direct contact with infected person's respiratory droplets (coughing and sneezing), as well as contact with infected surfaces. the 2019-ncov can survive for hours on surfaces, but a simple disinfectant can eliminate it (lai et al. 2020a ). covid-19 signs and symptoms include fever, cough, and shortness of breath. in more severe cases, the infection can lead to pneumonia or respiratory severe problems, and ultimately in rare cases, the disease will be fatal (huang et al. 2020a ).in the absence of a safe and effective vaccine, as well as a lack of specific drug treatment, the only solution is preventing its transmission, performing general education, and implementing appropriate prevention and control. precautions can help people prevent risk of infection, such as washing hands frequently with soap and water or an alcohol-based disinfectant gel, covering mouth with your bent napkin or elbow when sneezing or coughing, avoiding close contact with those who have symptoms, and being sure to see a doctor if have a fever, cough, or difficulty breathing (haybar et al. 2020) . the virus transfers through direct and close contact with respiratory droplets of the affected person (cough or sneeze) or contact with contaminated surfaces (ghinai et al. 2020; yu et al. 2020) , and it can survive for hours on surfaces, but a pure disinfectant can eliminate it.the covid-19 survival in the environment and its prevention and control common coronavirus viruses spread through respiratory and gastrointestinal tracts, and nose and mouth are their two main entry routes (fig. 1) . in vulnerable and susceptible individuals, these viruses often cause only common cold that usually recovers spontaneously and has no serious side effects. however, viruses such as sars, middle east respiratory syndrome-related coronavirus (mers), or 2019-ncov can cause an acute and lethal form of pneumonia or gastritis. the risk of environmental contamination by these three types of viruses is far greater than the other viruses . the outflow and spread of the virus from the body occur within about 6 days after infection and reaches its maximum 4 days later (jiang et al. 2020; nishiura et al. 2020 ). the environmental conditions necessary for the survival and spread of 2019-ncov are somewhat clear, but unlike animal coronaviruses, there is less and limited knowledge about the natural causes of 2019-ncov transmission (kamel boulos and geraghty 2020; khafaie and rahim 2020a) . although several studies on sars-cov have already been conducted, a limited number of studies have shown that humidity and temperature probably affect the activity and transmissibility of the 2019-ncov (table 1) . as simply can see in the table, most of the studies reported that temperature and relative humidity could have a significant impact on the incidence rate and transmission of sars-cov2.epidemiologic and field studies show that 2019-ncov, just similar to sars and mers, is spread through fine-grained particles (such as particles sneezing out of the mouth) (yu et al. 2020; schwartz and graham 2020) . in only a single old study (tang 2009 ), the survival of the airborne human coronavirus 229e (hcv/229e), a virus used in research as a representative or surrogate of coronary respiratory viruses, was studied under different temperature and relative humidity conditions. the study showed that under such conditions, the virus has a half-life of 27 and 67 h at 30% and 50% humidity, respectively, while its half-life at 80% humidity is only 3 h. when the temperature drops as 6 degrees, the virus's half-life is increased 3 h at 80% humidity. similar conditions and consequences have been reported for seasonal flu (lowen and steel 2014) . this severe effect of lowering the temperature on prolonging the virus's half-life at high humidity could help the 2019-ncov spread under these conditions. in spite of several clinical studies that claimed that spreading the virus into droplets can be prevented using appropriate masks, it is fig. 1 the importance of social distancing, close contact, particle size, percent of virus particle deposit in various regions of the upper airway, and the effect of humidity and temperature on the 2019-ncov activity challenging to prevent it from spreading into aerosol forms, as well as the type of mask makes no significant difference (long et al. 2020; wang et al. 2020b) . subsequent studies showed that viruses that had become airborne aerosols and spread through defective sewage were the possible cause of the sars coronavirus that killed lots of people in hong kong in 2003 (yu et al. 2004 ). in the same year, only one incident in sars contaminated 22 out of 120 passengers on a 3-h flight (olsen et al. 2003) . surprisingly, the contamination included people who were outside the person's 2-m distance, and viruses could not be transmitted to them through aerosols and droplets (la rosa et al. 2013) . although it is difficult to prove that the virus has spread only through aerosols and droplets, the relatively low humidity of the aircraft has undoubtedly contributed to the higher survival of the sars virus in the particles. but a later study did not observe that transmission of sars-associated coronavirus and suggested that the risk of transmission is not amplified aboard aircraft (vogt et al. 2006) . a research report from canada points to the fact that open oxygen masks can help to spread disease agents such as sars, in fact, viruses such as sars are transmitted through the droplets emitted from these masks (somogyi et al. 2004) . air exhaled through the oxygen masks transmits viruses in the droplets farther away, increasing the risk of the respiratory disease spreading to health facilities. further research is needed to fully determine that the sars virus and similar viruses can survive and stay live and spreadable in the warm and humid environment of oxygenated air.research findings on the impact of humidity and temperature on the survival of the virus in airborne particulate matter indicate contrary to that. li et al. conducted a comprehensive study on the spread of the sars virus at the hong kong hospital and found evidence of the transmission of the virus aerosols. they also suggested improving the air conditioning or ventilation system to reduce the risk of spreading such diseases . the 2019-ncov is claimed does not survive at temperatures above 26c, but it can survive for approximately 5-10 min on the skin, 6 to 12 h on plastic materials, and 12 h on metal (fig. 2 ).because safety and ethical considerations do not allow the covid-19 infection test on the human specimen, researchers used human coronavirus, 229e (hcov-229e), as a surrogate to study the survival of the coronavirus on human hands. initial findings from these tests show that about 45% of hand-infected viruses survive and remain viable after 1 h (warnes et al. 2015) . such a survival time is much longer than other viruses, such as the para-influenza virus type 3, which disappears after only 10 min. in another study, researchers used human fingers to show that by washing only with water, the concentration of hcov-229e was reduced by 70%; however, with the use of hand-sanitized alcoholic disinfectants, the concentration of this virus decreased by 99.99% within 30 s (geller et al. 2012) . this study highlights the importance of effective hygiene and disinfection preventing and controlling of infectious diseases caused by coronavirus family.there is no evidence that corona is transmitted through food or drinking water and recreational water. one study shows that sars in the water can survive to a very limited degree (wang et al. 2005) .coronavirus is more stable and more resistant to environmental surfaces than other coated viruses (warnes et al. 2015; otter et al. 2016) . recently, molecular methods such as pcr have been studied for the transmission of pathogens to the environmental surfaces of aircraft (maris 1990 ). however, the detection of pathogenic viruses in environmental samples seems to be necessary to assess their potential ability to infect and spread the disease. mathematical simulations also confirm the fact that environmental levels play an essential role in the spread of coronavirus in health facilities (ikonen et al. 2018 ).three-level biosafety has been suggested for protectivity: (1) level 1 protection (disposable hats, disposable surgical masks, disposable isolation clothing, and disposable gloves) (wang et al. 2020c) ; (2) level 2 protection (level 1 but with medical protective masks such as n95, goggles or protective masks, and as outer cover a medical protective suit); (3) level 3 protection (level 2 but with the addition of face mask or a medical mask, goggles, or face mask to a full set or with an electric air filter respirator) (pei et al. 2020) .wearing a face mask is suggested for healthcare workers and people who have respiratory symptoms, but is not recommended for healthy people (organization wh 2020a). nonmedical masks made of other materials such as cotton fabric has not been well evaluated (esposito and principi 2020) .scientific research to date on the covid-19 has yielded no conclusions that the covid-19 outbreak will decline with the start of the warm season. many researchers have said it is too early to predict whether the covid-19 will decrease as the season progresses (mahase 2020) . studies have hypothesized that areas where covid-19 has suffered the most have similar weather patterns . countries located in the east and west of the globe did not have a significant impact on the prevalence of the disease among communities, and on the other hand, the north and south have provided a model for the relative prediction of disease outbreaks (gates 2020) , but now scenario has changed, and countries located on east and west of globes (usa & japan) have already declared emergency, and this statement was in contradiction with reality. also, it is estimated that this disease will reach saturation in the usa in july 2020 (arias velsquez and meja lara 2020), and outbreak of covid-19 significantly correlated with average temperature, minimum temperature, and air quality (bashir and ma 2020) .there are striking similarities between average wuhan city air temperature in january (time of outbreak here) and other polluted places in february, as well as their humidity (vetter et al. 2020) . the temperature at meteorological stations in these areas between 4 and 9c and in cities due to urban factors has been slightly above and between 5 and 11c (sajadi et al. 2020b) . it can also be predicted that with the onset of summer in northern hemisphere of the covid-19, it may be slightly influenza-like in the tropics and spread simultaneously in the southern hemisphere (anderson et al. 2020 ).in addition to known factors influencing the transmission of viruses, such as population displacement and human-to-human contact, environmental factors can affect transmission of droplets and the virus's survival, but for covid-19 disease, the evidence is still very limited. absolute humidity, which is defined as water in the ambient air, is considered a robust environmental factor for virus transmission (huang et al. 2020b; oliveiros et al. 2020; islam et al. 2020; qi et al. 2020; berumen et al. 2020; guo et al. 2020; barreca and shimshack 2012) . in examining the relationship between climate and sars-cov-2, it is important to note that different regions of the world, which have had a high prevalence in recent weeks, have had different climates; also, no significant relationship has been found so far (sajadi et al. 2020b ) ( table 1 ). in analysis of regional regression, countries affected by high prevalence of disease are divided into different regions, and in these regions, climate will be examined and recorded in several changes. then, for first period, from first day of outbreak to day of study, regression of daily aggregate growth against average temperature and relative humidity will be taken (bukhari and jameel 2020b) . in this model, we try to control variables such as population and gdp (table 1) . however, temperature was not associated with epidemic growth of covid-19 and case counts (zhu and xie 2020).in a study by wang et al., the effect of air temperature and relative humidity on the transmission of 2019-ncov from 105 samples of viruses carrying infected and contaminated pairs calculated the number of daily virus production per 100 chinese cities with more than 40 confirmed cases. they reported that high temperatures and high humidity significantly reduced transmission of virus, respectively. also, 1c significantly reduces temperature increase and 1% decrease in relative humidity of daily virus production. previous studies have shown that high temperature and humidity reduce the transmission of influenza and sars, which is consistent with wang et al.'s study. this study showed that the arrival of summer and rain in the northern hemisphere might effectively reduce 2019-ncov transmission .in a study by lou et al., they looked at the number of covid-19 reproductions across china's provinces and found that rising temperatures and humidity necessitated the arrival of spring and summer in the northern hemisphere alone without extensive public health interventions. it does not reduce the number of viruses . therefore, it is important to understand the impact of environmental factors on the increasing prevalence of covid-19 to support disease control decisions . it is especially important in areas with high temperatures and humidity, where the risk of transmission is minimized ). distribution of significant disease prevalence in the community at limited latitude and longitude, temperature, and humidity is consistent with the behavior of seasonal respiratory viruses. due to the fact that temperature and humidity are known factors in the survival of sars-cov, mers-cov, and influenza (chan et al. 2011) , the prevalence of covid-19 in long periods of time has occurred at certain levels of temperature so that conditions of prolonged exposure to this temperature range increase the risk of disease outbreak (rahman et al. 2020b ). in addition to prolonging half-life and survival of virus, other possible mechanisms related to temperature and humidity, including droplet stabilization and increased virus spread in the nasal mucosa, like other respiratory viruses, are further evidence that these two factors affect 2019-ncov (schaffer et al. 1976; shirbandi et al. 2020) . it is important to note that although colder areas are relatively free of 2019-ncov, they can affect the survival of the virus due to the low freezing cycle (lamarre and talbot 1989) . the researchers also found that low humidity was a factor in transmission of influenza in laboratory and onset of seasonal flu (lowen et al. 2007; shaman et al. 2009 ).many researchers and politicians have suggested that the covid-19 disease will go away on its own in warmer weather in the coming months in the northern hemisphere (roy 2020) . some have even said that the sars experience in 2003 is an evidence of this claim. what can now be said in response to this claim based on existing studies is that it is possible to reduce the transmission of 2019-ncov in hot and humid weather with the closure of gathering centers such as schools and universities, but it is not logical because these reductions do not occur alone or without any effective public health-related intervention. it should be noted that even sars does not disappear for natural reasons, but does not survive due to very severe public health interventions. these include isolating and quarantining infected people and people in contact with them, social distancing, and other targeted actions.therefore, it can be concluded that in case of 2019-ncov, it is expected that, like other beta-coronaviruses, virus may be slightly more effective at low temperatures, such as in winter, although the underlying mechanism is not well-known. therefore, the size of this change in transmission and pathogenicity of the virus is expected to be moderate and will not stop by itself. comparing to the pandemic, the 2019-ncov is expected to be less immune to humans and even easily transmitted outside the cold season. changing seasons and closing down gathering centers such as schools and universities may help, but it is unlikely to stop the transmission of the virus. to make effective policy, it is necessary to determine whether the closure of gathering centers such as schools and universities may help to reduce the rate of transfer effectively, in which if it would not be effective, the resources are wasted during such closures. for example, recent evidence suggests that children may be as susceptible as adults (bi et al. 2020) , so the critical question is whether the virus is easily transmitted under different temperature and humidity conditions. finally, except for a limited number of articles. it is currently being published and shows that there is no conflict in the results regarding the effect of these two variables on the survival and transmission of the virus.coated viruses such as influenza virus and coronavirus are much more vulnerable to disinfectant chemicals than other viruses such as noroviruses. even before detection of sars virus, disinfectants have been tested against other human and animal-infected coronaviruses. a comparative study shows that disinfectants needed to kill non-coated parvovirus are 20 to 500 times denser than disinfectants needed to kill coronavirus (maris 1990; lai et al. 2020b; organization wh 2020b) . the resistance of hcov-229e against disinfectants has been compared with the coxsackievirus, adenovirus type 2, and influenza virus type 3 using the quantitative laboratory method, which showed that coronavirus is much more vulnerable to disinfectant chemicals than two other uninfected viruses (maris 1990 ).the more practical and quantitative method of qct-2 showed that ethanol could kill 99.9% of hcov-229e (policy et al. n.d.) . other studies showed that alcohol-based mixture such as lozenge that contains amyl meta-cresol and dichlorobenzene alcohol could have direct and significant effects in reducing the infectivity of severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus (sars-cov) (oxford et al. 2005; morokutti-kurz et al. 2017) . another research evaluated the impact of alcohol-based hand sanitizer on positive cases of mers-cov and showed that using this mixture had a significant increase in the utilized amount of virus, as well as hand hygiene compliance rates increased to 88% (al-tawfiq et al. 2019).formaldehyde 4% is used as a complete sterilizer and disinfectant. however, for safety reasons, its use as a regular disinfectant is not recommended. this disinfectant can kill the tgv virus in 99.999% in 5 min, and a 2% solution can kill more than 99.9% of hcov-229e (sattar et al. 1989 ).phenolic-based ingredients have a long history of using coal tar soap with creosol. although some disinfectants use the same historically active chemical, changes in creosol have been made to make them more effective against germs. for example, o-phenyl phenol with a concentration of 200 ppm is quite effective against coronavirus (sattar et al. 1989 ). however, adding detergent or ethanol can increase its effectiveness and eliminate 99.9% of the hcov-229e within 5 min. similarly, chemicals made from phenolics need other helpers to be effective (shah et al. 2020 ).many studies were ongoing (according to clinicaltrials.gov database). according to this database, bacillus calmette-gurin (bcg) vaccine, which primarily used against tuberculosis (tb), will be intervening. other vaccines such as inactivated sars-cov-2 vaccine, lv-smenp-dc vaccine, measles-mumps-rubella vaccine, autologous dendritic cells loaded with sars-cov-2 antigens (av-covid-19), chadox1 ncov-19, angiotensin-converting enzyme (ace) inhibitors or angiotensin ii receptor blocker (arb), igm and igg antibodies, vpm1002 (development of the bcg vaccine) , and adoptive cellular transfer (act) are ongoing. there are no food and drug administration (fda)-approved vaccines to prevent or trial covid-19. however, fda issued emergency use authorization (eua) for emergency use of remdesivir for the treatment of hospitalized covid-19 patients (grein et al. 2020 ).the scientific evidence in this review article suggests that the spread of 2019-ncov may be influenced by climatic variables such as temperature and humidity. apparently, warm, humid weather may indicate less transmission of the 2019-ncov.considering the topic that seems to impose both the positive and negative data on the possible effect of environmental factors, especially humidity and temperature on the stability and transmissibility of the 2019-ncov, almost all available evidence revealed the possible positive effect.countries located in the east and west of the globe did not have a significant impact on the prevalence of the disease among communities, and on the other hand, the north and south have provided a model for the relative prediction of disease outbreaks (gates 2020) . the government and public health organizations can take steps to reduce the rate of covid-19 transmission in the future. for example, in addition to helping their people, leading countries can help low-and middleincome countries (lmics) prepare for the epidemic and most effectively fight against the disease (khadka et al. 2020) .many lmic health systems are now vulnerable, and a pathogen such as covid-19 can quickly lead to serious problems and challenges and eventually collapse of healthcare system. given the natural inclination of richer countries to give priority to their own people over other countries, this has led to a political and economic leverage in poor countries. pioneer countries can save the lives of their own people by slowing the global transmission of the covid-19 by helping to prepare african and south asian countries to fight the disease (gates 2020) .helping lmic is essential to strengthening the primary care system with the infrastructure to fight epidemics. welltrained healthcare workers not only provide vaccines but also monitor disease patterns as part of early warning systems that warn the world of a possible outbreak. given the limited testing capacity in african countries, the numbers of confirmed cases of covid-19 may greatly underestimate the true burden, although there was little evidence of unexplained outbreaks of the virus. at face value, the figures suggest that an african continent people had suffered fewer covid-19 deaths than the top list countries such as usa, russia, and uk (zhao et al. 2020b; khafaie and rahim 2020b) .according to epidemiologists, 2019-ncov is not among the thermophile viruses, so it will become inactive once the cold season begins. however, others suggested that 2019-ncov disappears at 30c, which is a misconception about the virus. it is also reported in the multimedia that it is better to use fried food to eliminate covid-19, while the virus is coldfriendly and will survive longer with lower temperatures. based on the results of new studies on the 2019-ncov, the virus can survive on the surface for 4 to 28 days, but if the temperature drops to less than 30 to 40c, the life span of the virus will be reduced rather than eliminated (casanova et al. 2010) . some scholars think that if the temperature reaches 30c, the virus will not survive, which is a misconception, because at this temperature, the virus's survival will reduce and does not mean that the virus will completely eliminate . since the bats' body temperature is 48c, so the 2019-ncov has nothing to do with these creatures (levesque et al. 2016) . the virus is also sensitive to humidity in addition to temperature; therefore, sars coronavirus and possibly 2019-ncov have a longer life span of 50% than 30% humidity (chan et al. 2011 ). according to published data, the human coronavirus can survive at temperatures of 20c for up to 9 days, and if the temperature rises to more than 30c, it perhaps decreases 2019-ncov viability, but the lower the temperature is associated with the more virus activity, in such a way that it can continue its activity for up to 28 days (casanova et al. 2010) . thus, the most effective way to reduce the activity of this virus is to use disinfectants such as ethanol 70%. these types of substances can kill the virus within a short minute.currently, in a modeling study, using the classification of covid-19 confirmed cases was investigated as one of the epidemic diseases. consequentially, the average daily temperature and relative humidity of hubei province in china and the number of covid-19 confirmed cases were selected. they demonstrated that the relative humidity and the maximum daily temperature had the highest impact on the confirmed cases. the daily temperature and relative humidity affected 2019-ncov positively, and extreme daily temperature, with an average of 15.4c, affected this virus negatively (pirouz et al. 2020) . recently, a published evidence reports that 2019-ncov significantly contaminates air, surface environment, and protective equipment by droplets of an infected person, meaning that environment is an important issue to consider because it is a potential medium of transmission; thus, it is necessary for strict adherence to environmental and personal protection and hygiene, as well as social distancing (ong et al. 2020 ).we are poorly aware of their survival in the environment and the precise factors of their transmission. however, limited studies in this field show that 2019-ncov is more resistant to environmental factors than other coated viruses. the environmental conditions necessary for the survival and spread of 2019-ncov are somewhat clear, but unlike animal coronaviruses. the effect of humidity and temperature on the 2019-ncov activity is controversial. researchers in the field of epidemiologists believe that the 2019-ncov is not a thermophilic virus, so it will be activated with the onset of the cold season.according to published data, human coronavirus can survive for up to 9 days at 25c, and if this temperature rises to 30c, its lifespan will be shorter. the 2019-ncov is sensitive to humidity, and the lifespan of viruses in 50% humidity is longer than that of 30%. also, temperature and humidity are important factors influencing the covid-19 mortality rate and may facilitate 2019-ncov transmission. seasonal factors are recognized to play an essential role in the transmission of viruses responsible for various respiratory diseases. besides, most of these diseases reach epidemic proportions and key outbreak during winter. recently, researchers claimed that the two main causes contribute to the description of any association between viral outbreak and the seasonal factors, including changes in environmental parameters and human behavior. specifically, changes in temperature and humidity disturb the viral stability and transmissibility. thus, considering the recent and available evidence, it seems that low temperature, as well as dry and unventilated air, may affect the stability and transmissibility of the 2019-ncov.conflict of interest the authors declare that they have no conflict of interest.rapid urbanization in many countries is one of the many factors that has resulted in a long-term increase in global temperature and has made climate change a critical issue discussed by different parties. the general consensus is that the increasing frequency of extreme weather conditions, such as very hot days, is a product of climate change (chapman et al. 2017; griffiths et al. 2005) . to understand further the consequences of climate change, many studies have examined the relationship between weather and human health. among different health outcomes, death rate goggins et al. 2013 ) and hospitalization rate ) are two of the most popular research targets. various diseases have also been linked to weather, including heart failure (goggins and chan 2017) , asthma (lam et al. 2016; qiu et al. 2015) , and stroke . nowadays, health records such as hospitalization and death records are commonly collected in digitalized format; this is among the main reasons why the above studies have become popular wong et al. 2016) . in contrast, similar studies on the demand for emergency ambulance services (eas) are relatively few in number, even though the number of eas users is obviously much larger than the number of hospitalized patients and death cases. this situation is reflected in the number of journals in the category of emergency medicine and other health-related categories shown by the clarivate analytics' journal citation reports (clarivate analytics 2018). moreover, it is also believed that the effects of climate are stronger on eas than on hospitalization and mortality (ccouc 2019). as paramedics are the first health professionals to provide medical care to patients in emergency situations, eas has become a critical part of the health service system. knowing the effects of weather on eas demand can help authorities to formulate health policies and also help people to protect themselves before the onset of adverse weather conditions. some reports show that eas demand in different countries is increasing yearly (lai and wong 2015; lowthian et al. 2011) . therefore, understanding the abovementioned effects of weather can also help eas managing authorities to cope with unexpected sudden increases in eas demand under limited resources. for example, there are research reports that have recorded success in developing a 7-day eas demand forecast system, using weather forecast reports and based on the identified significant meteorological predictors of eas demand (wong and lai 2014) . moreover, the effects of such predictors on long-term eas demand could also be projected to help eas managing authorities to achieve timely responses (lai and wong 2015) .however, relatively few studies across the world have examined the relationship between weather and eas demand. in the western world, thornes et al. (2014) analyzed 5 years (2007) (2008) (2009) (2010) (2011) of eas call-out data for birmingham in the uk, and found that the number of eas call-outs significantly increased during cold weather. they also found that the impact of the cold weather of december 2010 on eas response time was almost as large as the impact of the swine flu pandemic in july 2009. given that the increase in eas demand has been mainly attributed to patients with certain diseases, some researchers have conducted similar studies by focusing only on these diseases. for example, turner et al. (2013) analyzed 783,935 ambulance usage records from 2000 to 2007 for brisbane in australia, specifically focusing on cardiovascular patients. they found that eas demand for cardiovascular patients was significantly increased by sustained periods of high temperature. this finding underscored the importance of installing heat warning systems that will assist with managing eas during severe heat events. in contrast, vencloviene et al. (2015) focused on patients with acute coronary syndrome (acs) and included additional factors in their analysis, including relative humidity, barometric pressure, and wind speed. they concluded that, in addition to air temperature, barometric pressure and wind speed were also potential predictors of acs.in the eastern world, wong and lai (2012) found that people with different social demographic characteristics showed different sensitivities to weather. based on their analysis of daily eas usage statistics in hong kong, they found that the elderly, poor, women, and more severe patients were relatively more vulnerable to weather. they obtained similar results from their analysis of monthly eas demand statistics, which showed that age and socioeconomic status were closely related to vulnerable groups (wong et al. 2017) . similar studies have also been conducted in asia-pacific countries such as japan (onozuka and hagihara 2016; onozuka and hagihara 2017) , korea , and china (chen et al. 2015; yang et al. 2014) . surprisingly, the impact of adverse weather conditions on eas demand in taiwan has never been investigated in the literature. although the negative impacts of extreme weather conditions on human health are significant, there is a paucity of publications related to weather effects on ambulance demand in taiwan when searching the most popular medical journals database, "pubmed," using the search query of "(ambulance) and (weather or temperature) and (taiwan or taipei)." lin (2015) has also pointed out that there is a lack of research on factors affecting taiwan's eas demand.given the differences in the climate, built environment, and lifestyle between taiwan and hong kong, the findings of wong and lai (2012) in hong kong may not be applicable to taiwan. for example, the daily temperature range in taipei is significantly wider in both value and variation than that in hong kong (table 1) . moreover, given that the distance between buildings in taiwan is significantly further than that in hong kong, people in taiwan experience longer periods of outdoor exposure when their daily activities require them to travel from building to building, therefore giving them less protection from the outdoor environment. the taiwanese are also not in the habit of using air conditioning all the time, which is considered common practice in hong kong, and therefore, they also have less protection from significant changes in temperature. as the capital of taiwan, taipei is one of the top ten destinations in the asia-pacific region in terms of international overnight arrivals, with around 7.4 million international visitors in 2016 (mastercard 2017) . therefore, studying the effects of weather on eas demand in taiwan is meaningful not only to local residents but also to international visitors. the taipei city government does also recognize the negative impacts, and efforts have been made to help vulnerable groups protect themselves from adverse weather conditions. however, it is not uncommon for significant increases in deaths on cold days to be reported. in particular, during the 9-h period from 11 pm on 21 january 2019 to 8 am on 22 january 2019, when the temperature dropped below 10c, eleven out-of-hospital cardiac arrest cases were reported in the cities of taipei and new taipei. gathering more information about vulnerable groups and ascertaining when they will be affected by weather could help eas managing authorities in formulating cost-effective eas management strategies and policies. therefore, this study aims to look at the effects of weather on eas demand in taipei by analyzing eas usage records.this study analyzed over 370,000 eas usage records from april 2010 to december 2012, obtained from the taipei city fire department. only data up to 2012 were used in order to prevent the data period from overlapping with the 23-day sunflower student movement in march 2013 and subsequent political events (brindle 2016) , which may have had significant impacts on eas demand despite being unrelated to weather. the collected eas usage records include five variables, including date, age, gender, triage level (level 1: critical; level 2: emergency; level 3: urgent; level 4: semi-urgent; level 5: non-urgent), and case nature (trauma or non-trauma). the case nature for each patient was decided based on the clinical judgment of paramedics. in general, a case with physical injury caused by external force would be classified as a trauma case. the information is included in this study because it was recorded in the taipei city fire department's database. it is useful when accounting for the possible effects of the popularity of motorcycle use in taiwan. information about disease type was not included in this dataset because paramedics are not expected to make diagnoses.daily meteorological data were downloaded in time series format from the central weather bureau observation data inquiry system (central weather bureau 2019). from the 16 meteorological stations in the city, the taipei meteorological station was selected to represent weather conditions in the city because of its location within the taipei metropolitan area and proximity to sea level. moreover, the measurements of this meteorological station are relatively complete compared with those of the 15 other stations in the city. the meteorological variables considered in this study include average temperature (t avg ), minimum temperature (t min ), maximum temperature (t max ), cloud amount, relative humidity (rh), wind speed (ws), barometric pressure (bp), precipitation, and visibility.before the data analysis, the eas usage records were aggregated into daily time series data based on their date. in this way, the format of the eas data was consistent with that of the meteorological data for conducting the data analysis. the 3day moving average smoothing technique was applied to the eas demand time series data to remove large, unexpected fluctuations resulting from disastrous events. normalization was not applied to the data series because the yearly eas demand did not significantly increase within the data period.after completing the above data preprocessing steps, time-lag analysis was carried out to ascertain the time-lag effects of temperature on eas demand. to achieve this, the eas demand time series with different days of time lag were regressed on t avg and average temperature squared (t avg 2 ) to find the lag effect of temperature on eas demand. the number of days of time lag that yielded the regression model with the highest adjusted-r 2 was considered in the subsequent analysis. in this time-lag analysis, both t avg and t avg 2 were included to address the quadratic relationship between t avg and eas demand. both t avg and t avg 2 were selected because they represent the u shape pattern of the relationship between t avg and eas demand. the u shape relationship is applicable to both the summer and winter periods, during which the eas demand will increase when t avg increases and decreases respectively. if only the first-order term (i.e., t avg ) is selected, the regression model formulated will be a straight line, not a u shape model. the u shape model has been observed in previous studies and considered the main focus of the meteorological effects on eas demand (lai and wong 2015; wong and lai 2012; wong et al. 2017; chan et al. 2011; iiguez et al. 2010; lindeboom et al. 2012; yu et al. 2019) . moreover, the u shape pattern of the effects of t avg on eas demand can easily be understood by a layman. placing the focus on t avg can make the final regression model of the relationship between weather and eas demand easier to interpret from a layman's perspective. after the time-lag analysis, the eas demand time series data were split into different groups of data based on the value of the variables in the eas usage records in order to represent demand from different groups of eas users.in addition, all the eas demand time series were shifted forward based on the number of days of time lag identified from the time-lag analysis in order to account for the time-lag effects. each of the generated eas demand time series data was then regressed on all weather factors via multivariate forward regression. forward regression was selected because the algorithm would prioritize the most predominant factors (e.g., t avg and t avg 2 ) in the regression analysis. to be more precise, the forward regression analysis would only include suitable predictors in the regression model based on the forward variable selection method. the forward variable selection method would first assess all the independent variables one by one. the independent variable that satisfied the entry criterion (the significant level of the independent variable's f value < 0.05) and had the highest correlation with the dependent variable would be included in the model. after the first independent variable had been included in the model, the independent variable that satisfied the entry criterion and had the largest partial correlation would be included in the model. this variable selection step would be repeated until none of the unselected independent variables satisfied the entry criterion (ibm spss 2017). linear models with an assumed poisson distribution were not considered because the distribution of the daily ambulance demand counts was close to normal, and the data was no longer counting values after the 3-day moving average smoothing technique had been applied. moreover, when using the same analysis method (i.e., multivariate forward regression) adopted in wong and lai's (2012) study, the results of the two studies can be more easily compared.twelve weather factors were considered, including (1) t avg ; (2) t avg 2 ;(3) t max -t min ; (4) t avg difference between 2 days; (5) t avg difference among 3 days; (6) rh; (7) rh  t avg ; (8) ws; (9) bp; (10) precipitation; (11) visibility; and (12) cloud amount. these factors were selected because they are the most common factors that can be calculated from basic meteorological variables. moreover, they were also adopted in wong and lai's (2012) study, so selecting the same set of variables could facilitate result comparison. in addition, the effect of weekends and holidays can also be controlled by including a binary variable in the regression models. assuming all the factors are included in the model, the model can analytically be written as shown below. in the equation, b 1 to b 13 are the regression coefficient of the corresponding independent variable in the model. after comparing the effect sizes calculated using adjusted-r 2 of the regression model of different groups of eas users, the group of users most sensitive to weather could be identified based on the effect size classification system (ellis 2010) . as the effect size classification system is based on r (not r 2 ), the regression models' adjusted-r 2 were transferred to r before being applied to the system (small: r < 0.3; medium: r  0.30 and r < 0.5; large: r  0.5). table 2 presents the results of the lag effect analysis. in addition to the population as a whole, the elderly (aged 65+ years) were considered independently in the analysis because they were believed to be the most vulnerable group based on previous studies (wong and lai 2012) . the 4-day time-lag eas demand data showed the highest correlation with t avg and t avg 2 , which obtained adjusted-r 2 values of 0.15 and 0.28 respectively in the regression model. therefore, the 4-day time-lag eas demand data were used in the subsequent analysis. table 3 shows the effects of weather factors on daily eas demand from different age groups. model (a) only contains temperature-related variables, while model (b) contains all the weather-related variables mentioned in the "data" section. the adjusted-r 2 of the regression model (b) on the whole population was 0.16 with a medium-sized effect (ellis 2010) . after analyzing the demands of different age groups, the model for the elderly (aged 65+ years) had the highest adjusted-r 2 (0.30) with a large effect, while the models for the other age groups only had adjusted-r 2 (0.02-0.05) with a small effect. the effect size difference of the variance explained by the models was considered meaningful, because the 0.25 difference on the adjusted-r 2 (i.e., 0.3-0.05) can be interpreted as a large-sized effect (ellis 2010) . the result for the elderly (aged 65+ years) shows that bp was negatively related to eas demand (b =  0.24; p < 0.05), and model (b)'s adjusted-r 2 was 0.01 larger than for model (a). both models (a) and (b) included the control variable representing weekends and public holidays, and none of the models' control variables was significant (p > 0.05). regarding model (b) for the whole population, visibility was positively related to eas demand (b = 0.55; p < 0.05) and the control variable was insignificant (p > 0.05). including the factor of visibility in the model improved the model adjusted-r 2 by 0.01. however, the effect size of the improvements was too low to be considered meaningful. table 4 presents the results of the regression analysis by triage level. the patients with triage level 1 were most sensitive to weather (adjusted-r 2 = 0.23), with a medium-sized effect. although the models for level 2 and 3 patients also had a medium-sized effect, their adjusted-r 2 values were relatively smaller than those for level 1 patients (level 1, 0.23 vs. levels 2 and 3, 0.09 and 0.09). the effect size difference of the variance explained by the models was considered meaningful, because the 0.14 difference on the adjusted-r 2 (i.e., 0.23-0.09) can be interpreted as a medium-sized effect (ellis 2010) . the effect size of the models for triage levels 4 and 5 can be neglected. when comparing the triage level 1 group's models (a) and (b), three new predictors (i.e., cloud amount, bp, and visibility) were discovered after considering meteorological factors other than temperature. all of them were negatively related to eas demand (cloud amount: b =  0.01, p < 0.05; bp: b =  0.08, p < 0.05; visibility: b =  0.09, p < 0.05), but the improved model r 2 was only 0.02, which is not large enough to be considered meaningful. in both models (a) and (b), the control variable for weekends and public holidays was insignificant (p > 0.05). table 5 presents the results of the regression analysis by gender and case nature. female patients were more sensitive to weather than male patients, with a 0.08 difference in adjusted-r 2 and a small effect size. the effect size difference of the variance explained by the models could not be considered meaningful because the difference can only be interpreted as a small effect (ellis 2010) . both the female and male groups' model (a) can be improved by including meteorological factors other than temperature. the two sets of variables, (rh: b = 0.063, p < 0.001; rht avg : b =  0.03, p < 0.001; and visibility: b = 0.42, constant 512.16*** 503.76*** 6.29*** 6.29*** 77.87*** 86.16*** 114.58*** 114.91*** 178.26*** 427.08*** the effects of weather on daily emergency ambulance service demand in taipei: a comparison with hong kong constant 45.34*** 125.00** 82.00*** 87.21*** 156.75*** 156.03*** 38.32*** 30.12*** 4.01*** 4.01*** t avg  1.75***  1.99***  2.50***  2.80***  0.74*** --- 0.12*  0.12* t avg 2 0.03*** 0.04*** 0.05*** 0.06*** ----0.00** 0.00** t max -t min 0.14** 0.24*** 0.27** 0.36*** ------ (c) the factor of weekend and public holiday was controlled p < 0.001) and (rht avg : b =  0.01, p < 0.001; precipitation: b = 0.08, p < 0.05; and visibility: b = 0.62, p < 0.001), were found to be the respective predictors of the female and male groups' eas demand. however, the corresponding improvements in the models after including these factors were only 0.02 with a small effect. on the other hand, the control variable for weekends and public holidays was significant in both models (a) and (b) for the female group (p < 0.05). meanwhile, the model (a) of non-trauma cases showed a significantly higher adjusted-r 2 than the corresponding model (a) of trauma cases (trauma 0.04 vs. non-trauma 0.18), with a 0.14 difference in adjusted-r 2 and a medium-sized effect. the effect size difference of the variance explained by the models was considered as meaningful, because the 0.14 difference (i.e., 0.18-0.04) can be interpreted as a medium-sized effect (ellis 2010) . the model (a) for trauma cases can be improved by including meteorological factors other than temperature (i.e., bp: b = 0.34, p < 0.001 and ws: b = 1.26, p < 0.01) in the model, and the control variable was significant (p < 0.01). similarly, the model (a) for non-trauma cases can be improved by including the factor of bp (b =  0.54, p < 0.01), and the effect of the control variable was significant (p < 0.01). however, the corresponding improvements were only 0.02 and 0.01 respectively; the effects are small.the question of how long people can tolerate adverse weather conditions is related to the time-lag effect. this effect has been observed in other similar studies on mortality (braga et al. 2002; leung et al. 2008) . the four lag days identified in this study were the same as those recorded in wong and lai (2012) . interestingly, the number of lag days identified in studies on mortality was slightly larger than that identified in this study, which focuses on eas demand (braga et al. 2002; leung et al. 2008) . such a small difference may be attributed to the time that patients spend in treatment.given their higher vulnerability compared with young people, the elderly were more sensitive to adverse weather conditions than the other populations. however, the sensitivity of infants and young children to weather remains unclear, as they are expected to be less able to protect themselves than adults. wong and lai (2012) found that the youngest age group showed the lowest sensitivity to weather, which increased with age. although this study also found that the elderly were more sensitive to weather, only those patients aged 65+ years showed sensitivity to weather with a large effect. a linear relationship between sensitivity and age was not observed in this study, but a step function was revealed. nevertheless, these studies found that infants and young children were insensitive to weather; this may be because they were well cared for by their parents. following this supposition, future studies conducted in rural and poor areas may find that children left unprotected by their parents are highly sensitive to weather. on the other hand, the extremely crowded living environment in hong kong may mean that people aged between 15 and 64 years are highly sensitive to weather compared with the same group in taipei. given that the cost of living in hong kong is ranked as the secondhighest in the world (economist intelligence unit 2017), many people aged between 15 and 64 years are only able to afford to live in subdivided flats that are around 30 ft 2 on average (dwan et al. 2013 ). these flats do not have windows or air conditioning, and thus have poor air ventilation, which means that their residents suffer during very hot or cold days. on the other hand, in a study in italy that looked at 5 years' worth of daily emergency ambulance dispatch data, the results showed that eas demand was higher among the older age group when air temperature was extremely high (alessandrini et al. 2011). similarly to the analysis by age, the analysis by triage level showed a step function relationship between sensitivity and triage level. this study, as well as that of wong and lai (2012) , found that more severe patients were more sensitive to weather. however, the pattern discovered in the latter study was not clear enough because the relationship between weather and triage for level 1 to 3 patients was at a high level. in contrast, the present study showed that the model for triage level 1 patients had a medium-sized effect, while that for triage level 2 and 3 patients had an effect size on the boundary between medium and small. therefore, the effects of weather on more severe patients were demonstrated much more clearly in this study than in wong and lai (2012) . in this case, patients were more affected physically than psychologically by adverse weather conditions. if these patients had been mainly affected psychologically, then the triage level 4 and 5 patients would have had models with higher adjusted-r 2 values because the triage level would have been set according to their physical conditions. therefore, the result suggests that weather mainly affects patients physically rather than psychologically. further confirmation of the effects of weather on triage level cases can be carried out if similar research conducted in cities in other parts of the world becomes available in the future.with regard to gender, the results of this study were consistent with those of wong and lai (2012) . the two studies showed that female patients were relatively more sensitive to weather than male patients, although the effect size differences of the variance explained by the models observed in the two studies were also not large enough to be considered meaningful. specifically, wong and lai (2012) observed 0.04 difference in the adjusted-r 2 of the models for female and male patients, while the present study observed a larger adjusted-r 2 difference (0.08), thereby highlighting a gender difference. there have been some similar studies conducted in china that also identified gender differences in the weather's effects on emergency room demand, but the difference was believed to be insignificant (chen et al. 2015; zhao et al. 2017 ). if eas usage records with more details on case nature can be obtained, then the effects of weather on gynecological conditions can be examined further (akutagawa et al. 2007; bianchi-demicheli et al. 2001 ).unlike wong and lai (2012) , who did not conduct an analysis by case nature, this study showed that non-trauma cases were more sensitive to weather than trauma cases. this finding may seem inconsistent with that of other studies in asia that have suggested temperature has a significant effect on trauma cases (chen et al. 2015; tai et al. 2007 ). however, it is possible that the effects of weather on non-trauma cases were stronger than on trauma cases, therefore making the non-trauma patients more sensitive to weather than trauma patients. given that a significant proportion of taipei residents are aged 65+ years (over 15%) and are identified as the most vulnerable group in the city, they greatly contribute to the non-trauma cases. in fact, this population comprised 46.4% of the non-trauma patients and 19.1% of the trauma patients in this study. this proportion of non-trauma cases is expected to increase in the future because of taiwan's aging population (national development council 2018) . there is also a research study in korea that has found that the factor of temperature has a larger effect on non-trauma cases than on trauma cases 4.6 comparison between taipei and hong kong in terms of the effects of weather on eas demand 4.6.1 similaritiesas discussed in the above subsections, the effects of weather on eas demand show similar patterns in taipei and hong kong. in general, elderly and critical patients are more sensitive to weather than other populations. the lag effects of temperature on eas demand in the two cities are also similar. this is expected, because the climatic environments of these cities are relatively similar compared with countries in the equatorial region such as singapore, which has no cold days. moreover, given that these two cities are metropolises, most of their residents adopt an urban lifestyle and living environment that differ from those of residents in rural areas. some differences may also be observed between the two cities because of their different levels of economic development and built environment.two major differences were observed between the studies on the effects of weather on eas demand in taipei and hong kong. first, compared with the hong kong study, the taipei study clearly demonstrated that the elderly and critical patients were most sensitive to weather. this difference can be attributed to the fact that this study directly obtained eas usage records from the taipei city fire department, while wong and lai (2012) only used proxy data from the hong kong hospital authority, which may have been unable to reflect eas demand accurately. given that the hong kong hospital authority is not the eas managing authority in hong kong, the dataset of wong and lai may contain a certain amount of missing cases if the ambulance brought-in indicator was not always filled in appropriately. moreover, wong and lai (2012) omitted eas calls without patient transfer as well as death before arrival cases, even though these cases only contribute to a small proportion of the total eas demand. nevertheless, the macroscopic picture of the results is expected to be correct, and expecting an error-free study would be unrealistic.second, wong and lai (2012) did not investigate the role of temperature change over the course of a day. they did consider the t avg difference between two consecutive days in their analysis, but the result of the analysis showed that it was not a significant predictor. although it remained an insignificant predictor in the taipei study, the newly added factor in the taipei study (i.e., temperature change over a day) played an important role for the two most vulnerable groups (i.e., patients aged 65+ years and triage level 1 patients). this finding is understandable, as temperature change over a day is more difficult to cope with than t avg change over two consecutive days. people can easily change their clothing on a new day, but may be unable to do so in the middle of the day if they have already left their homes without anticipating a possible change in temperature. if wong and lai had considered temperature change over a day in their study, they would likely have found the effects of this variable to be less significant in hong kong than in taipei. this is because temperature change over a day in taipei is significantly larger in both value and variation than that in hong kong (table 1) , despite the similarities in their average temperature profiles.to conclude, this study has found that the elderly, critical patients, and non-trauma cases are relatively sensitive to weather. the findings of this study are easier to interpret than those of the similar study in hong kong (wong and lai 2012) because this study used highly accurate eas usage data and obtained distinct results from the same patient subgroups. this study has also revealed that temperature change over a day, which was not considered in the hong kong study, has a significant effect on vulnerable groups.this study is the first to investigate the effects of weather on daily eas demand in taipei. by generating results that are directly applicable to taipei, this study will prevent the formulation of inappropriate eas policies. specifically, the study in hong kong showed that eas policies should target people aged between 35 and 64 years, while the study in taipei suggested that eas resources should only focus on the elderly (aged 65 years or above).after obtaining these preliminary results, a more detailed analysis of different subgroups of patients (e.g., patients with different illnesses, more detailed case natures, and socioeconomic status) should be conducted in order to obtain additional information on when and how paramedics should be equipped to cope with the possible increase in eas demand in the future. health education programs should also focus on vulnerable groups in order to increase their awareness and help them protect themselves before the onset of extreme weather conditions, thereby preventing the unnecessary use of eas.equine coronavirus (ecov) is an emerging virus associated clinically and epidemiologically with fever, depression, anorexia and less frequently colic and diarrhoea in adult horses. sporadic cases and outbreaks have been reported with increased frequency since 2010 from japan, the usa and more recently from europe. a faeco-oral transmission route is suspected and clinical or asymptomatic infected horses appear to be responsible for direct and indirect transmission of ecov. a presumptive clinical diagnosis of ecov infection may be suggested by clinical presentation, haematological abnormalities such as leucopenia due to lymphopenia and/or neutropenia. confirmation of ecov infection is provided by specific ecov nucleic acid detection in faeces by quantitative pcr (qpcr) or demonstration of coronavirus antigen by immunohistochemistry or electron microscopy in intestinal biopsy material obtained ante or post mortem. the disease is generally self-limiting and horses typically recover with symptomatic supportive care. complications associated with disruption of the gastrointestinal barrier have been reported in some infected horses and include endotoxaemia, septicaemia and hyperammonaemia-associated encephalopathy. although specific immunoprophylactic measures have been shown to be effective in disease prevention for closely-related coronaviruses such as bovine coronavirus (bcov), such strategies have yet not been investigated for horses and disease prevention is limited to basic biosecurity protocols. this article reviews current knowledge concerning the aetiology, epidemiology, clinical signs, diagnosis, pathology, treatment and prevention of ecov infection in adult horses.coronaviruses are members of the coronaviridae family, all of which are single-stranded, positive-sense, nonsegmented, enveloped rna viruses responsible for enteric, respiratory, hepatic or neurological disease in a variety of mammalian and avian species (wege et al. 1982) . the family coronaviridae is subdivided into two subfamilies, torovirinae and coronavirinae, with the latter subfamily containing four genera defined on the basis of serological cross-reactivity and genetic differences: alphacoronavirus, betacoronavirus, deltacoronavirus and gammacoronavirus (woo et al. 2012) . equine coronavirus (ecov) is classified within the betacoronavirus genus, along with human oc43 and hku1 coronavirus, bovine coronavirus, porcine haemagglutinating encephalomyelitis virus, canine respiratory coronavirus, mouse hepatitis virus and sialodacryoadenitis virus (zhang et al. 2007 ).the nucleocapsid protein of coronaviruses complexes with the genomic rna to form a helical capsid structure found within the viral envelope. trimers of the spike protein form peplomers embedded in the envelope giving the virion its corona or crown-like morphology. in ecov, the haemagglutinin esterase protein forms smaller spikes on the membrane. there are two fully transmembraneous structural proteins referred to as the membrane and small membrane proteins in the coronaviral virion (weiss and leibowitz 2011) .epidemiological information for ecov is sparse at this time and either extrapolated from close-related coronaviruses such as bcov or largely based on nonpublished preliminary observations ( table 1) .clinical cases are either sporadic or epizootic. collective data from three veterinary diagnostic laboratories in the usa (idexx laboratories, inc., west sacramento; animal health diagnostic center (ahdc), cornell university, ithaca; realtime pcr research and diagnostics core facility, university of california, davis) shows that the overall number of ecov qpcr-positive cases has steadily increased since 2010 (approximate time when ecov testing by qpcr was introduced by molecular diagnostic laboratories) and that similar to bcov, the case number is higher during the colder months of the year (october to april; fig 1) . the geographic origin of ecov qpcr-positive equids, based on zip codes of the submitting veterinary practices, is widespread across the lower 48 states of the usa (fig 2) . clinical ecov infection has predominantly been reported in adult horses (oue et al. 2011 (oue et al. , 2013 pusterla et al. 2013; fielding et al. 2015) . outbreaks have predominantly been reported in riding, racing and show horses and less frequently in breeding animals. two breeding farms in new york state have experienced ecov disease. on one farm, a yearling standardbred filly died from an acute enteritis and on necropsy, faeces tested qpcr-positive for ecov and ihc was positive for coronavirus on small intestine. no additional cases were documented on this large farm even though this filly was pastured with other horses. another breeding farm with 30 american miniature horses experienced an outbreak with a morbidity of 83% (l. mittel, personal communication 2015). one hypothesis behind the lack of large numbers of documented clinical cases at larger breeding farms is the frequent circulation of ecov between asymptomatic young animals and adult resident horses, conferring protection against clinical disease in adult horses.preliminary epidemiological observations support a faecooral route of transmission. this is supported by a recent experimental study in which three 9-10-month-old japanese draught horses were successfully infected via nasooesophageal intubation using faecal material from a previously characterised ecov infected horse (nemoto et al. 2014 ) two of the three draught horses developed clinical disease and all shed large amounts of ecov in faeces. bovine coronavirus (bcov) is closely related to ecov and considered a pneumoenteric virus, causing not only enteric disease but also mild upper respiratory signs (saif et al. 1986; tsunemitsu et al. 1999; tr av en et al. 2001; o'neill et al. 2014) . recently, a french group screened 395 faeces and 200 respiratory specimens submitted to a veterinary diagnostic laboratory for the presence of ecov (miszczak et al. 2014) . the samples had been collected from foals and adult horses suffering from mild respiratory or enteric disease. in that study, the researchers found ecov by qpcr in a total of 12 samples (11 faecal samples and one respiratory specimen). in a preliminary study testing nasal secretions from 2437 horses with signs of fever and/or acute onset of upper respiratory tract infection submitted to a commercial diagnostic laboratory in the usa from january 2013 to december 2014 for the detection of common respiratory pathogens, ecov was detected by qpcr in only 17 (0.7%) horses (n. pusterla, personal communication 2015) . collectively, both these studies show that ecov is infrequently detected in nasal secretions from horses with infectious upper respiratory tract disease, suggesting lack of tropism for ecov to the respiratory epithelium. in the three experimentally-infected japanese draught horses (nemoto et al. 2014) , nasal secretions were ecov pcr positive during the time of peak faecal shedding but it could not be determined if this was due to nasal replication and shedding of the virus or from environmental contamination from the positive faeces or both. morbidity of ecov in affected herds is variable and has been reported to range between 10 and 83% (oue et al. 2011 (oue et al. , 2013 pusterla et al. 2013; fielding et al. 2015) . mortality rates have been reported to be low (oue et al. 2011 (oue et al. , 2013 pusterla et al. 2013) , although a mortality rate of 27% was recently reported by fielding et al. (2015) in american miniature horses. a recent outbreak investigated by the ahdc on an additional american miniature horse breeding farm found laboratory confirmed ecov cases that developed serious but nonfatal illness (l. mittel, personal communication 2015). the apparent increased susceptibility to ecov disease in american miniature horses needs to be further investigated.mortality has been associated with endotoxaemia, septicaemia and hyperammonaemia-associated encephalopathy (pusterla et al. 2013; fielding et al. 2015; giannitti et al. 2015) . a large number of documented clinical cases will be needed to determine the effect of various host, viral, treatment and environmental factors on outcome, as well as the identification of risk factors associated with risk of morbidity.similar to bcov the incubation period is short and clinical disease develops between 48 and 72 h after either natural exposure or experimental infection (nemoto et al. 2014; fielding et al. 2015) . clinical signs persist for a few days to one week and generally resolve with minimal supportive care. occasionally clinical signs can last longer as recently identified in two ecov cases from florida that experienced colic and systemic illness for 14 days (l. mittel, personal communication 2015) . shedding post experimental infection as documented by qpcr ranged between 10 and 12 days (nemoto et al. 2014) . faecal shedding of ecov under natural conditions has been reported to range between 3 and 25 days (pusterla et al. 2013; fielding et al. 2015; l. mittel, personal communication 2015) . it is not clear how long ecov will persist in the environment and potentially act as the source of infection. it is reasonable to draw comparisons from other coronaviral pathogens such as severe acute respiratory syndromeassociated coronavirus (sars-cov) which has been shown in vitro to persist for 2 days in hospital wastewater, domestic sewage and dechlorinated tap water, while 3 days in faeces, 14 days in pbs and 17 days in urine at 20c. however, at 4c, the sars-cov could persist for 14 days in wastewater and at least 17 days in faeces or urine (wang et al. 2005) . enhanced replication of the virus in faeces in the environment during colder weather is one possible explanation for the apparent higher prevalence of test positive faecal samples and clinical disease during cooler weather. equine coronavirus disease can occur in one or more horses on a farm with no recent exposure to new horses (t. divers, personal communication 2015).hypothetically, this might be explained by indirect ecov transmission by nonequine animal species or that colder weather might allow increased faecal replication of the virus from a chronically infected horse.clinical information collected from 16 outbreaks during the time period of november 2011 to december 2014 on a total of 406 horses showed that 122 horses (30%) showed clinical signs (pusterla et al. 2013; n. pusterla, personal communication 2015) . the main clinical signs reported were anorexia (98%), lethargy (89%) and fever (84%). the rectal temperature of febrile horses ranged from 38.6 to 41c (median 39.9c). changes in faecal character, ranging from soft-formed to watery consistency and colic were observed in 25 and 18% of horses with any clinical signs, respectively. gastrointestinal signs are generally preceded by systemic signs of anorexia and fever (fig 3) . these results are in agreement with recent outbreaks from japan in adult draught horses reporting that anorexia and pyrexia were the main clinical signs, while specific gastrointestinal signs were observed in about 10% of affected horses (oue et al. 2011 (oue et al. , 2013 . in 3% of infected horses signs of encephalopathy including circling, head pressing, ataxia, proprioceptive deficits, nystagmus, recumbency and seizure have also been reported (fig 4; pusterla et al. 2013; fielding et al. 2015) .although clinical disease is apparent in 10-83% of ecov infected horses, one needs to take into account that some horses remain asymptomatic after infection. asymptomatic infection is defined as lack of clinical disease in a horse from which ecov is detected in faeces by qpcr. the percentage of asymptomatic horses during an outbreak of ecov has been observed to range between 11 and 83% (pusterla et al. 2013; l. mittel, personal communication 2015) .the antemortem diagnosis of ecov relies on the presence of clinical signs compatible with ecov infection, neutropenia and/or lymphopenia, the exclusion of other infectious causes and molecular detection of ecov in faeces.the consistently observed haematological abnormalities observed with ecov infection are leucopenia due to neutropenia and/or lymphopenia. the blood work from 73 clinical cases with suspected ecov infection showed that the total nucleated cell count ranged 0.5-7.8910 9 /l (median 3.4910 9 /l; reference interval 5.0-11.6910 9 /l; fig 5) . the white cell blood count in the 73 diseased horses showed leucopenia in 25%, neutrophilia in 66% and lymphopenia in 72% of the horses. the neutrophil and lymphocyte counts in these horses ranged from 0.2-5.1910 9 /l (median 1.6910 9 /l; reference interval 2.6-6.8910 9 /l) and 0.8-3.6910 9 /l (median 1.1910 9 /l; reference interval 1.6-5.8910 9 /l), respectively. both cbc and differential were unremarkable in only 11% of the horses. additional, less consistent haematological abnormalities included the presence of band neutrophils and shifts in monocyte counts (most typically shifting from a low or a normal count to a high-normal or rebound monocytosis). occasional rebound leucocytosis due to neutrophilia and monocytosis during the disease course and recovery was also observed. complete blood count abnormalities are expected to resolve within 5-7 days as long as noequine coronavirus complications associated with the disruption of the gastrointestinal barrier occur. biochemical parameters may be unremarkable but elevation of total and indirect bilirubin due to partial or complete anorexia, electrolyte changes consistent with enterocolitis, transient elevation of liver enzymes and renal parameters suggestive of prerenal azotaemia have been observed in some of the cases. it is judicious to measure blood ammonia in horses with suspected ecov infection and concurrent signs of encephalopathy. fielding et al. (2015) reported a case of severe hyperammonaemia (677 lmol/l; reference interval 60 lmol/l) with encephalopathic signs that subsequently died. hyperammonaemia associated with ecov infection is likely due to increased ammonia production within or absorption from the gastrointestinal tract due to gastrointestinal barrier breakdown. an increase in enteric ammonia production could also be the result of bacterial microbiome changes associated with ecov infection. isolation of ecov in human rectal adenocarcinoma cells, although difficult has been previously reported (guy et al. 2000; oue et al. 2011) . the need for cost-effective and timely detection methods has restricted the diagnosis of ecov infection to direct demonstration of coronavirus antigens or specific nucleic acids in biological samples. historically, coronavirus detection in faeces had been based on negative-stain em and antigen-capture elisa (davis et al. 2000; guy et al. 2000) . however, the sensitivity and specificity of these diagnostic modalities has not been evaluated and detection may be unsuccessful if viral particles are not present in sufficient numbers. timely, cost-effective and sensitive laboratory diagnosis of ecov is through obtained faecal quantitative pcr (qpcr). a recent study evaluated the overall accuracy of qpcr and determined 90% accuracy between clinical status and pcr detection of ecov in various outbreak populations (pusterla et al. 2013 ). the authors have documented a few cases of ecov infection which tested qpcr-negative during early disease. these few horses ended testing qpcr-positive on a 24-48 h recheck faecal sample. it is hypothesised that during peracute stages of infection, or when diseased horses experience gastrointestinal stasis due to colic, there are not enough viral particles in the faeces to be detected. the recommendation is to retest faecal matter in a suspected index case at a later time point or collect multiple samples for pooled testing. viral kinetics of ecov in faeces from experimentally-infected horses showed that horses began to shed ecov rna in their faeces at 3 or 4 days post infection and continued shedding virus until 12 or 14 days post infection (nemoto et al. 2014) . peak shedding is generally seen on day 3-4 following the development of clinical signs (fig 3) and qpcr detection of ecov in naturally infected horses can last for 3-25 days (pusterla et al. 2013; fielding et al. 2015; l.d. mittel, personal communication 2015) . interestingly, faecal viral load measured by qpcr in foals (up to 6 months) appears to be lower compared with horses older than 12 months of age, although the difference is not statistically significant (p = 0.307). this observation suggests that viral replication in the gut is comparable (l. leutenegger, personal communication 2015) between foals and older horses. in coronavirus infections in man, viral load is a strong prognostic indicator for clinical outcome and mortality (hung et al. 2009) . a similar observation has recently been reported for ecov . the viral load shed in human patients infected with coronavirus is associated with polymorphisms of genes involved in innate immunity, an individual's genetic make-up and immunological host response to the virus (chen et al. 2008 ). in addition, coronavirus strain variations can influence the replication ability and viral load as shown with feline coronavirus (fcov) which exists in two genotypes: a benign feline enteric coronavirus genotype (fecv) with low replication competency in enterocytes and a highly virulent feline infectious peritonitis virus (fipv) with an enhanced ability to replicate in different cell populations (chang et al. 2012) . single point mutations on the spike gene are responsible for dramatic changes in cell tropism, replication competency and clinical manifestations.necropsy cases of suspected enteritis should have faeces or gastrointestinal content tested by qpcr for ecov and other gastrointestinal infectious agents. further, formalin-fixed intestinal tissue samples can also be tested by immunochemistry and direct fluorescent antibody testing using bcov reagents .enteritis caused by ecov has been suspected in foals for many years but the direct pathogenicity of ecov has only previously been described in one neonate (davis et al. 2000) . further, the high and similar frequency of ecov shedding detected in healthy foals and foals with gastrointestinal diseases from central kentucky suggests that ecov commonly circulates among young horses with subclinical disease (slovis et al. 2014 ). an interesting observation is that all ecov infections in foals with gastrointestinal disease were associated with coinfections, while most healthy foals infected with ecov displayed a monoinfection (slovis et al. 2014) . this observation may indicate that in foals, pre-existing ecov infection may predispose to opportunistic secondary viral, bacterial or protozoal infections as shown for enteric and respiratory coronavirus in other species (pakpinyo et al. 2003; srikumaran et al. 2007; brockmeier et al. 2008) . other hypothetical reasons for the lack of clinical signs in foals infected solely with ecov is that host factors such as absence of specific receptor binding sites or presence of ecovspecific colostrally-derived antibodies prevent the development of enteritis. however, in the vast majority of clinical adult horses, ecov is a monoinfection, demonstrated by enteric panel qpcr testing. this suggests a unique pathogenicity, coinfection with still unknown pathogens or a distinct difference in immunological reaction between foals and adult horses towards the ecov infection similar to fcov. the development of a humoral, cell-mediated or mixed immune response against the highly virulent fipv version of fcov distinctly influences the clinical outcome of the infection. interestingly, the clinical outcome of fip has been correlated with a severe suppression of nk cells and t regulatory cells confirming earlier reports that a weakened cell-mediated immune response is associated with fatal fipv infection (vermeulen et al. 2013) .in adult horses, the pathology of ecov has recently been described in three equids . the ecovinfected equids displayed severe diffuse necrotising enteritis with marked villus attenuation, epithelial cell necrosis in the tips of the villi, neutrophilic and fibrin extravasation into the small intestinal lumen (pseudomembrane formation), as well as crypt necrosis, microthrombosis and haemorrhage (fig 6) . equine coronavirus was detected by qpcr in small intestinal tissue, gastrointestinal content and/or faeces and coronavirus antigen detected by immunohistochemistry and/or direct fluorescent antibody testing in the small intestine of all cases (figs 7 and 8 ).most adult horses with clinical ecov infection recover spontaneously in a few days without specific treatment. horses with persistent elevated rectal temperature, anorexia and depression are routinely treated with nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs such as flunixin meglumine (0.5-1.1 mg/kg bwt q. 12-24 h intravenously (i.v.) or per os) or while hyperammonaemia-associated encephalopathy only occurs in a small percentage of horses with ecov infection, early recognition and treatment is associated with a positive outcome. horses with suspected or documented hyperammonaemia are treated with oral lactulose (0.1-0.2 ml/kg bwt q. 6-12 h per os), neomycin sulfate (4-8 mg/kg bwt q. 8 h per os) or faecal transfaunation and crystalloid fluids.immunisation strategies have been best described in cattle for the prevention of winter dysentery infection using a modified-live commercially available bcov vaccine (welter 1998) . the use of bcov vaccine in horses for the prevention of ecov has, to the authors' knowledge, not been investigated and cannot be recommended at this time due to the lack of safety and efficacy data and sporadic incidence of disease. cattle that recovered from winter dysentery after experimental infection with bcov maintained a very long-lasting bcov-specific serum (iga and igg) and local (iga) antibody response (tr av en et al.the prevention of ecov infection should focus on the implementation of routine management practices aimed at reducing the likelihood of introducing and disseminating ecov at any horse-based premise (boarding facility, show ground, veterinary hospital). due to the highly contagious nature of ecov, any horse developing or presenting with significant fever, anorexia and depression with or without enteric signs (colic, diarrhoea) should be strictly isolated until a diagnosis is secured. such an approach can prevent the quarantine of an entire horse population should ecov infection be subsequently diagnosed. once ecov infection is confirmed, strict isolation procedures and secondary quarantine of the source stable of the particular horse should be employed. post infection testing of clinical cases should be done to prevent viral spread to other horses. at stables and farms, all newly arrived horses should ideally be isolated for at least 3 weeks. once an ecov infection is suspected or confirmed, strict biosecurity measures including footbaths and the use of personal protective equipment should be provided and adequately maintained for sanitary purposes. separate equipment, tack, bedding and feedstuffs should be used in the care of these animals. grooms and other personnel should be instructed to work with these animals last in the course of their daily routine. exercise periods should be confined to a time when other horses are not present in the training areas and riders should wear protective clothing and clean and thoroughly disinfect their boots, tack and hands after contact with such animals. horses returning from shows or extended travelling events should be isolated according to their particular circumstances. all horse vans and trailers should be thoroughly cleaned and disinfected after use. equine coronavirus is susceptible to common disinfectants including sodium hypochlorite, povidone iodine, chlorhexidine gluconate, phenols, quaternary ammonium compounds, accelerated hydrogen peroxide and peroxygen compounds. the examination of at risk horses for clinical signs of disease, including twice daily assessment of rectal temperature, remains the most effective tool in determining possible sources of virus introduction. equine coronavirus infection is an emerging disease in adult horses reported in europe, japan and the usa. increased awareness of this disease in the field and availability of diagnostics for detecting ecov in faeces of affected horses have resulted in increased reports of the disease. the epidemiology and pathogenesis of ecov infection in horses is now being actively investigated. informed consent was not available and the laboratories do not use an admission form allowing owners to opt out of research studies.none.environmentalists. th eir reasons for doing so often boil down to the thirst for money, which has a short-term benefi t, but, given the mountain of evidence to the contrary, doing so is little more than gambling with our collective longterm interests.th e battle lines that have been drawn between climate change believers and deniers could not be more distinct. however, outside of the halls of power and beyond diplomatic chatter there is a subtle, if imperceptible shift heralding a potentially more impactful climate awakening. th ose favoring grandiose solutions to the very real challenges posed by climate change will fi nd no victory with the advent of true market-based solutions to climate risk. for one, these shifts in the market are brought forth without presidential decree and signing ceremonies. rather, they are brought about the same way each economic revolution occurs-with the inexorable drive among entrepreneurs, engineers, planners and risk managers tackling the immediacy of problems, with practical solutions for which the market is willing to pay.th e former moniker for climate changeglobal warming -which was popularized in the 1980s, failed to capture the world's imagination and trigger signifi cant action. as a result, opponents of climate science used the reminder of winter and imperceptibly small temperature changes as evidence that the world was not warming, but in fact remaining in an eons-long natural oscillation. th e absence of evidence is not the evidence of absence, however, and the increasingly frequent climate impacts in major cities around the world is changing both attitudes and perceptions. although more urgent action is needed to combat climate change, there is reason for guarded optimism.when one person tries to blow up an airplane with his shoes, the whole world takes their shoes off at airports. no matter how infi nitesimal the risk of a shoe-borne airline calamity, we will subject ourselves to inconvenience on a grand scale when the economic costs are linear and fear becomes real. 3 one such climate change shoe dropped when new york's emergency managers put sandbags around the fl oor of the new york stock exchange during hurricane sandy and had to contemplate the very real costs of building fl ood walls to protect new york city from once unimaginable risks. 4 sandy, and irene before it (a near miss of sandy's proportions), are now part of our climate data sample and are not merely consigned to the labs or weather models 3 t. connor, "shoe bomber has 'tactical regrets' over failed american airlines plot," nbc news, february 3, 2015, accessed november 25, 2015, http://www.nbcnews.com/news/us-news/ shoe-bomber-has-tactical-regrets-over-failed-american-airlines-plot-n296396 . 4 c. marshall, "massive seawall may be needed to keep new york city dry," scientifi c american (may 5, 2014), accessed november 25, 2015, http://www.scientifi camerican.com/article/massive-seawall-may-beneeded-to-keep-new-york-city-dry/ . of scientists, but on the streets of manhattan and up and down the east coast of the u.s. as is often the case, it takes a calamity in a center of power and infl uence (new york rather than the maldive islands) to focus attention on an issue that some people around the world live with on a daily basis.across the planet we are reminded just how fragile we are in the face of accelerating climate change, from super typhoon haiyan (which wreaked havoc on the philippines in 2013) to the monster hurricane patricia (which hit mexico in 2015), the two most powerful cyclonic storms in recorded history. 5 climate deniers would say (with a point, albeit a small one) that recorded history of these storms only dates to the 1850s for the u.s., and that, therefore, it is likely that certain weather events will be out of sample . 6 denial or not, it does not bode well for humanity's future that we mostly have our heads in the sand and go about our merry lives without change. europe has been awakened by increasingly severe storms, fl oods, and other weather events. australia routinely battles drought, and california has been tormented by persistent droughts and wildfi res that have triggered water rationing on a scale the state and, indeed, the u.s., has not seen since the dust bowl dried up much of the country during the 1930s. 7 as is the case with so many aspects of man-made risk, climate change, which is certainly exacerbated by man and our inexorable carbon footprint that is leaving a deep impression on the planet's complex ecosystem, is most felt by the most vulnerable. climate change is driving the very real specter of water wars and the rise in piracy in east africa, which is, in no small measure, triggered by the scarcity of resources on land. indeed, the perennial confl icts in the middle east are not only fueled by centuries-old animus, but by control of natural resources, from fresh water in the golan heights to access to open water in the mediterranean. 8 indeed, the casus belli for russia's annexation of crimea from ukraine in 2014 was so that russia could regain control of its erstwhile soviet-era access to the warm water port in sevastopol. 9 th e veritable 'land grab' taking place under rapidly shrinking polar ice caps is a sign of how climate change is no longer a distant prognosis, but rather a current malady desperately in need of treatment. shipping fi rms, as well as nations, are contemplating the impact on global trade using northern open ocean routes. 10 we will derive little comfort from receiving goods faster if our cities are under water, however.some mega trends are working in humanity's favor. living in the age of homo urbanus , with more of humanity living in dense urban environments, produces strains on the environment and intensifi es resource demands, but it also exposes many more people-in whose adaptation climate resilience liesto the line of site of extreme weather events. just a few years ago it would have been unthinkable to see london's ubiquitous 'boris bikes' on the streets of washington, d.c. or new york, but for economic and business model reasons (not for the sake of being 'green') this mode of urban transport is now fl ourishing. uber, zipcar, and 'hives' of smart cars and cars2go are enabling urban dwellers to forgo car ownership altogether. hybrids and all-electric innovations are not only common place, they are also increasingly seen as 'cool' and part of the evolving mainstream. while diplomats and politicians grapple with not losing climate's upcoming 'big moment' at the next climate change conference, a 'climate standards war' is being waged in the market of ideas, giving the world hope that at last we are marshaling market-driven ingenuity to make a business out of solving climate change-or at least containing its impact.once upon a time the words corporate social responsibility (csr, discussed at length in chapter 10 ) were shunned in corporate boardrooms, whose members naively regarded dealing with myopic shareholder interests as the only business interest worthy of discussion. today, csr (or, more simply, managing against a triple bottom line of economic, social, and environmental factors) is not only commonplace, it is the source of competitive advantage for many fi rms. 11 th e garment industry serves as a prime example of how quickly an interconnected and fl at world can punish corporate social irresponsibility-even when it is carried out by sub-suppliers in a global chain.as previously noted, the collapse of the rana plaza building in bangladesh not only impacted share prices in the garment industry worldwide, it also triggered 'vicarious liability' because the garment tags of global brands were 10 found in the rubble. 12 even though these fi rms did not own the building or the subcontractors, they could not wash their hands of the lost lives and reputation risk. similarly, apple showed leadership by being among the fi rst global technology companies to publish worker and other standards for its global supply chain. th is not only defanged some of the pressures apple had been facing from lax or nonexistent standards at foxconn (its inextricably intertwined chinese supplier), it also (in a rare move) used transparency as a source of competitive advantage. 13 transparency itself will increasingly become a source of competitive advantage in the future.in short, just as it took about 30 years to move csr from a 'nice to have' to a 'need to have' in business, being 'green' is on a similar pathway. entire industries have cropped up, devoted to energy effi ciency. economic breakthroughs are afoot in virtually every aspect of the so-called 'green' economy. and while many of these micro-battles in the climate standards war may have gone unnoticed in the 2015 paris climate change summit, 14 and other global summits to come, a whole generation of business leaders and entrepreneurs stand to create a lot of real economic value by making it a business priority for the world to stay in business. th e world's ability to tackle climate change is the tragedy of the commons of our times, and perhaps the greatest risk we have ever faced-as well as being our greatest risk management failure. 15 climate change was once managed as an 'externality' by risk managers and quants-one so big that they could not conceivably factor it into their pricing models or risk-hedging strategies. th ere has also been a very dangerous remoteness to climate impacts, once seen as primarily the scourge of unfortunate and ill-prepared developing countries. ethiopia's dire famine, triggered by persistent droughts, claimed the lives of nearly a million people across the horn of africa. 16 as recently as 2011, severe draughts revisited the region, killing at least 260,000 people, most of whom were in war-torn somalia. 17 until recently, these grim images served to form so many peoples' misconcep-tions about the african continent, so as to relegate its massive growth potential to more astute investors and countries. today, climate change and the urgent need to fi nd solutions to it, is no longer being treated as an externality, but rather something for which organizations and societies must be prepared.global leadership, consensus, and, above all, agility are needed to begin arresting the rate of climate change and improving global resilience to it. for sensible solutions to emerge from governments around the world, the economic costs of climate risks can no longer be 'transferred' away by government subsidies and national catastrophe insurance programs that amplify moral hazard-which is risk taking without risk bearing. why would anyone build a house in tornado alley (a wide swath of the u.s. midwest with a propensity for frequent tornadoes) with anything other than 'ricks and sticks' if, following each instance of severe damage from tornadoes, the true cost of rebuilding is not carried by the communities that are aff ected?a broad commitment among the world's governments and businesses to quickly raise and diversify spending on research and development on energy technologies is urgently needed. while this would clearly be costly, it is important to remember three things. first, spending to reduce grave risks is reasonable. second, some current climate policies cost a lot more than would a greatly expanded research eff ort. th ird, battling climate change can actually raise money, the best example being well-designed carbon prices, which can boost green power, encourage energy saving, and suppress the burning of fossil fuels more effi ciently than subsidies for renewables. 18 while the paris climate change summit did perhaps represent a tipping point, there was a sense that, as was the case with each previous climate change summit, an opportunity had been missed, and should be tempered by the gradual climate awakening that is occurring in the market. "th inking caps should replace hair shirts and pragmatism should replace green theology. th e climate is changing because of extraordinary inventions like the steam turbine and the internal combustion engine. th e best way to cope is to keep inventing." 19 th e real opportunity cost is for business leaders not to seize this moment.th e fi rst step toward fi nancially de-risking the impacts of climate change on advanced economies is to change the economics. shared governmentsponsored risk pools, such as fl ood insurance, mis-price these increasingly commonplace catastrophes. th e result is that there is little innovation in making human habitation more resilient (where fi nancial wherewithal is not a limitation) while at the same time moving further inland from fl ood prone areas. th e banks of the mississippi river will brim and eventually spill over, as will the yangtze and the various rivers along the ganges delta. so much of humanity live near major waterways, oceans and shorelines that they enhance our collective vulnerability. in advanced economies, while government subsidized catastrophe insurance programs help to ease the fi nancial consequences relatively quickly, they also stem the tide of innovation and climate adaptation that could have started when the fi rst fl ood programs were created in the u.s. in 1968. 20 similarly, allocating tax dollars to rebuilding fl ood-damaged areas takes fi nancial resources away from taxpayers who do not live in such areas, but must in essence subsidize those who do.during a time when the u.s. economy was largely driven by agriculture and interstate trade through waterways, and there was no extensive transportation alternative by rail or road, the need to be near major bodies of water and fl ood zones was an economic imperative. today, however, with an economy that is highly diversifi ed, coupled with multiple modes of industrial transport and global trade, the economic need to be a riparian society is no longer essential. similarly, subsidies in wind storm insurance coverage, which would contemplate hurricanes, severe storms and tornadoes, have debased advancements in more wind-resistant or wind-proof housing. th e toll from these programs, which, year after year and calamity after calamity, have reconstructed homes back to their prior state, mostly of "brick and stick" construction (the principle of indemnity in insurance holds that claimants cannot profi t from a loss, thus getting the same asset they lost). th is naturally begs the question, how long until the next insurance claim is fi led by the same claimant in the same home, and raises the issue of how sensible it is to continue to rebuild and devote increasingly limited fi nancial resources in disaster prone areas.in 2013 the real toll of this perpetual weather induced creative-destructive cycle was felt by moore, a small town in oklahoma. in may that year a category 5 tornado, the highest class on the enhanced-fujita scale, ripped through the center of town and plowed right through two poorly constructed elementary schools. th e elementary schools did not have adequately reinforced walls and were hardly a durable construction class for tornado a hit). tragically, and criminally, the buildings had no tornado safe rooms. 22 at a minimum, public buildings in tornado alley should be mandated per the construction code to have protected basements or safe rooms suffi cient to shelter the building's occupants (this would imply a complex if impossible retrofi tting process for existing structures). th at there has been little fi nancial incentive to adapt building standards to predictable natural risks is partly driven by the moral hazard created by state-sponsored programs, (to make insureds whole again). in moore, 24 people perished and hundreds were injured with little more protection than the walls of the fl imsy buildings they cowered in to shelter from nature's wrath. 23 sadly, millions of children around the world face a similar fate from weather-related events, but so many of their governments have little or no money or resources to protect them.whether this type of tragedy is caused by climate change or by nature's usual rhythms matters less than the fact that the direst of consequences-the loss of nine young lives and their future potential-were in that case entirely preventable. if the u.s. does not take leadership in confronting the impacts of climate risk at home, global admonishments about reducing emissions and protecting natural resources will continue to fall on deaf ears. just as tornado alley goes through a predictable annual drama of destruction and reconstruction, the florida panhandle and gulf states undergo a similar repetitive annual drama. here too, miscalculating not only the eff ects but the reconstruction costs following a storm, hurricane or fl ood, continue to plague the region.just as climate risks take the heaviest toll on those who can least aff ord it, the entire city of new orleans was devastated by the eff ects of hurricane katrina-which was a category 3 storm in the saffi r-simpson scale when it made landfall in the gulf. 24 as described earlier, the entire city, state, regional and federal response apparatus froze in the face of what was an entirely predictable calamity. th ese government agencies did not freeze for lack of resources or knowledge of what to do and how to respond; they froze for the schools-destroyed-in-tornado-poorly-built-civil-engineer-says/article_a00b291d-3b1c-5fe5-a4dd-9d575c5a1323.html . lack of risk agility and the capability to act with the type of speed this era requires.part of the failure to act is that the system, much like public bailouts of banks, is 'internalizing' the consequences of external events. clearly, there needs to be a model in which aid and disaster relief work with speed-thus the reason to protect organizations like fema and its global counterparts. however, reducing moral hazard requires that the price of risk and its consequences are borne by those who create or take the risk in the fi rst place. in this case, climate change is being produced and accelerated by advanced markets. now advanced markets are beginning to feel the consequences.building climate change resilience in developing and emerging countries is, of course, a much more diffi cult task. it combines propping up often-decrepit national institutions and fi nancial systems, spurring infrastructure investment, and creating fi rst-response capabilities. above all, the development of nascent local insurance capabilities is critical, and this must be combined with greater interconnections with global insurance and reinsurance capacity. many protectionist government policies preclude greater integration with global insurance markets, relegating many countries to off set local and regional risks with often shallow, opaque and unregulated insurance pools.following a natural disaster, developing and emerging countries most often depend on global aid, development agencies, and their disaster relief response. as climate change becomes increasingly severe, developing regions of the world are facing the most consequential impacts. few developing regions are spared-and fewer still are able to go it alone. much like an individual u.s. state's resources will be strained following a crisis, organizations like fema help coordinate a whole-of-government response. as is the case with so many of the topics addressed in this book, eff ective international and regional responses are needed.in pakistan in 2010, record-breaking fl oods triggered by unseasonably heavy rains caused widespread damage, claimed thousands of lives and aff ected 18 million people (more than one-tenth of pakistan's population). 25 tionally restive region and safe haven for separatist and terrorists. 26 as a result, the pakistan government has a deep distrust of international aid eff orts, fearing that international intelligence agency operatives may be embedded among relief workers, and that the groups it opposes may take advantage of relief operations to pursue their own agendas. in pakistan, as well as the indiancontrolled side of kashmir, disaster relief eff orts were led by the military, the strongest institutions in each country.similar to how the world only gained the upper hand on the ebola outbreak that started in west africa and eventually aff ected 11 countries when its response was militarized, 27 militarizing aid and disaster relief quite literally has a double-edged sword. on the one hand, military intervention is most often associated with armed confl ict or a takeover, and people in developing countries have long memories of occupation. on the other hand, many of the worst disasters (man-made or naturally occurring) can only be tackled with the superior logistics and personnel capabilities controlled by the military. duplicitous actions blurring humanitarian neutrality-such as colombian paramilitary units posing as red cross workers to free ingrid betancourt from the fuerzas armadas revolucionarias de colombia -severely hamper global relief eff orts, especially when there is no other choice but to bring in the cavalry. 28 from the desertifi cation of already arid lands caused by persistent droughts to torrential downpours and a record-breaking el nio weather phenomenon, the worst impacts of climate change are being felt south of the equator. latin american countries, such as panama, which did the right thing by the renewable energy 'manual' of the 1980s with its reliance on hydropower, is now facing energy shortages and a head-on collision course with climate change. th is confl uence of events comes at a time when the country's growth and energy needs are outpacing its capacity to produce suffi ciently diversifi ed energy. th e adoption of greener energy alternatives the world over is partly suppressed by persistently cheap oil prices and a standard 'war' that is being waged by the alternative energy market. th ere is no "one size fi ts all" approach to powering economies. net contribution to climate change lower, but their ability to respond and rebuild stricken communities is, as we have noted, greatly impaired. while climate change invariably deals with large-scale science and phenomena, micro-climate impacts are increasingly commonplace. china's smog crisis (caused by severe industrial pollution and coal-fi red power plants) is linked to major respiratory ailments and a dramatic rise in lung cancer. 29 similarly, the temporary ban of vehicle traffi c in paris due to lingering noxious smog that aff ected the city in 2015, serve as reminders of just how fragile our ecosystem is. 30 adverse micro-level changes like these provide case studies on both the consequences and societal responses to climate change. aff ected cities adopt 'a life goes on' attitude and people and commerce proceed at a slower pace, while donning a surgical mask, popularized as a low-cost adaptation to air pollution and communicable respiratory diseases in asia. 31 in european cities, where people are already used to pedaling to work, bicycle use has skyrocketed and alternate forms of mass transit are available.facing hotter temperatures during summer months, colder winters, drier and longer droughts, and soggier monsoons, the world is being profoundly tested by what scientists would call the 'climate change little league'. th e dire consequences of rising sea levels and a world beyond a rise of 2 celsius promise to make it an increasingly unpleasant place-a veritable hot, fl at and crowded hellscape. 32 according to a consensus that has clearly formed among the scientifi c community, a 'gladwellian' tipping point is nigh.winter storms are now named in the u.s. to raise public awareness and improve safety against increasingly severe winter storms. 33 terms like 'snowmaggedon ' have become a part of the weather-watching vernacular, and cities like boston fi nd no mirth in being snowed in on an epochal scale. th rough the winter of 2014/2015, the northeastern u.s. faced a monster snow storm named juno. 34 boston was particularly hard-hit throughout the winter, with a record shattering 108.6 inches of snowfall, 35 resulting in massive snow drifts. th e economic impact of this calamity, preceded by super storm sandy, and irene before it, served as a stark reminder of the gdp at risk in cities, where climate-risk is one of the chief perils.as is noted in illustration 8.1 , 36 according to the u.s. national oceanic and atmospheric administration (noaa), the trend line since the beginning of the twentieth century shows a slow and steady increase in average land and ocean temperatures, rising more than one full degree celsius during this period, with a noteworthy rise since the 1960s. th e fi rst seven months of 2015 were the hottest in recorded history, and july 2015 was the hottest month ever recorded. 37 it is hard to argue with facts, and the fact is that average temperatures on land and in the oceans have risen consistently for more than a century.scientists diff er on the projected rise in average temperatures for the remainder of this century, but there is a growing consensus that the projection of a 2 celsius rise now appears inadequate, given the already observed impacts on ecosystems, food, livelihoods, and sustainable development. according to scientists from the inter-governmental panel on climate change, a 2 celsius increase in temperature would result in greater risk of a rise in sea level, shifting rainfall patterns and extreme weather events, such as fl oods, droughts, and heatwaves, that would severely impact the polar regions, high mountain areas, and the tropics. th is would pose a signifi cant danger to disadvantaged populations in many of the world's largest coastal cities, people whose livelihoods are dependent on natural resources, and those at risk from confl icts over scarce resources. 38 th ree reports produced by the world bank in its turn down the heat 39 series warn that, in the absence of concerted action, temperatures are on pace to rise to 4c above pre-industrial times by the end of this century. th e reports paint a dire picture of what the world could be like should such a temperature rise occur, including the inundation of coastal cities, increasing risks for food production (potentially leading to higher under and malnutrition rates), more extremes in temperature and precipitation, unprecedented heatwaves, substantially exacerbated water scarcity in many regions, an increased intensity of tropical cyclones and irreversible loss of biodiversity. 40 one of the more insidious eff ects of climate change is the impact it is having on the spread of communicable, warm-weather diseases, and on human health more generally. th e spread of mosquito-borne illness across parts of the mid-atlantic u.s., such as west nile virus, which is inexorably spreading 37 "two degree celsius climate change target 'utterly inadequate', expert argues," science news , march 27, 2015, accessed november 25, 2015, http://www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2015/ 03/150327091016.htm . 38 "celsius climate change," science news . 39 turn down the heat: climate extremes, regional impacts, and the case for resilience , worldbank.org, accessed november 25, 2015, http://www.worldbank.org/en/topic/climatechange/publication/ turn-down-the-heat-climate-extremes-regional-impacts-resilience . 40 "new report examines risks of 4 degree hotter world by end of century," worldbank.org, accessed november 25, 2015, http://www.worldbank.org/en/news/press-release/2012/11/18/new-reportexamines-risks-of-degree-hotter-world-by-end-of-century . north, is being attributed to climate change, 41 which will provide little comfort to northern cities when anti-malaria cocktails and mosquito repellents become a part of daily life. while the so-called maladies of affl uence continue to be the leading killers in developed countries, climate change poses a serious setback to the world's eff orts to combat the maladies of poverty . from diarrheal diseases to water and food supply challenges exacerbated by forced migration, all development goals are inextricably connected. other diseases that fester in warm, densely populated environments continue to mutate and spread. while there may be a spurious linkage to climate change, a globally connected world with a new variety of dread diseases, such as h5n1, sars, zika, ebola and vector-borne diseases, pose grave threats to humanity. as noted in illustration 8.2 , 42 the potential impacts of climate change on human health are numerous and serious. 41 undoubtedly, climate change is most visibly aff ecting the world's food supply chains and agricultural output. from droughts and wildfi res in california (one of the largest agricultural suppliers in the world 43 ) to $1.25 billion in lost rice production in th ailand, climate change is not only disrupting output, but is also disrupting and potentially eradicating entire crops-and the lifestyles that go with them. 44 our insatiable appetite in developed countries for a perennial supply of out-of-season fruits and vegetables is pushing agricultural production to new, dangerous limits of industrialization. a year-round bounty of meat, fi sh, and poultry harvested in massive industrial complexes is having unintended consequences on co 2 emissions and the world's fi sh stocks.climate-related impacts on food prices and staple crops translate quickly into urgent political and security challenges. indeed, observers have linked the eff ects of the rising costs of grain to the spark that ignited the arab spring in tunisia in 2010. 45 one act of self-immolation in protest to the oppressively prohibitive cost of living and the arc of history changed throughout the middle east, and indeed the world. th e security and refugee crisis plaguing europe and much of the rest of the world are an indirect consequence of this climate-linked spark. looking ahead, as war-ravaged countries throughout the middle east face the confl uence of low oil prices, desertifi cation, food supply chain pressures, and mass migration caused by sectarian violence, peace and stability face potentially insurmountable odds.th e climate-related risks to food supply chains underscore just how far societal adaptation must go to decelerate the rate of change and eventually establish a new normal, albeit a hotter and more austere normality. humanity must change its diet, its mobility, modes of transport and, above all, its industrial and residential energy consumption. policymakers, in turn, must embrace greater diversifi cation and effi ciency in energy production and distribution. governments must implement fi nancial systems that accurately price for the externalities of dirty fuels, following a "polluter pays" principle. additionally, building up risk hedging that funds crisis and post-crisis reconstruction eff orts as if climate change were not a surprise event is key. perhaps the most important step governments can take is to let the thousand fl owers of effi ciency and climate readiness bloom in the private sector and let the market pick winners and losers.th e internal combustion engine has been in use globally since the 1800s. over this 200 year period, the basic technology and its basic output-pollutionhas been largely unchanged. 46 th at the volkswagen group, the crestfallen global automotive major claiming the fastest production car in the world, still needed a cheat device to meet regulatory emissions standards speaks to need to leave an old technology to a bygone era. 47 in moving urban dwellers from pestilent horse-drawn carriages, the internal combustion engine and its early mass produced carriage, the ford model t, heralded a new era-an industrial renaissance. mobility over long distance is as essential to economic development as water is to survival. herein lies the challenge of an antiquated form of mobility: who among the world's advanced countries has the right to dictate the development pathway of emerging and developing countries when they are themselves merely playing a game of 'catch up'?as in some areas of the economy, people are waiting with baited breath as innovations continue to leapfrog old systems that seem increasingly illequipped. brick and mortar banking, for example, is increasingly being consigned to the history books in countries like kenya, where the advent of mobile money through the ubiquitous m-pesa program jump straight to a cash-free and banking branch-free future. 48 can any 'developed' country say that? technologies such as elon musk's groundbreaking tesla vehicles serve as a hopeful guidepost for the future of mobility.climate change resilience goes far beyond how we get around over long distances and whether we evolve from the internal combustion engine. it also includes our fi nancial readiness and the penetration of insurance and other hedging mechanisms, such as insurance-linked securities. lloyd's research shows that a 1 percent rise in insurance penetration translates into a 22 per-cent decrease in the burden shouldered by taxpayers following a large loss. 49 while some classes of insurance are seemingly more ubiquitous than gravity in advanced economies, underdeveloped or non-existent insurance markets in developing countries greatly hamper post-disaster recovery eff orts. moreover, the lack of insurance penetration across all categories of coverage provides no fi nancial backstop as families that grapple with losing economic breadwinners inevitably slide into hardship or poverty. increasing insurance penetration, from property programs to life and health, cannot only price climate risk more accurately, it can also help shore up redevelopment and individual household resilience.indeed, part of the reason the vw emissions-rigging scandal had such a swift punitive response is that attitudes and enforcement about climate change have evolved the world over. while there remains an unsurprising lag in attitudes among the worst co 2 emitters, generally the tendency globally is both an acceptance that climate change is real and that the time for action is now. in a compelling read of public sentiment, the pew research center has conducted a global survey on climate change (see countries, such as the u.s., germany, and the uk, among others. 50 th e more conservative or right-leaning on the political spectrum the less likely one is to believe that climate change is a serious problem that is harming people right now. th is schism widens when looking at the partisan diff erence on climate change among democrats and republicans in the u.s., creating a dangerous environment of climate inaction and denial. 51 political gridlock in the face of such a stark global risk is the very antithesis of risk agility. th erefore, it is largely up to the market and individual households (and voters) to drive change. th e more climate impacts are felt in advanced markets, the more likely attitudes will change.th e global insurance industry is among the most resilient business sectors in the world. its raison d'tre is to provide fi nancial coverage against the misfortune visited upon policyholders. th e industry is increasingly responding to climate change with innovative fi nancial products that at a minimum provide economic security in the face of more frequent climate-related risks. while fi nancial innovations can mitigate some of the economic consequences of climate change (for a premium), they will, of course, not stop adverse impacts from occurring. insurance is merely a mechanism for fi nancing unforeseen losses. risk management is the art and science of stopping (or minimizing) losses in the fi rst place. we need a true climate risk management strategy, for the collision course we are on with the planet's most complex system (the environment) is untenable.weather-related crop failures have been a persistent threat since our earliest ancestors gave up their wandering lifestyles in favor of more sedentary farming societies. today, crop failure insurance has expanded to include other weather-related risks to global food supply chains. coverage based on specifi c predetermined rain volumes can help farmers and buyers alike off set some of the economic consequences triggered by weather. supply chain disruptions continually aff ect world trade. from the fl ooding in th ailand that stopped much of the global production of semiconductors in its tracks to disruptions caused by natural disasters, off setting economic risks and enabling fi rms and countries to reposition is a key facet of building resilience. 52 one of the more promising aspects of fi nancial innovation in building a societal response to climate change borrows from behavioral economicsalthough many of these innovations are still in their nascent stages. john hancock, a u.s. subsidiary of the manulife financial corporation, unveiled an innovative whole life insurance policy in partnership with vitality, a pioneering south african wellness program. 53 in this solution, traditional life insurance customers combat longevity risk by wearing a fitbit device that rewards a healthy lifestyle with a combination of incentives and real savings on premiums, which for a whole life insurance policy can range in excess of $50,000.th is type of behavior-based solution is also occurring in the highly commoditized auto insurance market, where drivers install a device in their car that monitors driving patterns, thereby rewarding good road conduct with reduced premium and other benefi ts. further incentives for hybrid or all-electric vehicles add to government-sponsored tax incentives, spurring the adoption of effi cient vehicles. following total loss claims, some homeowner's policies require rebuilding houses with environmentally friendly materials and systems, such as use of natural light and solar panels, among others. 54 options for harnessing insurance and fi nancial incentives beyond the traditional indemnifi cation off er a compelling, if underexplored, area for innovation. similar possibilities also abound to hedge large-scale losses. harnessing the depth, liquidity, and actuarial capabilities in the private sector will help not only an individual household vis--vis climate change, but also highly exposed industries and society writ large. clearly, the scale of the potential economic consequences are such that it will require true cross-sector collaboration. bringing government resources to bear, along with global reinsurance and insurance capacity, would create an unbroken chain of fi nancial control that can help communities rebuild following a loss, while helping others gain resilience by incentivizing behavioral change. countries alike, the opportunity lies in creating basic insurance industry capabilities while strengthening ties and access to international markets.in the face of climate change-a risk so large that people wrongly believe they cannot have an impact-harnessing all aspects of the capital markets is key. while most climate-related fi nancial innovations are quite sophisticated, insurance-linked securities, such as catastrophe bonds (so-called "cat bonds"), are still underutilized in the world's climate risk management strategy. given the scale and potential city-wide and broad regional impacts natural disasters can have, catastrophe bonds were developed to bring greater fi nancial liquidity following a large-scale loss, while at the same time giving sophisticated investors an important source of diversifi cation. while catastrophe bonds themselves come with a series of intrinsic risks, they nonetheless off er a compelling approach to improving fi nancial resilience.while a novel investment vehicle, catastrophe bonds and their constituent funds, like other insurance-linked securities, are prone to a number of risks. some are inherent in the underlying insurance exposure they are attached to-for example, natural disasters-while other risks may be common to the investment class. th e fi rst order of risks materialize if the underlying claim trigger (or covered event) occurs during the maturity of the bond, which is typically three years. th is would result in a payout from the special purpose vehicle (spv) to cover certain portions of the loss that have been transferred to the capital markets. in eff ect, these specialized fi nancial instruments are the reinsurance of the reinsurance industry.one of the most attractive features of catastrophe bonds is that they are largely decoupled from the fl uctuations of the economy. while it shields investors from potential economic contagion in other asset classes, these bonds expose insurers to highly concentrated regions that are prone to natural disasters, which, as the evidence suggests, are occurring with greater frequency and severity, and are aff ecting more densely populated/built-up areas. 55 hurricane katrina, which decimated the gulf coast and inundated new orleans, hurricane sandy, the march 2011 tohoku earthquake, and the ensuing tsunami and nuclear fallout in japan, highlight the perils intrinsic in these instruments.in other words, while seeking diversifi cation from economic risks, investors in catastrophe bonds are largely putting all their proverbial eggs in only a few highly concentrated regions exposed to natural perils, such as east coast hurricanes, japanese earthquakes, and european weather events. in short, only those regions that are prone to natural disasters that can be modelled and have a confl uence of insurable assets are in the pool-therefore there may be a case of limited gains from diversifi cation. broadening the geographic scope and the types of natural perils covered in a catastrophe bond will not only help to diversify risks, adding coverage to woefully under-insured regions, but will also help mitigate the eff ect of adverse selection.rating agencies (not necessarily the paragons of accurately rating risk) have noted this so-called 'peak peril' attribute of catastrophe bonds. consequently, most rating agencies give these bonds low marks in terms of investment grades. 56 in fact, approximately 90 percent of the cat bonds tracked in swiss re's cat bond index receive a bb rating or lower. 57 where other investment instruments have a property of 'slow degradation' and can quickly turn around with the advent of new market information, cat bonds are not dissimilar from a game of russian roulette: if the event occurs, albeit remote, an investor is likely to lose everything. th is feature of being uncorrelated to the 'noise' in the fi nancial markets give cat bonds the quality of being an investment vehicle that is not speculative in nature, but rather associated with the advent of a pure risk.while climate change is a man-made risk, people will have a hard time gaming the acuity of these claim triggers, which can be an important source of stability against adam smith's invisible hand. outside of the 'all or nothing' risk inherent in cat bonds, they face a host of what can be deemed operational risks, which are exacerbated by the fact that there is a limited secondary market for these instruments and many investors do not totally understand this market, as evidenced by its small comparative size, at $24 billion. 58 in addition to potential exposures resulting from issuer insolvency or fi nancial distress, returns to investors are subordinated to other potential obligees. additionally, reductions in interest rates due to early redemption or extensions in the notes can potentially hamper investor returns. 59 cat bonds are unequivocally appealing in that they are one of the few investment vehicles that can help diversify away business cycle exposures in a portfolio. while in turn this exposes investors to the often misunderstood peril of natural catastrophes and the opacity of risk modelling agencies, the trade-off is nonetheless attractive. empirically, cat bonds have performed well in terms of holding their principal and delivering returns to investors that are often superior to other benchmarks. 60 at the same time, there appears to be inherently less volatility in cat bond returns as evidenced when comparing returns to more volatile equity markets. in addition to being uncorrelated to the business cycle, cat bond pricing and returns are relatively straightforward spreads, with returns being a premium spread on treasuries and pricing typically pegged as a spread on libor.another attractive feature of cat bonds is that they typically abate counterparty exposures, such as insolvency or fi nancial distress, by being managed through spvs and collateralized with strong paper. th is property makes cat bonds attractive to issuers as well, as spvs are often off -balance sheet instruments that tend to be bankruptcy remote. cat bonds aided the broader insurance industry with standardized contracts, a move away from ad hoc reinsurance agreements, providing the vital liquidity of the capital markets following hurricane andrew. 61 while many insurers had diffi culty coping with this, investors clearly benefi ted from a degree of harmonization. finally, with the advent of multi-peril cat bonds, investors have been able to secure an added layer of "natural" diversifi cation, by not being exposed to a single natural catastrophe in a single region, but rather to be invested in a basket of natural perils. while the dominant force majeure in cat bonds are u.s. wind-related exposures, the multi-peril approach adds an additional layer of protection.in terms of disadvantages, cat bonds have largely remained the remit of large institutional investors and insurance and reinsurance fi rms wishing to tap into the capital markets. th is is a by-product of their issuing complexity and costs, combined with their relative novelty. additionally, cat bonds are heavily dependent on third-party modelling fi rms, who use historical loss information and various payment trigger approaches (i.e. modelled loss and parametric modelling, among others), thus exposing cat bonds to substantial model risk, as many natural catastrophes, by default, are out of sample.th is is particularly true when dealing with something as vastly complex as nature and weather systems, which operate on a millennial scale. another drawback of this asset class is that they are, by design, prone to adverse selection. more clearly, only those regions that are prone to natural disasters and have exposed assets will enter the pool. while this exposure is abated by the various underlying layers of insurance (e.g. underlying insurance limits perform like a deductible, thus they need to be exhausted before the cat bond is triggered), cat bonds off er something of an 'all or nothing' proposition to investors. it should be noted that one major disadvantage of this asset class, to the extent one can rely on rating agencies, is that none receives an investment grade.cat bonds are an important fi nancial instrument that are here to stay. as such, they are well placed in large, well-diversifi ed portfolios. in fact, this may be their only home, for the reasons of size and complexity cited earlier.th e property of being decoupled from the business cycle is an attractive one. however, fund managers would be well advised to tread carefully into cat bonds, for their 'all or nothing' properties can wreak havoc on an imbalanced portfolio. crucially, cat bonds not only off er some respite from economic volatility compared to other assets classes, but also tend to demonstrate superior risk-adjusted returns. 62 a limited secondary market is a business risk that fund managers have to contend with for cat bonds, leaving few exits in instances of investor remorse. nonetheless, cat bonds off er another avenue in the pursuit of investment yield, with spreads averaging between 300 and 600 basis points over treasuries. th ere is also evidence, following the tohoku earthquake in japan, that even in the face of unforeseen calamity, cat bonds are a surprisingly resilient asset class. 63 th is resilience, and, thus, their attractiveness as a source of diversifi cation, is increased with the advent of multi-peril instruments.undoubtedly, the risk-return trade-off provided by cat bonds is appealing to investors. while they largely remain an investment vehicle for sophisticated institutional investors, cat bonds off er an attractive value proposition. multiperil cat bonds overcome some of the concerns of being exposed to specifi c regions that are prone to specifi c natural hazards. th us, in a given year or over multi-year periods, wherein investors are typically locked into the bond, it is unlikely that a confl uence of natural catastrophes will occur. th e property of being shielded from the economic cycle lowers the overall volatility of cat 62 bonds, making them a favorable addition and a potentially stabilizing force in a portfolio.as investors seek yield, cat bond primary issue yield spreads have stood up reasonably well during the last decade. a period that was both naturally tumultuous-with katrina, the tohoku earthquake and sandy, among others-and fi nancially turbulent, with the great deleveraging of 2007-2009 and a historically low interest rate environment. against this backdrop, and with the evident resilience of cat bond returns, the risk-return trade-off appears to be in balance. th is being the case, it is striking how comparatively small the cat bond market is, perhaps signaling that they are only attractive to "practitioners" or those whose investment mandates permit them to dabble in the below investment grade "no-go zone".nonetheless, there are encouraging signs that these instruments are being cleverly applied to bring liquidity into other areas of the insurance market. for example, life and health insurers are using cat bonds for the 'longevity' calamity that has the potential to upend actuarial models around life expectancy. likewise, governments are turning to this vehicle as a way of creating a backstop in the event of a natural disaster. innovative applications in man-made disasters, such as war and terrorism, which already enjoy a vibrant insurance and reinsurance markets, appears to be a logical next frontier.financing climate change and natural disasters through a broad-based approach can help improve pre-crisis readiness and post-crisis reconstruction. no matter how innovative pure claims-based solutions are, there is no climate risk management substitute to stopping the accident in the fi rst instance. in order to do this, leveraging fi nancial markets to change behavior through incentives and penalties can have a positive impact on the worst-performing advanced market consumers. globally, the disequilibrium of impacts from climate change weigh heavily against underdeveloped countries. calibrating this imbalance through public-private approaches will help stem the tide of forced migration, terrorism, and other global threats in the era of man-made risks.a 2015 poll 64 found that just 3 percent of americans viewed climate change as the most important issue facing the u.s. given the short-term orientation of so many people, perhaps this is unsurprising, but it should be alarming, coming from the world's top producer of carbon dioxide. 65 in the face of overwhelming scientifi c evidence proving that climate change exists, there is little that can be said to someone who continues to deny this fact. however, much of the world's population clearly believes climate change is here to stay. whether the result of their own personal experience or their understanding of the science supporting the climate change argument, people around the world are beginning to recognize both the adverse eff ects of climate change, and the need for urgent action. reversing the paralysing eff ects of partisan politics that is stalling serious action on climate change is vitally important. broadbased resilience on the part of individuals, organizations, and governments will collectively determine our agility in responding to this looming threat.of march 20th, 2020. our estimate for cumulative cases of infection until that date is 916,000 (90% ci: 508k, 1.5m), and for total death is 15,485 (90% ci: 8.4k, 25.8k). these numbers are significantly (more than one order of magnitude) higher than official statistics. the trajectory of the epidemic until the end of june could take various paths depending on the impact of seasonality and policies targeting social distancing. in the most optimistic scenario for seasonal effects, depending on policy measures, 1.6 million iranians (90% ci: 0.9m-2.6m) are likely to get infected, and death toll will reach about 58,000 cases (90% ci: 32k-97k), while in the more pessimistic scenarios, death toll may exceed 103,000 cases (90% ci: 56k-172k).our results suggest that the number of cases and deaths may be over an order of magnitude larger than official statistics in iran. absent extended testing capacity other countries may face a significant under-count of existing cases and thus be caught off guard about the actual toll of the epidemic.the 2019 novel coronavirus (sars-cov-2), the pathogen that causes covid-19 infection, is exposing the world to one of its largest global health challenges of recent time. the challenge is multi-faceted, from understanding a quickly evolving situation to responding with limited information and under extreme pressures on the healthcare system. from public understanding to policy choices, much depends on the data about the epidemics spread and models that integrate such data into actionable policies (kaplan, craft et al. 2002 , thompson, tebbens et al. 2008 ). yet the official data is highly uncertain, with large variations in quality depending on the country reporting it, and regularly offering lower bounds that have unknown error bounds compared to the reality on the ground. other sources of data, often based on smaller samples, travel screening, and anecdotal evidence may offer relevant hints, but there are not easily generalized or combined with official data. the current paper focuses on using a standard dynamic epidemiological model as a tool for incorporating various sources of data into a unified estimation of the trajectory of disease for the country of iran.current information (as of mid-march 2020) point to the spread of covid-19 starting from a food market in wuhan china in mid-november 2019. the epidemic was not officially detected until the early 2020, and spread rapidly, mostly in china, for january and february of 2020. in response significant public health resources were mobilized in china, entire cities and regions were put under quarantine, and economic activity was reduced to a fraction. by mid-february the speed of contagion was slowing down in china, offering hope to many that the epidemic would be contained before becoming a global pandemic. since then, however, rapid rise of detected cases in many other countries have dimmed the hopes for containing the contagion at origins. the situation may also be much worse than official statistics portray. for example, in late february, the united states had only a handful of endogenous cases, i.e. identified as not being imported from china. yet genetic sequencing of the virus among one of those cases tied it back to a traveler from china who entered the country six weeks before and was thought to have not infected anybody (fink and baker 2020) . this implies that the epidemic might have been spreading in the u.s. for six weeks without being detected. cases of death from covid-19 might have also been popping up, but attributed to flu instead. the situation may be worse elsewhere. among countries in south and east asia with significant economic and travel ties to china, several, including india, pakistan, indonesia, malaysia, vietnam, myanmar, bangladesh, and philippines have reported limited cases (as of early march) despite having a total population of over two billion. that seems unlikely when many smaller countries or those with further ties from china already show sustained epidemics, unless temperature plays an important role in infectivity, a possibility that requires further investigation (wang, jiang et al. 2020) . thus official statistics are not a reliable gauge for understanding the actual extent of the epidemic.the situation in iran, the country with the third largest number of official deaths from the disease by late march 2020, is instructive. the first official cases were reported on february 19th, 2020, in the city of qom (wikipedia 2020) . later some anonymous sources reported on observing cases suspected of the disease much earlier, as early as january 2020 (iraninternational 2020). yet in the absence of test kits to confirm the virus and lagging government response, those reports gained little traction. from february 19 th on the disease spread rapidly in different cities.. cc-by-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. (which was not certified by peer review)the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted march 27, 2020 . . https://doi.org/10.1101 how far will this epidemic go and what policies should be put in place to control and mitigate the risks very much depends on understanding the true magnitude of the epidemic.while large and alarming, current reports for iran, and many other countries, may well be underestimating the actual size of the pandemic. any under-estimation is worrisome, but early in the exponential growth phase of an epidemic such errors could be extremely costly. the risk of under-estimation is partly driven by the characteristics of the covid-19 such as a potentially large population of unrecognized patients with mild symptoms (at least 80% of the cases have symptoms not very different from common cold or flu) (novel coronavirus pneumonia emergency response epidemiology 2020). some heuristics are used to correct for such biases. for example the ratio of deaths to those recovered at the beginning of march was 6.3% (worldmeters 2020), yet most reports put the death rate at lower rates (fauci, lane et al. 2020, wu and mcgoogan 2020) , implying that some 70% of cases go undetected. a formal study puts that number at 86% for the early stage of the epidemic in china (li, pei et al. 2020 ). yet, the country-specific biases in measurement and reporting may exceed those due to the nature of the disease. to illustrate, in the next section we provide a quick survey of various clues related to the magnitude of epidemic in iran, which we then build on in our analysis.there have been a few clues from iran which may inform efforts to estimate the true cases. first, is the number of cases identified among travelers arriving in other countries from iran. screening of passengers from high-risk countries in airports is more reliable than most countrylevel screening statistics. one study in pre-print estimated 18,300 total cases of infected individuals in iran by february 25 (tuite, bogoch et al. 2020) . the method relied on estimation of cases in the whole country based on three diagnosed cases of infection upon individuals' arrival from iran in various international airports and the likelihood of such an incident given approximately 7,500 daily outbound passengers from iran during those early days (fraser, donnelly et al. 2009 ). there is much uncertainty associated with these estimates, a wide 95% confidence interval of 3,770 -53,470, partly because the method assumes many cases of infected travelers have gone undetected. nevertheless the range was orders of magnitude larger than official statistics at the time. later reports on the number of infected travelers from iran rose rapidly, to 97 cases by february 28 (radiofarda 2020). an article in the atlantic, offered a series of back-of-the-envelope calculations which included several simplifying assumptions, estimating 2 million accumulated cases of infected individuals by march 9 th (wood 2020) .one may expect the death statistics to be more reliable. but test kits for identifying have been in short supply, and post-mortem testing may not have been a priority of officials in iran, so potentially many cases are missed. for example on march 1st a health official in golestan, a state with 1.9 million population in iran, reported 594 cases of coronavirus in the state based on ct-scan outcomes (iraninternational 2020). he complained the cases were not yet counted in the official tally because the central authorities had not provided test kits to the state and are reluctant to accept other diagnosis methods. a bbc persian report on february 28 th used interviews with an unspecified number of hospitals in iran to put the death from the disease at 210, an order of magnitude larger than official numbers at the time (bbcpersian 2020). another news agency quoted similar sources for a total of 416 deaths by march 1 st (iraninternational 2020) and 5000 on march 18 th . on february 24 th a member of iran's . cc-by-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted march 27, 2020 . . https://doi.org/10.1101 parliament reported 50 deaths only in qom, a city of 1.2 million (wikipedia 2020) . several reports of government officials contracting the disease have also been released, including reports on infection of 20 member of the iranian parliament (a body of 270 members), as well as several deaths among officials (bbcpersian 2020). more informal observations shared on social media offer a peek into grim conditions in hospitals, with large numbers of patients suffering from covid-19 symptoms and death rates that are far larger than official statistics suggest and include many deaths at homes.we develop a dynamic simulation model of the spread of the disease in iran to estimate the likely trajectory of the disease that is consistent with the evidence summarized above. we start with the traditional seir (for susceptible, exposed, infectious, and recovered stocks representing population groups) model and incorporate feedbacks regulating endogenous changes in contact rate, screening, diagnosis, and reporting in response to risk perception and other relevant factors. thus not only reported statistics, but also the effective reproduction number, re, are endogenously generated and can change as people respond to the epidemic. the model is very simple on other fronts: it assumes perfect mixing for the whole population of iran and includes no disaggregation of population into different groups, nor any travel patterns across population groups. the focus being on a single country, the only link with the pandemic is when the cases were first seeded in iran (supposedly from china). we use this model, along with various strands of data reported above, to weave together an estimate of disease trajectory so far, and offer projections for expected future trajectory. given the rapid development of this model and various uncertainties not included in the analysis, the results should be seen as an assessment to enhance the overall picture of the epidemic, but not as reliable point estimates. with these limitations in mind, we estimate over 916,000 (90% ci: 508k, 1.5m) cumulative cases of the disease in iran as of march 20th, with over 15,485 (90% ci: 8.4k, 25.8k) deaths. we thus estimate that only 2.1% of cases and 9.2% of deaths are officially attributed to covid-19, with the rest going undetected. the confidence intervals around our estimations are relatively wide due to data limitations and our conservative assumptions in estimating those intervals. nevertheless these results point to extreme gaps between official data and actual trajectory of disease, which may lead to slow response and under-appreciation of risks of the diseases in the coming months.model structure- figure 1 offers a simple representation of the model's structure. model equations, and parameter values are documented in the supplementary material. the model belongs to the family of the infectious disease models knowns as seir (susceptible, exposed, infectious, and recovered). main state variables of the model are shown in the figure as boxes, with flows between them represented explicitly. the infected population is first asymptomatic and later becomes symptomatic. the inflow to the asymptomatic population mostly comes from the susceptible population. first cases of infection are injected to the exposed stock which then trigger dynamics of infection. these first cases are critical for starting the epidemic, but once several seeds of infection are planted, later importation of cases in largely inconsequential to the overall trajectory (chinazzi, davis et al. 2020 ). the symptomatic infected population will follow two different paths of recovery or death. in practice different symptomatic subpopulations . cc-by-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted march 27, 2020. . https://doi.org/10. 1101 have different risks both in severity of illness and mortality, but to avoid proliferation of parameters we use general population averages.the model includes the 'infection' reinforcing loop (r1) which regulates the spread of disease from infected to susceptible, and creates the initial exponential growth in the number of cases. we also assume that asymptomatic patients (captured in the 'exposed' stock in figure 1 ) might be infective (bai, yao et al. 2020 ), though at a lower infectivity than symptomatic infected. as in the generic seir model the disease will continue as long as the reproduction number, the number of secondary cases from each infection, remains above one.to this basic epidemiological model we add two endogenous mechanisms that are key to understanding the observed trajectories in official data. first, we formulate contact rate to be endogenously changing in response to perceived risk of infection (a function of death statistics). the impact of perceived risk on contact rate captures not only the endogenous changes in social interactions, gatherings, self-isolation of suspected cases, and hygiene, but also government mandated closure of events, schools, and businesses to name a few. for example in iran schools and sport and cultural events were closed down after the seriousness of the epidemic was recognized in late february. moreover people started to reduce their discretionary interactions in public spaces, cut down on social and family gatherings, and followed hand washing and mask wearing recommendations more closely. we assume public risk perception depends on the number of recent reported cases of death. this balancing feedback (loop b) can bring down contact rate, potentially enough to slow down the epidemic, and captures in a simple formulation how a few other countries, namely china and south korea, have brought down their case counts after the initial exponential growth. second, we explicitly model the endogenous changes in screening and reporting of cases over time. here, the increased understanding of risks leads to mobilization of screening resources that further expand the case detection and official statistics in a reinforcing process (loop r2). nevertheless even with good screening many mild cases will go undiagnosed and not counted in official statistics. . cc-by-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted march 27, 2020. . https://doi.org/10. 1101 estimation-we have time series data for official reports of death, recovered, and cumulative number of infection over time. besides the official data, we use a few unofficial data points including three observations about number of iranian passengers diagnosed with covid-19 upon arrival in international airports, and three unofficial estimations from bbc and iraninetrnational news sources about total cases of death from covid 19. the model includes several biological parameters (such as the asymptomatic period of the disease or average time to recover) which we specify based on prior literature; population size and travel scope are also input using existing data. eleven uncertain parameters remain that are estimated using the above data. five of the parameters are used to specify how official measurement and reporting relates to "true" values of infection and death, three parameters estimate public reaction to the reports, and two parameters are for mortality rate among two different groups of patients. finally, the arrival of first cases of the virus is estimated as a separate parameter.our calibration method is mainly based on forming a likelihood function for observing the actual time series data conditional on model parameters. we then conduct a markov chain monte carlo (mcmc) simulation to estimate the joint posterior distribution of the model parameters subject to observed data. we define a likelihood function for change over time (net-flow) of official reports on death, recovered and infection assuming they are count events drawn from model-predicted rates (poisson distribution). we use a similar poisson distribution assumption for number of infected passengers and unofficial reports of death as well, since they both fit well into a count measure framework. the mcmc method searches over the feasible ranges for the uncertain parameters and accepts various combinations of parameters that are consistent with the observed data. similar methods are used frequently in estimating dynamic models of epidemics. for example wu and colleagues used a similar likelihood based mcmc method for estimating the basic parameters of the covid-19 epidemic and its potential for spread beyond china (li, pei et al. 2020 , wu, leung et al. 2020 . four prior experience with the use of mcmc methods in nonlinear dynamic models highlights the risk that model mis-specifications may lead to confidence intervals that are too tight. we therefore downscale the likelihood function to expand the confidence intervals (details in the online appendix) to err on the side of caution in assessing uncertainties and structural nuances not explicitly modeled.we first provide results from an out of sample prediction exercise intended to build additional confidence in our method, then discuss the detailed results based on full sample.our data are limited (three data series for 30 days plus a handful of data points for other variables) and thus proper out of sample prediction test is limited in its scope. nevertheless, we calibrate the model with the first 15 days of data using the methods discussed above, and test the model's ability in replicating the rest of the data points. figure 2 shows the results, comparing simulation outcomes (median and 90% confidence interval) with data.. cc-by-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted march 27, 2020. . cc-by-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. the model performs better in replicating cumulative cases of infection and death than recovered. while any model that may create exponential growth trend might perform reasonably under this tests, our model is constrained by many structural features of contagion and behavioral response dynamics, and the match is despite those constraints. in the next section, we recalibrate the model with the entire data of 30 days.we follow the procedure described in the modeling section and calibrate our model using multiple data sources. the results from mcmc is a joint distribution of parameter values for 11 estimated parameters through calibration. after about 2 million simulation runs, we received about 1.6 million acceptable points from posterior joint distribution of parameters, and used top 90% of the distribution of payoff values. we randomly selected 3% of those samples and used those to simulate the trajectories for various model variables. figure 3 -a compares simulation results for official confirmed cases of death, recovered, and cumulative cases of infection compared with the data. rmspe values of simulation for the last 10 days of reported recovered, death, and cumulative infected are 16%, 26%, and 5%, and rmse's are 877, 116, and 794. simulation runs almost perfectly correlate with data. table a1 in the appendix reports estimated parameters along with those adopted from the literature. figure 3 -b shows how simulation runs replicate unofficial statistics including the number of infected travelers diagnosed before air travel patterns changed substantially, and medical community's counts of cumulative death reported by media sources.the simulation results reported in figure 2 . cc-by-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted march 27, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020. 03.22.20040956 doi: medrxiv preprint infected (panel e) until march 20, 2020, starting from december 31 st , 2019 (day 0 in simulation). as discussed in detail in the modeling assumptions (above) and limitations (below), there are several structural uncertainties that can affect our estimations. some of those uncertainties are quantified further in section 3.4. with these sources of uncertainty in mind, we find total infected cases at the time of this writing may be closer to 916,000, than the reported 19,000. cumulative deaths by march 20th, over 15000, may also be an order of magnitude higher than official statistics and might have almost tripled in the last 10 days of the analysis. there is also much uncertainty in these numbers: our baseline estimate for cumulative infected to date may be as low as 508,000 and as high as 1.5 million. similarly cumulative deaths is between 8400 and 25,800. the wide confidence intervals are partly due to the nature of the data: not having found any data on the rate of testing in iran it is very hard to fully know the underlying diffusion patterns based only on the formal statistics. the travel and informal estimates of death partially address these limitations, but much uncertainty remains. our conservative assumption on downscaling the likelihood function may also have contributed to this wide interval. nevertheless, even our lower bound are 26 times the official statistics for total infections and 6 times larger than the death statistics.there are some glimmers of hope in our estimates as well. the drop in contact rate in response to perceived risk, which we have captured in our model, might have reduced re significantly, to just below 1 as of late march (panel f). that reduction, if confirmed by data in the coming days, would help bring down the number of new cases. thus, figure 3 -e shows the number of currently infected cases may well be reaching its peak at the end of the simulation. note that this number is smaller than cumulative cases to date (panel c).the epidemic seems to have raged with a reproduction number close to 2.72 (90% ci: 2.57-2.92 ci) for more than six weeks before the behavioral and policy interventions have slowed down the diffusion rate starting in late february. some of this drop may also be attributed to weather, but current research is mixed on the impact of weather (luo, majumder et al. 2020 , wang, jiang et al. 2020 ) so we did not include it in our estimation (but would explore it in forward projection in 3.5). those factors, we estimate, have already brought down the aggregate contact rate to 26% (90% ci: 22%-31%) of pre-epidemic levels. this number may just succeed in bringing down the reproduction number below 1, which is the necessary condition for containment of the epidemic. is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted march 27, 2020 . . https://doi.org/10.1101 whereas the case fatality rate in iran, based on official statistics until march 20 th , is 18.4%, our estimated case fatality rate for the iranian population is 3.7 (0.4)% (standard errors for estimates are in parentheses). this estimate is consistent with, and slightly higher than, the 2.3% reported by wu and mcgoogan (2020) based on tracing confirmed cases in china. if correct, the magnitude of epidemic in iran would be much larger than that in china so far, and limits to healthcare services may explain the increased death rate. this finding is reinforced by the limited coverage of testing in iran that is indicated in our estimation. many cases go unconfirmed, and at its maximum, formal testing is covering only 2.5 (0.9)% of infections and 26 (17)% of deaths. these estimates are consistent with qualitative media reports from iran on very limited availability of testing, the doctors' need for getting authorization before conducting tests, and the multi-day delays in receiving test results that render them ineffective in the clinical decision making process. we estimate that hospital sources of news organizations who have offered alternative versions of actual death statistics in iran have had a much wider coverage of true death statistics (42 (15)% of true values). their count offers a lower bound for true deaths, is also close to our lower confidence bound, and suggests that the true number of cumulative cases, even with a case fatality rate as high as 3.7%, would not be lower than 380,000. nevertheless, we estimate that even those medical community reports offer coverage significantly below 100%, consistent with the less-than-perfect coverage of hospital reports by media sources, and anecdotal evidence that hospital system has been overwhelmed in most hot spots of the disease and many patients have died at home and been buried with no testing or proper association of cause of death to covid-19.the model used prior estimates from the literature for three important parameters: the total duration of illness (d=14 days), the asymptomatic period (=4 days), and the fractional infectivity of the asymptomatic period (=0.25). we assess our projections' sensitivity to these structural assumptions by re-estimating the model for different values of each parameter. in this analysis we find a new set of best-fitting parameters given each different assumption on disease parameters. in table 1 results are summarized as percentage changes in key projections (cumulative infections and cumulative death until march 20 th , 2020) compared to baseline bestfitting parameters. 34.7% note: each row reports percentage change in cumulative infection and death compared to baseline given alternative assumptions on fractional infectivity of asymptomatic period (), asymptomatic period (), and duration of illness (d).results suggest these structural parameters are important in identifying the true magnitude of the epidemic. specifically, a smaller fractional infectivity during asymptomatic period (), a longer asymptomatic period (), or a shorter duration of illness all significantly increase the projections for total cases and deaths. reductions in the estimates are less significant when parameters move in the opposite direction, though a very high level of  would bring down the . cc-by-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted march 27, 2020 . . https://doi.org/10.1101 estimated cumulative cases notably. current evidence for transmission during asymptomatic period is rather limited, and thus our baseline projections may be somewhat conservative. nevertheless, given our conservative treatment of the confidence intervals all these baseline projections with different disease parameters remain within the 90% bounds of our baseline projections.we run the model until july 1st of 2020 under six scenarios (three alternative assumptions about the impact of seasonality times two policy measures). specifically, our scenarios about seasonality include no effect (status quo), moderate effect (infectivity of the virus decreases linearly from april 1 st and halves by june 1 st , then stays the same for the rest of the simulation), and very strong mitigating effect (infectivity of the virus decreases from april 1 st to a quarter of its base value by june 1 st , then stays the same for the rest of the simulation). for policy, our focus is on contact rate, and we include two conditions of status quo and aggressive efforts to decrease contact rate by half what it would be otherwise. these six conditions provide intuitions for a potentially wide range of cases. both intervention and weather impacts are assumed to include rather strong options, which is to offer a feel for the range of possibilities, but not necessarily be representative of most likely scenarios. moreover, we also note that the wide cone of uncertainty in the baseline simulations will continue and expand in future projections.keeping the uncertainty considerations in mind (but not graphed due to clutter), figure 4 shows results based on best-fit parameters. if our best case scenario on the reduction of contacts and benefits of seasonality for containment hold, the number of infected cases will peak soon at approximately 494,000 (90% ci: 274k-813k), and will go down later on. this optimistic scenario will still lead to over a million infections and some 58,000 deaths (90% ci: 32k-97k) by the end of june. the less aggressive scenarios point to continued spread of the epidemic. a reduction in contagion is realized only when reproduction number remains below one as a result of natural contact reduction in response to recent deaths, government interventions that reduce contacts, and seasonality. among these three, the first (behavioral response) is endogenous to recent death rate. when death rate comes under control (due to the combination of all those factors), our model assumes the contract rate rebounds, weakening the first channel. economic pressures, normalization of death, and behavioral modeling after the more risk seeking (or those already recovered and thus presumably immune) could all weaken the behavioral response when the perceived risks have faded. the increased contact would then, with a delay, bring up the death rate close to levels sustaining a reproduction number around or slightly above one. this creates a strong attractor in the dynamics where in steady state contact rate is high enough to sustain the contagion but not so high to lead to the rapid infection of all the population. therefore it is only with strong weather and/or government interventions that reduced reproduction number brings the epidemic under control. this dynamic offers a cautionary tale against declaring victory early in the fight against the epidemic. however the actual magnitude of such rebound effect is not known in this setting and our data offers no guidance on the relevant parameters. therefore these results are only qualitatively suggestive but not quantitatively reliable.. cc-by-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted march 27, 2020 . . https://doi.org/10.1101 . cc-by-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted march 27, 2020 . . https://doi.org/10.1101 figure 4-simulation-based estimation of the trajectory of cumulative recovered (a), death (b), cumulative infected (c), current infected (d), reproduction number (e) and contact rate (f), until the end of june 2020, under 6 conditions: (three seasonality effect conditions (s1-s3) x two policy effects (p1 and p2)). note: each graph shows the median value of than 3000 simulation runs. 90% ci would give a wider range of results. the reproduction number starts from zero given that the disease have slightly different starting days at different simulations, and then reaches its initial steady state value.in this paper we provided a more sobering picture of the covid-19 outbreak in iran using a dynamic model that goes beyond official statistics. integrating data from various sources we suspect the current official statistics are at least an order of magnitude below actual spread of the epidemic, and even in optimistic scenarios the burden of disease will be large and lasting for many months. implementing, and sustaining, strong policies that target social distancing offers the main hope for containing the epidemic.the gap between official statistics and our estimates may be due to various complications in measurement as well as policy choices. the availability of testing infrastructure has been a major bottleneck for detecting cases in iran. citizens with suspicious symptoms have had no easy way for getting tested; most tests are conducted on hospitalized patients, require specific authorization, and are processed in a few centralized labs adding significant delays to the process. not only mild cases are missed, but also many critical patients have been unable to access the care they need due to hospital congestion. the fact that majority of cases have mild symptoms similar to flu (wu and mcgoogan 2020) adds to the risk of under-counting even if the testing capacity was ample. in fact many mild or moderately sick patients may have preferred to stay home than risk being infected upon visiting a congested hospital, further reducing demand for testing.many of the insights form this analysis are applicable to the spread of the disease in other regions. specifically, many countries have low test rates which may be hiding the magnitude of the epidemic and increasing the risk of unpleasant surprises for policy makers and the public.this paper is based on modeling-in-real-time of an emerging outbreak. the problem is rapidly changing, and timely estimation is critical for the purpose of our analysis. therefore we have made several simplifying assumptions that readers should be aware of in interpreting our results. first, consistent with prior findings (rahmandad and sterman 2008) we have focused on capturing behavioral feedbacks in contacts and testing and have adopted a formal estimation process, but have done so at the cost of abstracting away from much detail complexity and heterogeneity in populations and risks. second, we have left out explicit treatment of healthcare resources and their impact on the burden of disease. third the model is scoped only around iran --we ignore potential effects of global spread of the disease on iran, including the risk of reintroduction of cases in future. forth, we assumed that the recovered population are immune during our simulation time period of six months. fifth, we ignore mutations in the virus which may change its contagiousness and case fatality rate. despite these limits we hope the paper offers a more accurate assessment of the risks and scope of the epidemic for iran and beyond. we also hope other researchers build on this work using the publicly available data, models, and replication instructions provided in the online appendix.. cc-by-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. (which was not certified by peer review)the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted march 27, 2020. cc-by-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. (which was not certified by peer review)the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted march 27, 2020 . . https://doi.org/10.1101 urban areas currently face a wide variety of environmental challenges, many of which may be exacerbated by climate change. one such issue is ground-level ozone. ground-level ozone is a known pulmonary irritant and is the primary constituent of smog (ebi and mcgregor 2008). a number of great plains urban areas have issues with ozone compliance, but the houston area in particular, has been in non-attainment of the epa ozone standard since it was set in 1977 (raun 2010). higher temperatures may result in greater ozone formation because the chemical reactions resulting in ozone formation are temperature dependent (bell et al. 2005a). in addition, biogenic volatile organic compounds, which are ozone precursors, increase as temperatures rise (bell et al. 2005b).suspended particulate matter also presents a potential air quality issue in cities. sources of particulate matter (pm) include construction sites, smokestacks, fires, emissions from power plants, and automobiles (u.s. environmental protection agency 2012). pms can penetrate deep into the lungs and cause health problems. prolonged or severe droughts may result in dusty conditions and wildfires that can cause an increase in suspended particulates including smoke, pollen, and fluorocarbons (centers for disease control and prevention et al. 2010).the urban heat island (uhi) effect occurs when cities have warmer air and surface temperatures than surrounding rural areas, particularly at night (grimm et al. 2008, u.s. environmental protection agency 2008a). this is attributable to a variety of causes, including decreased vegetation, lower albedo from impervious surfaces, and urban building morphology (grimm et al. 2008, u.s. environmental protection agency 2008a). in urban areas with 1 million or more people, annual average air temperatures can be 2-5 f (1-3 c) higher than surrounding areas. on individual clear, calm nights the uhi can be as much as 22 f (12 c) warmer. smaller cities and towns can create heat islands as well, although the urban-rural temperature differences often decrease as the city size decreases (u.s. environmental protection agency 2008a). uhis can act in conjunction with climate change to create more extreme temperatures.an increase in high temperatures, particularly long stretches of days over 100 f, will damage the integrity of transportation systems. high temperatures, particularly those exceeding 90 f (32 c), can cause pavements to degrade faster, compromising their integrity (savonis et al. 2008, bjune et al. 2009). increased temperatures can also cause some types of rail to develop sun kinks in which sections of the rail buckle (savonis et al. 2008). increased cooling and thus energy consumption may be required for freight and passenger operations (savonis et al. 2008). compounding the problem, crews responsible for construction and maintenance may not be able to work during times of extreme heat (savonis et al. 2008, bjune et al. 2009).extreme rain events could result in increased flooding if flows start to exceed the design capacity of a citys culverts and storm sewer system (savonis et al. 2008, bjune et al. 2009). bjune et al. (2009) assess that this would present a problem for cities lying on flat terrain, as is the case with many great plains metro areas. more intense storms will also reduce clearance under bridges and increase erosion of road bases and bridge supports (savonis et al. 2008, bjune et al. 2009).climate change could also have a variety of impacts on municipal water supplies. the headwaters of many great plains rivers are in the rocky mountains, and cities in the western part of the region, such as denver, are often dependent on snowmelt. the snowpack acts as a natural and massive reservoir for water storage, holding water historically until late spring or early summer. warming temperatures will not only result in a decreased amount of snow and reduced water storage in the snowpack, but it will also cause snow to melt earlier in the spring (barnett et al. 2005). in the absence of precipitation changes, maximum runoff will shift to earlier in the season, further from the peak water demand months of july and august.in addition to shifting times of peak runoff, warmer temperatures may also af-fect evaporation rates. many cities in the great plains are dependent on reservoirs for their water supplies, and these reservoirs currently lose considerable amounts of water to evaporation. annual evaporation from the six largest reservoirs on the missouri rivers main stem, for instance, has been estimated to be about 5% of the average annual river discharge (benke and cushing 2005). in the rio grande, evaporation from the major reservoirs has been estimated to exceed municipal water usage in the basin (benke and cushing 2005). such reservoir losses could increase if warmer temperatures persist without an increase in precipitation.increases in precipitation intensity could adversely affect municipal water supplies by causing elevated levels of turbidity, organic matter, pathogens, and pesticides in source waters, associated with either rises in nonpoint source pollution loads or increased infiltration influencing groundwater quality (kundzewicz et al. 2008, clark et al. 2011). for cities, such as kansas city, in which storm and wastewater sewers are combined, high rainfall events could also overload the capacity of wastewater treatment plants leading to situations in which untreated or partially treated sewage may be discharged into streams (kundzewicz et al. 2008, delpa et al. 2009, struck et al. 2009).droughts can lead to water-quality problems for municipalities, as well as water-quantity issues. in some areas, droughts may result in elevated levels of toxic algae and organic matter in source waters, and lower streamflows may lead to the concentration of pollutants. such factors may adversely affect the ability of treatment plants to meet safe drinking water standards (centers for disease control and prevention et al. 2010). excessive drying of soils can damage pipes leading to breaks in water mains, such as those experienced in texas during the states most severe one-year drought on record. in houston alone, over 6000 water main breaks were reported during summer 2011 (climatologist 2011, houston city council 2011, royal academy of engineering 2011).green infrastructure is one approach that cities can use to simultaneously address these issues as they upgrade aging, outdated infrastructure. although the term green infrastructure can have alternative meanings in different contexts, it often refers to landscapes that have been specially conserved or sometimes designed and engineered to mimic natural processes and provide ecosystem services, such as flood control (u.s. environmental protection agency 2010, foster et al. 2011). sometimes the definition of green infrastructure is expanded to include additional approaches (not always vege-tation-related) that cities use to try and achieve environmental goals (foster et al. 2011). in the text below, it is this broader definition that is considered.green infrastructure can benefit climate change adaptation strategies through its ability to curb the impacts associated with the anticipated increases in air temperatures and in extreme precipitation events (foster et al. 2011). benefits associated with climate change mitigation are generally related to the ability of green infrastructure to decrease energy usage and sequester carbon. in addition, green infrastructure can also contribute to recreational space and aesthetic value that can improve health and provide a better quality of life (tzoulas et al. 2007, foster et al. 2011).green infrastructure approaches can be incorporated into new developments, completed as a retrofit or included as repairs or replacements are made. they can be implemented at an assortment of spatial scales ranging from individual house lots to entire metropolitan regions (foster et al. 2011). although green infrastructure may be implemented to meet a single, specific goal, such as reducing ambient air temperatures, it often provides additional benefits, and the full value of a project stems from the multiple functions that green infrastructure performs. a variety of cities within the great plains are beginning to incorporate green infrastructure into existing building codes and city plans as a pragmatic way to update current infrastructure to meet climate challenges.examples of initiatives being taken include: eco-roofs, such as cool roofs or white roofs (u.s. environmental protection agency 2008b, energy 2011, foster et al. 2011); bioretention, to address flood control and water quality protection by creating vegetated depressions that receive, absorb, and treat stormwater runoff from impervious surfaces (u.s. environmental protection agency 2010, foster et al. 2011) to capture and remove contaminants and sedimentation; and urban forestry or greenways which can be developed to sequester greenhouse gases, providing natural cooling to buildings and pavement, improving air quality, reducing energy bills, decreasing stormwater runoff, controlling erosion, and adding attractive landscapes (mid-america regional council n.d., briechle 2009, universitiy of nebraska 2011, city of grand forks 2012, denver mile high million initiative 2012). greensburg, kansas, serves as an example of a town that embraced sustainability and used a tragedy as an opportunity to rebuild in a greener manner. prior to may 4, 2007, it was a rural town similar to other great plains farming communities. the energy structure of the town, developed in the 1960s, was similar to many rural towns in the great plains, with electricity created largely from coal-based sources. on the evening of may 4, 2007, an ef-5, 1.7-mile- (2.7-km) wide tornado with wind speeds over 200 mph (320 km per hour) hit the town, destroying or severely damaging 90% of its structures and killing 11 people.in the aftermath of the storm, community citizens resolved to rebuild a town that is prepared to face 21st century challenges. key city leaders expressed interest in rebuilding a model green community, which generated enthusiasm among residents eager to demonstrate that challenges present opportunities and a disaster can be turned into a chance to foster resilience. the department of energy and other key organizations, including the national renewable energy laboratory, quickly aligned their support and interest in helping greensburg rebuild and demonstrate energy solutions that could be replicated in other communities. other federal and state agencies, nonprofit, professional organizations and individuals reached out to greensburg with professional expertise and donations of materials or cash.on august 15, 2007, the city of greensburg adopted a long-term community recovery plan that was prepared through femas long-term community recovery program, which included strategies to rebuild sustainably. the residents then developed a sustainable comprehensive master plan for the towns next 20 years. it states, a truly sustainable community is one that balances the economic, ecological, and social impacts of development. in implementing the recovery plan, greensburg has set a new standard for other rural and urban communities. it has become a net-zero energy community, generating as much electricity from renewable sources as it consumes. the city council passed a resolution requiring all new city buildings larger than 4,000 square feet (370 square meters) to reduce energy consumption by 42% (compared to standard buildings) and pass us green building council leed platinum certification. an 11,000-btu per second (12- megawatt) wind energy system will be installed near greensburg that will meet its pre-tornado electricity needs. additionally, the city has entered into a power purchase agreement from a renewable energy provider that will deliver 100% renewable electricity from wind, hydro, and other renewable energy electricity generation sources.greensburg citizens acknowledge that there is potential for similar disasters in the future and have adopted building code standards to be better prepared for severe wind events. it has also embraced tornado preparedness education within the community, and schools have implemented programs to educate students about storm safety and sustainable living. (city of greensburg, 2008; national renewable energy laboratory, 2009) advantages of water reuse include improved water supply reliability, in particu-lar during droughts, and reduced dependence on imported water supplies. in some instances, reuse may increase the amount of water for the environment; for example, if it replaces some existing surface or groundwater supplies, thereby increasing in-stream flows or decreasing groundwater pumping. water reuse may also improve surface water quality when nutrient-laden effluent is diverted for the irrigation of landscapes and crops (national research council 2011).at the same time, water reuse could also potentially have negative effects on downstream flows and water quality. depending on its extent and context, reuse may decrease downstream flows, adversely affecting downstream users and ecosystems, particularly in water-limited environments. if irrigation application rates exceed the ability for plants to make use of the nutrients in the reclaimed water, this could result in excess nutrient levels in ground- or surface water, which could lead to human health and environmental effects (national research council 2011). irrigation with reclaimed water could possibly produce excess levels of salinity in soils, which can be detrimental to plant growth. denver water has been studying this and exploring options for decreasing impacts (denver water 2011b). depending on project design and energy sources, reuse projects also have the potential to increase the carbon footprint of water supplies (national research council 2011).the financial costs of water reuse projects vary and are highly site specific (national research council 2011). they depend on a variety of factors including the degree, if any, of additional treatment needed before reuse, pumping requirements, timing and storage requirements, and the extent of any new transmission pipelines. this latter factor is related to the distance between a wastewater treatment plant and reclamation plant, the need for and sizing of any piping for the conveyance of nonpotable water, which has to be kept separate from the potable transmission lines already in place, and the distances between the reclamation plant and non-potable water customers (national research council 2011). in combination with water conservation, water reuse could potentially decrease seasonal peak demands, which can reduce capital and operating costs (national research council 2011).a 2011 national research council report on us water reuse notes that if utilities decide to start placing more emphasis on water reuse, moving towards having multiple smaller, decentralized wastewater treatment plants could make more sense. currently, wastewater treatment plants are generally constructed at low elevations near a discharge point such as a river or lake. consequently, reclaimed water must generally be pumped uphill for use. a more decentralized system in which reclaimed water is closer to potential customers could reduce pumping costs as well as the costs of transmission and distribution infrastructure. in addition, such a system might be able to better accommodate demand fluctuations in contrast to a large, centralized plant.the 2011 national research council report on water reuse in the us also notes a variety of research needs. included among these are conducting an analysis of the extent of de facto potable water reuse in the us and improving our understanding of the health impacts of human exposure to constituents in recycled water. the report also notes that while water reuse for ecological enhancement is promising, few studies have examined possible environmental risks.the impacts of climate change on rural communities are determined by a set of complex interactions among the environment, different sectors, and population groups (parton et al. 2005, 2007, hartman et al. 2011). the potential impacts of climate change include the modified vulnerability of rural families dependent on farm and ranching activities to climate and market stresses; the modification of crop and livestock production systems; water use competition; changed water quality; expansion of weeds, pests, and diseases; a change in plant-animal communities; altered fire and storm patterns; changes in grassland ecosystems and species composition; disruption of pollinator relationships; tree mortality; enhanced vulnerability to drought conditions, and insect or disease outbreaks in a number of ecosystems (parmesan and yohe 2003, parmesan 2006, field et al. 2007, u.s. climate change science program 2008a, 2008b). there is a scarcity of information and literature on the interface of how socioeconomic and demographic factors will interact with the biophysical changes accompanying global change and almost no information on how the interconnected socio-economic / ecological systems will respond (lal et al. 2011).one certainty is that vulnerability to climate change is intensified in rural areas with highly climate-sensitive livelihoods, where communities have fewer resources and alternatives than metro areas. lal et al. (2011) suggest that rural areas typically have higher poverty rates and lower household incomes, historically putting them at higher climate-related risk from weather-related shocks. the impacts of climate change and capacity to manage resulting challenges will vary across the region and within communities, just as households have differentiated vulnerabilities and coping mechanisms. a range of impacts will be felt across different communities, with some benefiting from climate-induced changes, and other facing devastating losses. further regional research that improves upon current understanding of socio-economic and biophysical impacts of global change on rural communities would be useful to develop appropriate policies and mitigate negative consequences (lal et al. 2011).as stated in chapter 7, the response of agricultural systems to climate change will vary across the region. however, the disproportionate percentage of rural counties (versus metro counties) reliant on agriculture as a primary source of economic activity suggests rural communities will experience the brunt of climate impacts on agriculture (lal et al. 2011, usda economic research service 2012). if yields decrease, not only will profits and income be lowered, but families reliant on agriculture for subsistence will be doubly impacted by both a loss of income and food source. similarly, farming communities are expected to experience additional water stress from climate change, particularly in counties reliant on irrigation. chapter 4 details critical issues related to the effects climate change will have on water. aquifers in the great plains continue to be tapped faster than the recharge rates, causing unsustainable water-use in the region (barnett et al. 2008). although urban areas are using more total water, the greatest percentage is surface-water. on average, rural communities (including agriculture) use more groundwater and almost eight times the total water of urban areas (u.s. geological survey 2005).effects of climate-related events on social systems are less known but can be expected to be negative in remote areas. as previously stated, the accessibility of health care resources tends to deteriorate as population density declines. with decreased access to health infrastructure and a higher proportion of income spent on health services, rural communities are likely to become more vulnerable to the harmful climate change health impacts discussed later in this chapter.the native american people of the great plains have lived in this region for thousands of years. however, as the region deals with the current challenges of the 21st century, the added stress of climate change on socioeconomic and political factors of the great plains is further exacerbating the degrading conditions of many of these tribal communities. how climate change impacts tribes in the great plains, with changing water conditions, health implications, and energy challenges are a concern throughout the region. how tribes in this region can draw on their cultural values in developing strategies that can be used to adapt to and mitigate climate change are lessons which can be shared across the rural communities in the region.a number of tribal communities living in the rural areas have limited capacities to respond to climate change. many reservations already face severe problems with water quantity and quality  problems likely to be exacerbated by climate change and other human-induced stresses. however, a number of communities and tribal governments are establishing strategies to cope with these social-ecological challenges related to environmental and climate changes taking place on their lands. these activities recognize the socioeconomic challenges faced by these communities, isolated areas where housing often lacks electricity and running water. communities dealing with high poverty rates and poor health levels are indicators of communities more at risk to climate change. native american populations on rural tribal lands have limited capacities to respond to climate change and ability to move is constrained by cultural and other socio-economic linked to the tribal lands.tribes are disproportionately impacted by rapidly changing climates, manifested in ecological shifts and extreme weather events, as compared to the general population, due to the often marginal nature and/or location of many tribal lands. the high dependence of tribes upon their lands and natural resources to sustain their economic, cultural, and spiritual practices, the relatively poor state of their infrastructure, and the need for financial and technical resources to recover from such events all contribute to the disproportionate impact on tribes (intertribal climate change working group 2009). tribal communities are deeply connected to local ecosystems and are economically and culturally dependent on the fish, wildlife, plants, and other resources of their lands. however, this connection to the local ecosystems and ecosystem services also provides potential long-term solutions for adaptation as these strategies incorporate ecosystem services as part of these actions to deal with climate changes in their social-ecological system. so there are ways which the various indian tribes have shown significant strengths and resiliency to meet these challenges.water is vital for drinking, agriculture, economic activities, and ecological habitats  basically, for life. and while tribes have adapted to the water cycles of the great plains over generations, population growth, region-wide increased industrialization, and climate change are making the variable water supply and regimes in this area more uncertain. tribes already face significant challenges in providing adequate water supply and wastewater treatment for their communities. climate change will add to these challenges.in addition, the uncertainty associated with undefined tribal water rights results in constraints in developing strategies to deal with water resource issues. these water right issues are made even more complicated by the fact that these are often cross-jurisdictional, cutting across intersecting tribal, municipal, state, and federal boundaries. various court cases have attempted to resolve these issues (e.g., winters vs. us 1908, arizona vs. california 1963), however, questions still are unsettled. in many areas of tribal lands, water infrastructure is in disrepair or lacking (u.s. environmental protection agency 2011). according to a 2007 indian health services report, approximately 40,000 tribal homes in the great plains region had water supply deficiencies and 24,000 had deficiencies related to wastewater treatment (rogers 2007). roughly 9,700 homes completely lacked either a safe water supply system or a sewage disposal system or both (rogers 2007). these conditions lead to increased vulnerability to climate extremes, and emergency fixes may take time to implement and can be costly. for instance, during a 2003 drought in the missouri river basin, lake oahe levels dropped so low that silt and sludge clogged the sole intake pipe at fort yates, north dakota, cutting off the water supply for residents of the standing rock sioux tribe for several days and causing an indian health services hospital to be temporarily shut down. a temporary intake system was installed at a cost of about $3 million (albrecht 2003, odriscoll and kenworthy 2005). such situations across the great plains further affect peoples well-being, and constrain their ability to further cope with other stresses in their socio-ecological system.although the challenges can be numerous, tribes have initiated water-related projects that can help them prepare for climate variability and change. these strategies cover a range of actions, which can be identified as assessment, diversification, restoration, and emergency planning. the assessment strategy provides a way to analyze the future needs of a community for various environmental stresses. on the wind river reservation in west-central wyoming, the bureau of reclamation examined current municipal and rural water supply systems and wastewater disposal, and also assessed the reservations future needs (u.s. bureau of reclamation 1996). the assessment incorporated water demands for enhanced fire protection capabilities as part of the future needs. recommendations included the installation of metering to help identify where water leaks in the system were occurring, and the development and implementation of a watershed protection plan to maintain the quality of source waters.in other communities, actions have been taken to diversify water sources to reduce vulnerability to drought or other catastrophic impacts to their sole water source. on the rosebud sioux reservation in south dakota, work through the mni wiconi-- water is life in the lakota language-- rural water project (hall 1998, rosebud sioux tribe 2012) expanded access to the missouri river sources. restoration of degraded watersheds and wetlands have also been undertaken to reduce risks to water quality and flood abatement measures. the potawatomi reservation in kansas has worked with kansas state university to establish several demonstration projects showcasing riparian forest buffers and streambank stabilization techniques for streams that drain cropland. these streams have been subject to erosion and may contain high levels of nutrients and pesticides. emergency planning has also been effective in reducing risks. in 2007, the northern cheyenne tribe in montana worked with a consulting firm to develop a drought mitigation plan (northern cheyenne tribe 2007). the plan outlined action items, such as identifying emergency water supplies for each public drinking water system and for the indian health services clinic. the tribe also plans to continue working with the usgs, epa, and the montana bureau of mines and geology to monitor water quantity and quality on the reservation.tribes currently face a variety of health care issues, and climate change may act to ex-acerbate. expected increases in hot extremes and heat waves may put the elderly and the very young at an increased risk of illness and death (intertribal council on utility policy n.d., maynard 1998, kovats and hajat 2008). as life spans increase, people in the elderly category will increase as well (houser et al. 2000). another group of people vulnerable to heat extremes are those with diabetes (intertribal council on utility policy n.d., maynard 1998, kovats and hajat 2008). in native american communities the adult-onset of diabetes has become pandemic (houser et al. 2000). in tribes in north and south dakota, one study found the prevalence rate of type-2 diabetes for people aged 45 to 74 to be 33% among men and 40% among women (lee et al. 1995, struthers et al. 2003) which is over 4 times the national average. another factor that makes tribal communities more vulnerable to extreme heat is the high proportion of inadequate housing that provides little protection against excessive temperatures (houser et al. 2000). many tribal homes also lack air conditioning or insulation, and residents may not be able to afford the additional costs that air conditioning would entail. moreover, nationwide, about 14% of indian households have no access to any electricity, which is ten times the national average (1.4%) (energy information administration 2000).in addition to extreme heat, other anticipated consequences of climate change in the great plains include increases in drought severity and frequency and greater wildfire risks. these factors could lead to a rise in respiratory ailments from increases in dust and smoke (houser et al. 2000). asthma sufferers may be particularly vulnerable, and as with diabetes, rates of asthma among native americans are higher than the na-tional average. according to the office of minority health, data from 2004-2008 show that american indian/national native adults over 18 years of age were 20% more likely to have asthma than non-hispanic white adults (14.2% vs. 11.6%) and 40% more likely to die (1.3 vs. 0.9 deaths per 100,000).climate change health adaptation strategies include programs, such as the diabetes prevention demonstration project of the winnebago tribe in nebraska. this project, sponsored by the indian health services division of diabetes prevention and treatment, involves a series of 16 group education sessions using a specially prepared curriculum as well as individual coaching and monitoring (mclaughlin 2010).another strategy is a public health campaign, such as the native american asthma radio campaign, launched by the epa in 2001 and broadcast in native american languages, to educate listeners on how to reduce environmental triggers of asthma attacks. further adaptation measures include the development of tribal energy efficiency codes and weatherization programs (maynard 1998), the building of new housing units to decrease overcrowding, and the construction of better quality housing units overall to protect against the elements. improvements in infrastructure, such as road-paving and drainage and strengthening communication links and power supplies, would help decrease health risks from natural disasters (houser et al. 2000). recent efforts by native great plains tribal communities include protecting medicinal plants and transporting them to safe areas, developing sustainable agriculture to address nutritional issues in native diets, obtaining information about social and environmental stress management as climate change action strategies, and obtaining training from the federal emergency management agency on the development of emergency response plans (maynard 1998).energy concerns on reservations can be framed both in smaller-scale terms of energy use, including supply for residences and vehicles, and in larger-scale terms of energy production as a source of economic development and jobs (see chapter 6). in a climate change context, energy concerns center primarily around energy usage as a source of greenhouse gas emissions. on great plains reservations, many synergies exist for addressing the two sets of small-scale and large-scale concerns.one of the major concerns surrounding energy usage can be framed in terms of access and efficiency of usage. in many regions, availability of reliable power to many households is lacking. secondly, due to substandard housing and buildings, energy is wasted in cooling and heating costs. the improvements in affordable and accessible housing materials would greatly alleviate some of the chronic stresses these communities experience.development of small- to large-scale energy sources, such as wind, solar, and hydro, would lead to improved access and, possibly, dependable power. this could also lead to improved economic viability of tribal communities if, for instance, tribal wind energy operations were sold through the sale of renewable energy certificates or green tags (gough 2002). through green tags, the environmental benefits of wind or other renewable energy sources are quantified and sold as a commodity separate from the electricity itself, which is sold as a second commodity with no particular environmental attributes and at a price comparable to its fossil-fuel-based counterparts. an advantage of green tags is that they may be bought by individuals, organizations, or utilities anywhere in the us that would like to support renewable energy development. the tags thus allow consumers to support green power even if their local utility does not directly offer it, and they broaden the potential market for a renewable energy project. the revenue generated through the sale of green tags can significantly boost a projects financial feasibility.despite the challenges, the rewards of large-scale tribal renewable energy development in terms of creating long-term sustainable livelihoods, reducing greenhouse gas emissions, and addressing the future energy needs of the great plains region could be great both on and off the reservation.sustainable, affordable, and energy efficient housing is key for creating community re-silience to climate change. it provides major opportunities for both adaptation and mitigation by supplying protection against climate and weather extremes, promoting human health, and reducing greenhouse gas emissions. in the rural great plains, there are a variety of housing issues including rural foreclosures, the rehabilitation of housing, the preservation of affordable rental properties, manufactured housing, rural homelessness, and more. inadequate housing is pervasive among certain groups in the great plains, in particular native americans and those living along the us-mexico border.these communities share certain characteristics, including lower median incomes, higher rates of poverty, and younger populations. according to the 2000 census, the median on-reservation/oklahoma tribal statistical area (otsa) native household income was about $26,700, which was roughly 36% below the national average of $42,000. in border areas, the median household income, as a whole, was $28,000 according to a 2002 housing assistance council report. according to the 2000 census, the percentage of individuals of partial or full native american descent living below the poverty level on reservations or otsas ranged from 13.7% in kansas to 50.5% in south dakota, and averaged 26.6% for reservations/otsas over the entire great plains region. this latter percentage was a little over twice the national average of 12.4%. according to the 2002 housing assistance council report, for the border region as a whole, 18% of residents had incomes below the poverty level. the percentage for hispanic residents living in non-metro areas was 32%.native american indian reservations are currently suffering from a severe shortage of healthy, safe, and affordable housing, and have been since they were established over a century ago. the need for adequate housing stems back to the 18th and 19th centuries during the eras of removal, reservation and, later, allotment (u.s. commission on civil rights 2003). during this time, tens of millions of acres of tribal lands were either forcibly surrendered or were lost through sales to white settlers. many native peoples from east of the mississippi river were relocated from their traditional woodland homelands to unfamiliar, undeveloped, and often barren areas in the southern plains. in the northern plains, once nomadic tribes were confined to much smaller portions of their traditional homelands or settled onto lands allotted for farming or ranching, requiring a shift away from tipis to more permanent housing.in addition to poor building conditions, more than 30% of reservation households nationwide are considered to be crowded and 18% are considered to be severely crowded (u.s. commission on civil rights 2003). twenty-five to thirty people, for instance, may share a single home (u.s. commission on civil rights 2003). the percentages of overcrowding may be underestimated as no extensive study has ever been done. also, the census relies on self-reporting, and public housing tenants may not provide an accurate accounting for fear of violating occupancy rules (u.s. commission on civil rights 2003). homelessness, in which families may live in cars, tents, storage sheds, or abandoned buildings, is also being increasingly observed on reservations (u.s. commission on civil rights 2003). however, no firm statistics for homelessness on reservations are currently available.in addition to carryover from previous generations, housing continues to be an issue today for a variety of reasons. many native communities are geographically isolated and distant from urban centers, which increase the costs of both supplies and labor. harsh climates may limit the construction season. the construction of public housing on reservations can be very time-consuming because efforts may have to be coordinated among several federal agencies (hud, bia, usda, hhs) and among state agencies as well (u.s. commission on civil rights 2003). also, there are a variety of complicated and unique land tenure issues in indian country. in terms of home ownership, issues, such as predatory lending, insufficient credit ratings, and a general lack of banks and mortgage lenders, are barriers (u.s. commission on civil rights 2003). additionally, land held in federal trust status, such as land on reservations, cannot be used as collateral for loans. banks may thus not be inclined to make loans to tribal members for permanent homes, but may provide loans for mobile homes, which they would then have the ability to repossess.in order to address some of the indian country housing issues from the public housing perspective, the native american housing assistance and self-determination act was passed in 1996 separating native american housing from other public housing both administratively and financially. the act recognizes native rights to self-determination and allows the tribes to plan, manage, and monitor housing assistance programs instead of the us government. this should permit each tribe to take into account its unique situation and provide some leeway for tribes to address their housing needs as they see fit. from the private housing perspective, some recommend trying to attract more private mortgage lending to indian country (u.s. department of housing and urban development 1996). however, new housing strategies implemented without simultaneous economic development likely wont work because tribal residents wont be able to pay the rent needed or be able to afford to maintain their homes.one bia-funded program on the crow reservation in montana is using the housing shortage as an opportunity to create on-reservation jobs by both producing building materials and constructing high-quality, resilient housing on crow lands. awe-itche ash (good earth lodges) has partnered with the university of colorados mortenson center to start manufacturing compressed earth blocks using resources from the local area, the location furthest north in the us to do so. awe-itche ash is using these blocks to build houses with a passive solar design, thermally efficient windows and doors, and a geothermal system for radiant heating and cooling. the aim is to create long-term, high quality careers for tribal members and create hundreds of sustainable, energy efficient homes on the crow reservation.a second innovative project is taking place on the pine ridge reservation in south dakota where oglala lakota college, the thunder valley development corporation, the oyate omnicye regional planning project, and the university of colorados environmental design program are all partnering on a native american sustainable housing initiative which started in january 2012. the initiative will provide energy efficient housing for pine ridge residents and hands-on learning experiences for students. a research component to the project will involve constructing four houses made of different building materials on the oglala lakota college campus in kyle, south dakota, and monitoring them for indoor air temperature, humidity, and air quality, energy performance, and durability. the homes will be designed with cultural appropriateness as a major consideration, and life-cycle cost analyses will be performed that will account not only for financial costs, but also greenhouse gas emissions, associated with creating the housing materials, constructing the house, and living in and maintaining the house. the ultimate goal of the project is to identify housing options within the community that are healthy, affordable, and sustainable.other programs are emerging which provide more financial and technical support for affordable and weather-resilient housing. in the colonias areas, the nuestra casa home improvement lending program of the nonprofit community resource group has been developed to provide better housing. the program is a revolving fund, short-term micro-credit loan system in which a low-income homeowner can borrow $2,500 to be repaid over a two-year period at a 9% interest rate (giusti 2002, squires and korete 2009). the nuestra casa program provides a great deal of flexibility in how the borrower can use the funds (giusti 2002). another innovative program is proyecto aztecas self-help new construction program. proyecto azteca is a nonprofit rural housing development organization, based in san juan, texas, that serves colonias residents (arizmendi 2003, annie e. casey foundation 2005a, 2005b). the families receive materials, tools, and instruction, and work together under the supervision of construction trainers to build homes in proyecto aztecas construction yard, learning new potential job skills in the process tribal residential concerns are often focused around the rising costs of fuel sources used for domestic heating due to poorly insulated housing (maynard 1998, u.s. commission on civil rights 2003). in order to meet local needs, the lakota solar enterprises founded in 2006, is one of the first 100% native-owned renewable energy companies in the us and is located on the pine ridge reservation. lakota solar enterprises provides opportunities to reduce both their heating costs and greenhouse gas emissions while simultaneously providing green jobs and training for tribal members, including the manufacture and installation of solar air heaters on pine ridge (koshmrl 2011).lakota solar enterprises has also been collaborating with the nonprofit trees, water, and people to plant wind breaks and shade trees around residences to further reduce energy costs. at the red cloud renewable energy center on pine ridge, tribal members from all over the us can receive hands-on training in renewable energy applications from native lakota solar enterprises employees (koshmrl 2011). in addition, lakota solar enterprises in collaboration with trees, water, and people, has implemented the little thunder single-home renewable energy demonstration project on the neighboring rosebud sioux reservation, which includes photovoltaic solar panels, a small wind turbine, a solar air heater and a windbreak. these efforts provide additional opportunities in new jobs, more energy efficient housing, and renewable energy sources.at a larger scale, great plains tribal governments and communities as a whole may also be involved in and affected by energy production. oil and gas operations on tribal lands provide income for the tribal governments in the form of leases and royalties. however, concerns about resulting water pollution and environmental contamination often compete with the desire to develop such resources for the benefit of tribal economic development (maynard 1998). in some cases, large-scale renewable energy development also has serious impacts on native communities. hydroelectric power on the missouri river has adversely affected great plains tribes through the historic relocation of riverside communities, the associated loss of their traditional environs, and the eventual erosion of culturally important gravesites (gough 2002). yet, these lands may be ideal for renewable energy production. the great plains are home to a phenomenal wind resource on millions of acres of unobstructed, undeveloped land (garry et al. 2009, koshmrl 2011). on reservation lands in north and south dakota alone, the wind power potential is over 240 million btus per second (250 gigawatts) (gough 2002). this is at least one hundred times the hydroelectric power produced by the six large dams on the missouri river (30). moreover, development of tribal wind power in the great plains could not only reduce greenhouse gas emissions but also help alleviate some of the current and future management demands on the missouri river (houser et al. 2000).however, there are certain considerations in development of energy resources on native american lands. the owl feather war bonnet wind energy project highlights some of these challenges (garry et al. 2009). the owl feather war bonnet concerns include consideration of protecting sacred sites and cultural resources (gough 2002, garry et al. 2009) in the siting requirements; consideration of tribal council involvement in agreements; and the need for development and access to transmission facilities (garry et al. 2009). additional legal issues are associated due to the unique status tribes hold as domestic dependent nation status and the access to certain of the existing incentives in further developing energy resource (garry et al. 2009). diseases can be specific to one of these categories or involve all three. for example, west nile virus is a vector-borne pathogen, introduced into the us in 1993, which causes disease in humans, livestock (primarily horses) and wildlife (primarily birds) (mclean 2008). in addition, wildlife are associated with a number of diseases that are zoonotic (disease normally existing in animals that can infect humans) and play a key role in both the emergence of novel diseases and in the maintenance and spread of pathogens causing currently known diseases. of the 1,415 infectious organisms known to cause disease in humans, 61% are zoonotic (taylor et al. 2001, jones et al. 2008). in addition, the incidence of emerging diseases has increased dramatically since 1940 and, primarily, has been caused by 1) newly evolved strains of pathogens, such as drug-resistant strains of bacteria and the asian-strain of the h5n1 avian influenza virus; 2) pathogens that have recently entered populations for the first time, such as a corona virus-causing sars in humans and nipah virus in domestic swine; and 3) pathogens that have been present historically but have recently increased in incidence, such as lyme disease in humans (wolfe et al. 2007, jones et al. 2008).wildlife also plays a critical role in both the emergence and increased prevalence of new pathogens in livestock and humans. recent increases in incidence of emerging diseases in humans have largely been of zoonotic origin (60.3%), and 71.8% of these were caused by pathogens that originated in wildlife (jones et al. 2008). in addition, there is an inextricable linkage among pathogens affecting wildlife, domestic animals, and humans, with these pathogens often originating in wildlife and subsequently moving to domestic animal hosts and then humans (wolfe et al. 2007, dobson and foufopoulos 2011). in general, the effects of climate change in creating environments in the us for pathogens emerging outside of the country (e.g., africa and asia) have largely been overlooked. for example, if climate change fosters conditions for pathogens, such as rift valley fever virus from east africa (gerdes 2004), in the us, then introductions of those pathogens are more likely to take hold.thus, understanding the effects of climate change on disease requires an understanding of those effects on a wide variety of ecological processes, ranging from pathogen persistence in the environment to vector and host population dynamics to the ability of pathogens to infect new hosts and become established in new environments.there is general consensus that climate change will affect the geographic distribution of diseases, seasonality of disease incidence, and variation and magnitude of disease outbreaks. however, there is little consensus on how and where this will occur. while conventional wisdom suggests that climate change will result in the expansion of tropical diseases, especially vector-borne diseases, into more temperate regions (epstein 2001, lafferty 2009), there is considerable debate of whether this will occur, at least on a global scale. randolph (2009) argues that the assumption that climate change will result only in a worsening of worldwide health have become unsubstantiated dogma.predictions on the effects of climate change on pathogens and diseases are predi-cated on the assumption that climate constrains the range of infectious and vector-borne diseases while extreme weather events affect the timing and intensity of outbreaks of those diseases (epstein 2001). some of the general hypotheses considered (harvell et al. 2002) for predicting how climate warming will affect host-pathogen interactions include: increasing pathogen development rates, transmission and number of annual generations;relaxing overwintering restrictions on pathogen life cycles;modifying host susceptibility to infection;disproportionately affecting pathogens with complex life cyclesin general, the effects of climate change are considered to be positive for disease emergence, spread, and incidence. vector-borne diseases appear to be the strongest candidates for increased abundance and geographic range shifts because many of these are climate-limited with pathogens or parasites that cannot complete development before the vectors die (harvell et al. 2002). harvell et al. (2002) also suggest that the greatest impacts of disease due to climate change may result from a small number of emergent pathogens.vector-borne diseases are especially correlated with changes in climatic conditions (epstein 2001), primarily in response to the ability of insect vectors to increase in abundance, survive, and transmit pathogens to susceptible organisms. temperature thresholds generally limit the geographic range of vectors. expanding tropical conditions can enlarge geographic ranges of vectors and extend the season of pathogen transmission, given precipitation conditions remain equal (epstein 2001). a number of vector-borne diseases have expanded their geographic ranges into more northern latitudes along with their relevant vectors (see (harvell et al. 2009)).warm nights and warm winters favor insect survival (epstein 2001), and warm winters tend to facilitate overwintering of both vectors and the pathogens they carry. for example, ticks carrying tick-borne encephalitis and lyme disease have expanded northward and are predicted to expand even further (ogden et al. 2008), especially when wild birds are included as a potential transport mechanism for ticks. in addition, conditions during heat waves (high temperatures and high humidity) that often challenge human and livestock health are also the conditions that may favor insect vectors, such as mosquitoes (epstein 2001).of particular concern to human, agricultural, and wildlife health are diseases transmitted by mosquitoes. dynamic models of the effects of climate change on the global distribution of malaria predicted that climate change will expand the geographic distribution of malaria into north america (martin and lefebvre 1995, martens et al. 1997, rogers and randolph 2000). however, the predictions on the extent of this spread vary considerably, depending on model structure and which climate change models were used. for example, rogers and randolph (2000) predicted that malaria will occur only in the southern portion of the great plains region, whereas martin and lefebvre (1995) predicted that, at least under one model, malaria would be more patchily distributed across the entire great plains region. contrary to epstein (2001) and lafferty (2009, 2010) argued there is little evidence that existing climate changes have favored infectious diseases. more recent process-based models suggest range expansions or shifts, but little net increase in actual area because increases in habitat suitability for pathogens and vectors have been offset by decreases in habitat suitability elsewhere. this is supported by the models developed by rogers and randolph (2000) for malaria spread.one factor rarely considered in predicting climate change impacts on disease is the effect of restructuring of ecological communities concomitant with changes in environmental conditions that promote pathogen spread and persistence. if climate change reduces the diversity of wild hosts, then pathogens invading a new area will focus on fewer novel hosts and have the capability to have a larger impact, spread further, and have stronger seasonal effects because the dilution effect of multiple potential hosts will be reduced (schmidt and ostfeld 2001, swaddle and calos 2008, garrett et al. 2009, johnson and thieltges 2010). thus, there may be synergistic linkages with climate effects on both biodiversity and disease.in temperate zones, both temperature and precipitation vary seasonally, which has strong effects on disease transmission, especially with vector-borne diseases. since changes in seasonal patterns are expected with climate change, theoretically this should also affect disease transmission, either in a positive or negative fashion (lafferty 2009).there are a number of hypotheses on how climate change could affect seasonal frequency of disease. for example, climate change can lead to an increase in vector abundance while staying within the same seasonal time period, it can extend the season of high abundance, or may lead to a shift in the season of peak abundance to later in the year. two of the hypotheses were also further explored by harvell et al. (2002) in terms of r0 (basic reproductive ratio of a disease), which defines the number of secondary cases produced by an infected individual in an entirely susceptible population. when r0 < 1, the infection will die out in the long run and when r0 > 1, a pathogen will increase and the infection will be able to spread in a population. hypothetically, increases in temperature not only allow the peak value of r0 to increase, but also lead to an increased annual duration of the period during which the pathogen is a problem.in recent years, the implications of climate change have gained recognition among business leaders worldwide. a prominent example is the insurance and reinsurance sector, which is at considerable risk from the impacts of climate change. these impacts include sea level rise, melting permafrost, floods, heat waves, and an increase in wildfires, drought, and extreme precipitation events (u.s. climate change science program 2009). although the scientific community cannot yet prove a definitive link between the planets warmer climate and individual extreme weather events, the insurance industry has not waited for this causal link to react (mills 2009).as the vanguard of risk management, the insurance industry helps society understand and adapt to emerging and evolving risks. insurers have channeled this expertise into the field of climate change. they have been utilizing data collection, catastrophic modeling, and risk analysis as a means to track trends, define the risks, and formulate solutions for their industry and society at large (mills 2009). because of this analysis, they have come to view climate change as a significant cost to their industry, which has resulted in changes in insurance underwriting, investments, and lending credit. a lack of action in response to climate change would constitute a threat to the economy and the insurance industry as a whole (mills 2009).the american insurance industry has recently begun to be more engaged in spearheading initiatives and actions on climate change. the national association of mutual insurance companies have initiated climate change-related action plans and initiatives, and are urging its members to reflect this risk in policies (national association of mutual insurance companies 2011). despite the climate-related products and policies now widely available, many insurers initially focused on financial means to limit their exposure to losses related to extreme weather events and natural disasters. this included limiting the availability of policies in certain areas, tightening terms, and raising premiums (mills et al. 2006).an example of the industry rationale behind these policy losses and premium hikes can be found with allstate insurance, the largest publicly traded insurance company in the united states. allstate recognizes that there is a relationship between increased extreme weather, catastrophic events, and climate change (mills 2009). an insurance company that insures one in every nine vehicles and one in every eight houses in the united states, allstate concedes that climate change contributes to rising temperatures and changing weather patterns. the company believes that these contributions will impact the frequency and severity of extreme weather occurrences and wildfires. allstate uses this rationale to justify changes in the affordability and availability of homeowners insurance in the us (mills 2009).as risks associated with extreme weather events have lowered the availability and the affordability of homeowners insurance in high-risk areas, the responsibility has fallen on the shoulders of the federal government. this scenario is best illustrated by the national flood insurance program (nfip), which is managed by the federal emergency management agency (fema). the nfip is a federal subsidy-backed public flood insurance program. it was created in response to a lack of private sector policies for american citizens that live within close proximity to floodplains. policies are sold by private insurers, but the premiums go directly to fema (drawbaugh 2011). the nfip has continually been rendered insolvent by extreme weather events.the nfip currently is running a deficit of $18 billion and cannot cover its losses without increasing the governments debt burden. in october 2011, the nfip, which was set to expire in november 2011, was renewed through september 2016. this new bill lowers government subsidies for high-risk property owners, while allowing the insurance industry to raise its premiums in flood areas to reflect the actual risk (drawbaugh 2011). the insurance industrys heightened participation in the nfip is expected to strengthen land-use planning and hazard mitigation through market-based signals on risk and remediation (nutter 2011).even though 2010 had a greater number of extreme events than 2011, the total damage in 2011 was more expensive. from extreme drought, heat waves and floods to unprecedented tornado outbreaks, hurricanes, wildfires and winter storms, a record 14 weather and climate disasters in 2011 each caused $1 billion or more in damages and, most regrettably, loss of human lives and property, according to the national oceanic and atmospheric administration (noaa) (national oceanic and atmospheric administration 2011). the great plains experienced damages associated with spring flooding along the missouri and the souris rivers in the northern portion, drought and fire losses in the southern region, and tornados in central and southern areas, adding to this total. these occurrences of natural disasters and extreme weather events are consistent with scientific predictions related to climate change.thunderstorms, which are common in the great plains, are beginning to receive the attention of the insurance industry as high risks. illustrates the increase in frequency of thunderstorms throughout the united states. allstate is predicting an increase in vi-olent thunderstorms, which are known as non-model catastrophes (lehmann 2011). the insurance company views the increase of these non-model catastrophes as permanent changes and understands the need to recover the costs associated with these events (lehmann 2011). this permanence will likely be reflected in rate increases for areas affected by thunderstorms.the insurance and reinsurance industries operate their businesses with the perspective that the climate system is in the process of changing due in large part to human emissions of greenhouse gases. the worlds largest insurance and reinsurance companies see the risk posed by climate change as one that poses a risk to their bottom line. while the scientific community is still studying the link between climate change and extreme weather events, these industries have already adapted their business to the realities and uncertainties associated with these impacts.insurance and reinsurance companies are sending a clear market signal regarding the economic impacts of climate change. they have changed their risk analyses for extreme weather events and natural disasters to include macroeconomic modeling and catastrophic risk modeling. it is no surprise that, when it comes to reporting on climate change, this industry works hand in hand with the scientific community to develop new risk models for trends deviating from historical realities. their prioritization of the risks associated with climate change signifies that the insurance and reinsurance industries view the escalating impacts of climate change as definitive aspects of the worlds future.sospecha de abdomen agudo como manifestaci n extrapulmonar de infecci n por suspected acute abdomen as an extrapulmonary manifestation of covid-19 infection en diciembre del 2019, se produjo un brote de nueva neumona por coronavirus en wuhan, hubei, y se extendi r pidamente por china y a un nuevo foco en europa. es causada por el pat geno llamado sars-cov-2, inicialmente 2019-ncov 1 . despu s del brote, con m s o menos  xito, pases como italia, espa a, francia y tambi n ee. uu. han iniciado una respuesta de primer nivel. finalmente, ha sido declarado pandemia por la organizaci n mundial de la salud en marzo del 2020 2 .los sntomas cl sicos de los pacientes con covid-19 y que nos sirven para su orientaci n diagn stica durante esta situaci n excepcional son la tos seca y la fiebre. los protocolos actuales utilizan estos sntomas para realizar una sospecha clnica de la enfermedad. sin embargo, algunos pacientes presentan otros sntomas extrapulmonares 3 . presentamos un caso tratado inicialmente por el equipo de urgencias de ciruga en marzo del 2020 y que puede ser de inter s como ejemplo del alcance que puede tener el covid-19.se trata de un paciente de 53 a os, con antecedentes de epilepsia en tratamiento farmacol gico y sin antecedentes quir rgicos previos. acude a urgencias por malestar abdominal, sensaci n de distensi n y fiebre termometrada de 38 8c que haba empeorado en las  ltimas 48 h. adem s, explicaba cambio del ritmo deposicional con escasas heces lquidas en la  ltima semana. en la anamnesis dirigida, el paciente refiri leve tos sin mucosidad de 1 semana de evoluci n, sin asociar artromialgias, rinorrea, disnea o clnica respiratoria. se descartaron viajes recientes o contacto con familiares con sintomatologa respiratoria.en la exploraci n presenta febrcula de 37,5 8c tras la toma de paracetamol, hemodin micamente estable (presi n arterial 125/69 mmhg, 75 lpm) y saturaci n aire ambiente del 98%. el paciente presentaba distensi n abdominal moderada, m s exacerbada en el hemiabdomen superior, con molestias abdominales difusas sin focalizaci n ni defensa peritoneal.se solicit analtica en la que destaca linfopenia del 11,3% (valores normales [vn] entre el 20 y el 50%) y pcr de 18,6 (vn entre 0,03-0,05) y radiografa de t rax y abdomen que objetivan gran distensi n de asas col nicas ( fig. 1 ) y leve aumento de condensaci n bibasal, sin infiltrados con compresi n por asas dilatadas de hemit rax superior. se solicita finalmente tomografa computarizada (tc) de abdomen solicitando ampliar a bases pulmonares ( fig. 2a y b) . la tc urgente descart enfermedad quir rgica abdominal urgente, describiendo una marcada distensi n del dolicosigma con contenido a reo; en el l bulo pulmonar inferior izquierdo se objetivan infiltrados en vidrio deslustrado que, dada la situaci n epidemiol gica actual, se orienta compatible con infecci n por covid. se solicit finalmente pcr sars-cov-2, resultando positivo.este caso es un ejemplo de las manifestaciones de tipo no respiratorio producidos por covid-19. en la actualidad, la tos (98%) y la fiebre (76%) suponen los sntomas m s frecuentes 4 . sin embargo, otros sntomas como los digestivos pueden estar presentes 5 . la diarrea se ha descrito en un 3-14% de los pacientes, v mitos en un 5%, dolor abdominal en un 3% y anorexia en el 55% 1,6 . la presentaci n de sintomatologa gastrointestinal puede variar seg n la poblaci n, present ndose como sntomas leves y en algunos casos previos a la clnica respiratoria. analticamente, es com n encontrar linfopenia, descrita en m s del 60%. asimismo, se puede encontrar elevaci n de aminotransaminasas en casos con da o hep tico leve o moderado, o debido a la afectaci n hep tica derivada del tratamiento farmacol gico recibido 4-6 . otras formas de presentaci n de covid-19 son las serositis cardiacas 7 .la inmunopatogenia por la cual el covid-19 produce clnica gastrointestinal a n no se ha demostrado. se ha visto en estudios previos que podra estar relacionado con el receptor ace2 expresado en diferentes proporciones en c lulas pulmonares at2, c lulas del tracto superior esof gico y c lulas epiteliales estratificadas y enterocitos de leon y colon 8 . este caso clnico nos muestra la importancia de revisar, en el momento actual, durante la anamnesis, la posibilidad de existencia de sntomas respiratorios en pacientes inicialmente orientados para valoraci n quir rgica. este cribado es de importancia para evitar contagios con pacientes, ya no solo asintom ticos, sino tambi n con pacientes infectados. cualquier medida que pueda servir para paliar la enfermedad de los profesionales es necesaria en el momento actual. otro aspecto a destacar es la afectaci n abdominal no tan frecuente en el paciente afectado de covid-19. en la actualidad, se ha descrito este tipo de afectaci n, sin embargo, no se han descrito, por el momento, complicaciones derivadas de la afectaci n gastrointestinal, como podran ser perforaci n, isquemia o hemorragia gastrointestinal. otro dato que se conoce es que los pacientes afectados de covid-19 podran ser transmisores por las heces, sugiri ndose como posible m todo diagn stico 5, 9 . en este sentido, y en el momento actual, deberamos ser vigilantes en pacientes que presenten tos y fiebre alta en el momento de la exploraci n anal. 1 -en esta imagen podemos observar la gran distensi n de colon, pudiendo ser compatible con un cuadro de colitis infecciosa. figura 2 -imagen de neumona organizada con opacificaci n bilateral en vidrio esmerilado multilobar de predominio en l bulos inferiores.