severe acute respiratory syndrome corona virus 2 (sars-cov-2) emerged for the first time in wuhan, china, in december 2019. it is a type of highly pathogenic human coronavirus (hcov) that causes zoonotic diseases and poses a major threat to public health. the vast majority of patients with the coronavirus disease 2019 (covid- 19) have had a good prognosis, but there were still some critical individuals and even deaths. 1 most of these critically ill and dead patients did not develop severe clinical manifestations in the early stages of the disease. some of the patients only showed mild fever, cough, or muscle soreness. the conditions of these patients deteriorated suddenly in the later stages of the disease or in the process of recovery. acute respiratory distress syndrome (ards) and multiple-organ failure occurred rapidly, resulting in death within a short time. 2 cytokine storm is considered to be one of the major causes of ards and multipleorgan failure. 3 it plays an important role in the process of disease aggravation. 4 clinical studies have detected a cytokine storm in critical patients with covid-19. therefore, effectively suppressing the cytokine storm is an important way to prevent the deterioration of patients with covid-19 infection and save the patients' lives. 5 this article reviews the mechanisms by which hcov infection induces cytokine storm and the options to inhibit the cytokine storm, in order to provide a reference for the clinical diagnosis and treatment of covid-19.jid: yjinf [m5g; april 13, 2020; 17:20 ] diseases in humans. 7 , 8 so far, seven hcovs that can invade humans have been identified, including the α-type hcov-229e and hcov-nl63; the β-type hcov-hku1, sars-cov, mers-cov, and hcov-oc43; and 2019-ncov, causing the present epidemic. according to their pathogenicity, hcovs are divided into mildly pathogenic hcovs (including hcov-229e, hcov-oc43, hcov-nl63, and hcov-hku) and highly pathogenic covs (including severe acute respiratory syndrome cov (sars-cov), 9 middle east respiratory syndrome coronavirus (mers-cov) 10 , 11 and sars-cov-2). the mildly pathogenic hcovs infect the upper respiratory tract and cause seasonal, mild to moderate cold-like respiratory diseases in healthy individuals. in contrast, the highly pathogenic hcovs (hereinafter referred to as pathogenic hcovs or hcovs) infect the lower respiratory tract and cause severe pneumonia, sometimes leading to fatal acute lung injury (ali) and ards. the pathogenic hcovs have high morbidity and mortality and pose a major threat to public health. [12] [13] [14] it has long been believed that cytokines play an important role in immunopathology during viral infection. a rapid and well-coordinated innate immune response is the first line of defense against viral infection. however, dysregulated and excessive immune responses may cause immune damage to the human body. [15] [16] [17] the relevant evidences from severely ill patients with hcovs suggest that proinflammatory responses play a role in the pathogenesis of hcovs. in vitro cell experiments show that delayed release of cytokines and chemokines occurs in respiratory epithelial cells, dendritic cells (dcs), and macrophages at the early stage of sars-cov infection. later, the cells secrete low levels of the antiviral factors interferons (ifns) and high levels of proinflammatory cytokines (interleukin (il)-1 β, il-6, and tumor necrosis factor (tnf)) and chemokines (c-c motif chemokine ligand (ccl)-2, ccl-3, and ccl-5). [18] [19] [20] like sars, mers-cov infects human airway epithelial cells, thp-1 cells (a monocyte cell line), human peripheral blood monocyte-derived macrophages and dcs, and induces delayed but elevated levels of proinflammatory cytokines and chemokines. 21 , 22 after mers-cov infection, plasmacytoid dendritic cells, but not mononuclear macrophages and dcs, 23 are induced to produce a large amount of ifns.serum cytokine and chemokine levels are significantly higher in patients with severe mers than patients with mild to moderate mers. 24 , 25 the elevated serum cytokine and chemokine levels in mers patients are related to the high number of neutrophils and monocytes in the patients' lung tissues and peripheral blood, suggesting that these cells may play a role in lung pathology. [24] [25] [26] similar phenomena have been observed in patients with sars-cov infection. [27] [28] [29] [30] [31] [32] [33] [34] the production of ifn-i or ifn-α/ β is the key natural immune defense response against viral infections, and ifn-i is the key molecule that plays an antiviral role in the early stages of viral infection. 35 , 36 delayed release of ifns in the early stages of sars-cov and mers-cov infection hinders the body's antiviral response. 36 afterward, the rapidly increased cytokines and chemokines attract many inflammatory cells, such as neutrophils and monocytes, resulting in excessive infiltration of the inflammatory cells into lung tissue and thus lung injury. it appears from these studies that dysregulated and/or exaggerated cytokine and chemokine responses by sars-cov-infected or mers-cov-infected cells could play an important role in pathogenesis of sars or mers.animal models can well elucidate the role of cytokines and chemokines in mediating pulmonary immunopathology after hcov infection. despite of similar virus titers in the respiratory tract, sars-cov-infected old nonhuman primates are more likely to develop immune dysregulation than the infected young primates, leading to more severe disease manifestations. 37 it seems that the excessive inflammatory response rather than the virus titer is more relevant to the death of the old nonhuman primates. 37 similarly, in balb/c mice infected with sars-cov, disease severity in old mice is related to the early and disproportionately strong upregulation of the ards-related inflammatory gene signals. 38 the rapid replication of sars-cov in balb/c mice induces the delayed release of ifn-α/ β, which is accompanied by the influx of many pathogenic inflammatory mononuclear macrophages. 15 the accumulated mononuclear macrophages receive activating signals through the ifn-α/ β receptors on their surface and produce more monocyte chemoattractants (such as ccl2, ccl7, and ccl12), resulting in the further accumulation of mononuclear macrophages. these mononuclear macrophages produce elevated levels of proinflammatory cytokines (tnf, il-6, il1-β, and inducible nitric oxide synthase), thereby increasing the severity of the disease. depleting inflammatory monocyte-macrophages or neutralizing the inflammatory cytokine tnf protected mice from the fatal sars-cov infection. in addition, ifn-α/ β or mononuclear macrophage-derived proinflammatory cytokines induce the apoptosis of t cells, which further hinders viral clearance. 15 another consequence of rapid viral replication and vigorous proinflammatory cytokine/chemokine response is the induction of apoptosis in lung epithelial and endothelial cells. ifn-αβ and ifn-γ induce inflammatory cell infiltration through mechanisms involving fas-fas ligand (fasl) or trail-death receptor 5 (dr5) and cause the apoptosis of airway and alveolar epithelial cells. [39] [40] [41] apoptosis of endothelial cells and epithelial cells damages the pulmonary microvascular and alveolar epithelial cell barriers and causes vascular leakage and alveolar edema, eventually leading to hypoxia in the body. therefore, inflammatory mediators play a key role in the pathogenesis of ards.ards is the leading cause of death in patients infected with sars-cov or mers-cov. 42 , 43 it is now known that several proinflammatory cytokines (il-6, il-8, il-1 β, granulocytemacrophage colony-stimulating factor, and reactive oxygen species) and chemokines (such as ccl2, ccl-5, ifn γ -induced protein 10 (ip-10), and ccl3) all contribute to the occurrence of ards. [44] [45] [46] these results support such points of view that, following sars-cov infection, high virus titers and dysregulation of cytokine/chemokine response cause an inflammatory cytokine storm. the inflammatory cytokine storm is accompanied by immunopathological changes in the lungs.high levels of expression of il-1b, ifn-γ , ip-10, and monocyte chemoattractant protein 1 (mcp-1) have been detected in patients with covid-19. these inflammatory cytokines may activate the thelper type 1 (th1) cell response. 47 th1 activation is a key event in the activation of specific immunity. 48 however, unlike sars patients, patients with covid-19 also have elevated levels of th2 cellsecreted cytokines (such as il-4 and il-10), which inhibit the inflammatory response. the serum levels of il-2r and il-6 in patients with covid-19 are positively correlated with the severity of the disease (i.e., critically ill patients > severely ill patients > ordinary patients). 49 other studies have found that, compared with covid-19 patients from general wards, patients in the intensive care unit (icu) display increased serum levels of granulocyte colony-stimulating factor, ip-10, mcp-1, macrophage inflammatory protein-1a, and tnf-α. the above studies suggest that the cytokine storm is positively correlated with disease severity. 47 a report on the severe new-type coronavirus-infected pneumonia showed that 37 patients (71.2%) required mechanical ventilation, and 35 patients (67.3%) suffered ards. moreover, the mortality of the elderly patients with ards was significantly elevated. 50 jid: yjinf [m5g; april 13, 2020; 17:20 ] the core pathological change in ards is the pulmonary and interstitial tissue damage caused by nonspecific inflammatory cell infiltration. 51 local excessive release of cytokines is the decisive factor that induces this pathological change and clinical manifestation. 52 in covid-19, the inflammatory cytokine storm is closely related to the development and progression of ards. the serum levels of cytokines are significantly increased in patients with ards, and the degree of increase is positively correlated with mortality rate. 53 the cytokine storm is also a key factor in determining the clinical course of extrapulmonary multiple-organ failure. 54 this partially explains the signs of extrapulmonary organ failure (such as elevated liver enzymes and creatinine) seen in some covid-19 patients without respiratory failure, suggesting that the inflammatory cytokine storm is the cause of damage to extrapulmonary tissues and organs.in summary, the new-type coronavirus infection causes an inflammatory cytokine storm in patients. the cytokine storm leads to ards or extrapulmonary multiple-organ failure and is an important factor that causes covid-19 exacerbation or even death.high virus titer and the subsequent strong inflammatory cytokine and chemokine responses are related to the high morbidity and mortality observed during the pathogenic hcov infection. the experience from treating sars and mers shows that reducing viral load through interventions in the early stages of the disease and controlling inflammatory responses through immunomodulators are effective measures to improve the prognosis of hcov infection. [55] [56] [57] [58] ifn-λ ifn-λ primarily activates epithelial cells and reduces the mononuclear macrophage-mediated proinflammatory activity of ifn-αβ. 59 in addition, ifn-λ inhibits the recruitment of neutrophils to the sites of inflammation. 60 sars-cov and mers-cov mainly infect alveolar epithelial cells (aec). ifn-λ activates the antiviral genes in epithelial cells, thereby exerting antiviral effects without overstimulating the human immune system. therefore, ifn-λ may be an ideal treatment. some studies have applied pegylated and non-pegylated interferons for the treatment of hcovs, but the efficacy varied significantly due to the application of different treatment regimens. early administration of interferons has certain benefits in reducing viral load and improves the clinical symptoms of patients to a certain extent. however, it fails to reduce mortality rates. [61] [62] [63] with the exception of early administration, the use of interferons at other time periods will not bring more benefits than placebo treatment. 63corticosteroids are a class of steroid hormones that have antiinflammatory functions. corticosteroids are commonly used to suppress inflammation. during the 2003 sars epidemic, corticosteroids were the primary means of immunomodulation. timely administration of corticosteroids often leads to early improvements such as reducing fever, relieving radiation infiltration of the lung, and improving oxygenation. [64] [65] [66] a retrospective study of 401 patients with severe sars revealed that proper administration of glucocorticoids in patients with severe sars significantly reduced the mortality rate and shortened the hospital stay. moreover, secondary infections and other complications rarely occurred in these glucocorticoid-treated patients. 67 however, there are studies showing that administration of corticosteroid therapy during human sars-cov infection led to adverse consequences. early treatment of sars patients with corticosteroids increased plasma viral load in non-icu patients, resulting in the aggravation of the disease. 64 in treatment of patients with covid-19, the use of glucocorticoids has again become a major conundrum for clinicians. 68 the timing of administration and the dosage of glucocorticoids are very important to the outcome of the severely ill patients. a too early administration of glucocorticoids inhibits the initiation of the body's immune defense mechanism, thereby increasing the viral load and ultimately leading to adverse consequences. therefore, glucocorticoids are mainly used in critically ill patients suffering inflammatory cytokine storm. inhibition of excessive inflammation through timely administration of glucocorticoids in the early stage of inflammatory cytokine storm effectively prevents the occurrence of ards and protects the functions of the patients' organs. for patients with progressive deterioration of oxygenation indicators, rapid imaging progress, and excessive inflammatory response, the use of glucocorticoid in the short term (3-5 days) is appropriate, and the recommended dose is no more than equivalent to methylprednisolone 1-2 mg/kg/day. 69 it should be noted that large doses of glucocorticoid may delay the clearance of coronavirus due to immunosuppression.chen et al. analyzed the treatment of 99 wuhan patients with covid-19 and found that 27% of these patients had received ivig treatment. 70 ivig therapy has the dual effects of immune substitution and immunomodulation. its practical application value in treatment of covid-19 needs confirmation in future studies.during the cytokine storm, the three most important cytokines in the il-1 family are il-1 β, il-18, and il-33. 4 studies that focus on the inhibition of il-1 β to reduce the cytokine storm have attracted most attention. anakinra, an antagonist of il-1 β, can be used to treat the cytokine storm caused by infection. it significantly improved the 28-day survival rate of patients with severe sepsis. 71 there is currently no clinical experience with applying specific il-1 family blockers to treat covid-19. their effects need to be verified through in vivo animal experiments and clinical trials.tocilizumab is an il-6 antagonist that suppresses the function of the immune system. currently, tocilizumab is mainly applied in autoimmune diseases such as rheumatoid arthritis. 72 tocilizumab itself has a therapeutic effect on the infection-induced cytokine storm. 73 serum il-6 level is significantly increased in severely ill patients with covid-19. clinical studies from china have shown that tocilizumab is effective in treating severely ill patients with extensive bilateral lung lesions, who have elevated il-6 levels. the first dose was 4-8 mg/kg. the recommended dosage was 400mg with 0.9% saline diluted to 100 ml. the infusion time was more than 1 h. for patients with poor efficacy of the first dose, an additional dose can be applied after 12 h (the dose is the same as before), with a maximum of two cumulative dose.tnfs are key inflammatory factors that trigger a cytokine storm. they are attractive targets for controlling the cytokine storm. a meta-analysis showed that anti-tnf therapy has significantly improved survival in patients with sepsis. 74 anti-tnf therapy has also achieved satisfactory outcomes in treatment of noninfectious april 13, 2020; 17:20 ] diseases such as atherosclerosis. 75 studies in animal models have shown that tnfs contribute significantly to acute lung injury and impair the t cell response in sars-cov-challenged mice. in mice, neutralization of tnf activity or loss of tnf receptor provides protection against sars-cov-induced morbidity and mortality. 15 , 76 however, it should be noted that, at least in the later stages of infection, tnf has not been detected in the serum of patients with sars. at present, tnf blockers have not been suggested in the treatment of patients with covid-19, but the efficacy of tnf blockers in treatment of patients with covid-19 deserves further exploration.ifn-αβ limits viral replication by inducing ifn-stimulated gene. however, ifn-αβ also exacerbates diseases through enhancing the recruitment and function of mononuclear macrophages and other innate immune cells. although an early interferon response has a protective effect on mice infected with sars-cov, delayed ifn-αβ signaling causes an imbalance of the anti-sars-cov immune responses in humans. this phenomenon indicates that the timing of ifn treatment is crucial to the outcome of diseases. based on these results, ifn-αβ receptor blockers or antagonists should be administered in the later stages of severe disease to prevent excessive inflammatory responses. 16chloroquine inhibits the production and release of tnf and il-6, which indicates that chloroquine may suppress the cytokine storm in patients infected with covid-19. 77 chloroquine phosphate has been used in the treatment of adults aged 18 to 65 in china. 78 the recommended dosage by diagnosis and treatment of new coronavirus pneumonia (trial version 7) from china is as follows: if the weight is more than 50 kg, 500 mg each time, 2 times a day, 7 days as a treatment course; if the weight is less than 50 kg, 500 mg each time on the first and second days, twice a day, 500 mg each time on the third to seventh days, once a day.ulinastatin is a natural anti-inflammatory substance in the body. it protects the vascular endothelium by inhibiting the production and release of inflammatory mediators. ulinastatin is widely used in clinical practice to treat pancreatitis and acute circulatory failure. ulinastatin reduces the levels of proinflammatory factors such as tnf-α, il-6, and ifn-γ , and increases the level of anti-inflammatory factor il-10. 79 these activities of ulinastatin promote the balance between proinflammatory and anti-inflammatory responses in humans, thus interrupting the cytokine storm induced by the vicious cycle of inflammation. animal studies show that the anti-inflammatory effect of high-dose ulinastatin is equivalent to that of hormones. 80 however, unlike glucocorticoids, ulinastatin does not inhibit immune functions and is unlikely to cause sequelae such as femoral head necrosis. therefore, ulinastatin has great application prospects in the treatment of covid-19.in a mouse model of influenza a virus (iav) infection, oxpl increases the production of cytokines/chemokines in lung macrophages through the toll-like receptor 4 (tlr4)-tir-domaincontaining adapter-inducing interferon-β signaling pathway, thereby promoting the occurrence of ali. 81 eritoran is a tlr4 antagonist. it does not have direct antiviral activity but has strong immunomodulatory functions. eritoran effectively lowers the production of oxpl, inflammatory cytokines, and chemokines in iav-infected mice, thereby reducing death. 82 pathogenic human coronaviruses also cause a high accumulation of oxpl in patients' lung tissues, resulting in ali. 81 thus, it seems that eritoran and other oxpl inhibitors may also be able to alleviate hcov-induced inflammatory responses.sphingosine-1-phosphate (s1p) is a signal lysophospholipid that promotes cytokine synthesis and secretion. 83 the s1p receptor signaling pathways significantly inhibit the pathological damage induced by the host's innate and adaptive immune responses, thereby reducing the cytokine storm caused by influenza virus infection. 84 , 85 in mouse models of iav infection, sphingosine-1phosphate receptor 1 (s1p 1 ) signal transduction in respiratory endothelial cells modulates pathogenic inflammatory responses. 85 agonists targeting s1p 1 inhibit excessive recruitment of inflammatory cells, inhibit proinflammatory cytokines and chemokines, and reduce the morbidity and mortality of iav. 85 , 86 sars-cov-2 also mainly infects human lung epithelial cells and endothelial cells. therefore, s1p 1 agonists may be potential therapeutic drugs for reducing cytokine and chemokine responses in those hcov patients whose cells generated excessive immune responses. an s1preceptor modulating drug, siponimod, was approved in 2019 to treat multiple sclerosis. however, clinical trials are needed to further verify whether siponimod is an ideal alternative for the treatment of cytokine storm.as an important member of the stem cell family, mesenchymal stem cells (msc) not only have the potential of self-renewal and multidirectional differentiation, but also have strong antiinflammatory and immune regulatory functions. msc can inhibit the abnormal activation of t lymphocytes and macrophages, and induce their differentiation into regulatory t cell (treg) subsets and anti-inflammatory macrophages, respectively. it can also inhibit the secretion of pro-inflammatory cytokines, such as, il-1, tnf-α, il-6, il-12, and ifn-γ , thereby reducing the occurrence of cytokine storms. 87 , 88 at the same time, msc can secrete il-10, hepatocyte growth factor, keratinocyte growth factor and vegf to alleviate ards, regenerate and repair damaged lung tissues, and resist fibrosis. 89 therefore, many functions of msc are expected to make it an effective method for the treatment of covid-19.in addition, the blood purification treatments currently used in clinic practice can remove inflammatory factors to a certain extent. blood purification system including plasma exchange, adsorption, perfusion, blood/plasma filtration, etc., can remove inflammatory factors, block the "cytokine storm", to reduce the damage of inflammatory response to the body. this therapy can be used for severe and critical patients in the early and middle stages of the disease. the artificial liver technology led by academician li lanjuan can eliminate inflammatory factors on a large scale. this technology has also been used to resist the cytokine storm of h7n9, and its application on covid-19 has also achieved certain efficacy. 90 early renal replacement therapy, which is similar to the treatment principle of artificial liver technology, seems to be an effective method to control cytokine storm. 91 1 supplement with ifn-λ to activate the innate immunity; 2 using immunomodulator to restore immune balance; 3 inhibiting the production of cytokines; 4 scavenging cytokines; 5 inhibiting mononuclear macrophage recruitment and function; 6 strengthening the vascular barrier by activating of the endothelial slit-robo4 signal pathway.an autopsy report of patients with covid-19 revealed a large amount of inflammatory cell infiltration in the lungs of the deceased. 92 one potentially effective treatment approach is to reduce the recruitment of mononuclear macrophages to the site of inflammation through small interfering rna (sirna)-mediated silencing of c-c chemokine receptor type 2 (ccr2), which has been demonstrated by animal experiments to improve the outcome of the disease. 93 , 94 toll-like receptor 7 (tlr7) agonists stimulate mononuclear macrophages to undergo a strong inflammatory response at the time of infection with single-stranded rna (ssrna) viruses such as hcov. therefore, tlr7 antagonists may be able to alleviate the storm of inflammatory factors caused by sars-cov-2 infection.increased vascular permeability is also a hallmark change that occurs in the process of a cytokine storm. it was found in animal infection models of sepsis and h5n1 virus that activation of the endothelial slit-robo4 pathway with drugs improved vascular permeability, thereby reducing the occurrence of a cytokine storm during infection. 95inflammation is an essential part of an effective immune response. it is difficult to eliminate infections successfully without inflammation. the inflammatory response begins with an initial recognition of pathogens. the pathogens then mediate the recruitment of immune cells, which eliminates the pathogens and ultimately leads to tissue repair and restoration of homeostasis. however, sars-cov-2 induces excessive and prolonged cytokine/chemokine responses in some infected individuals, known as the cytokine storm. cytokine storm causes ards or multipleorgan dysfunction, which leads to physiological deterioration and death. timely control of the cytokine storm in its early stage through such means as immunomodulators and cytokine antagonists, as well as the reduction of lung inflammatory cell infiltration, is the key to improving the treatment success rate and reducing the mortality rate of patients with covid-19. fig. 1 the authors declare that they have no competing financial interests.jid: yjinf [m5g; april 13, 2020; 17:20 ] contributors qy led the writing of the manuscript. jhm developed the initial concept and framework for the manuscript and oversaw the drafting of the manuscript. all authors contributed to the content, drafting, and critical review of the manuscript.this study was supported by zhejiang university special scientific research fund for covid-19 prevention and control.since december 2019, the frequent incidence of pneumonia has become a distinctive feature of the infection caused by a novel coronavirus (severe acute respiratory syndrome-coronavirus-2, sars-cov-2) in wuhan, hubei province, china. 1 cd8 + t cell counts, yet lacked any evidence of pulmonary changes upon imaging. 8 the most common symptoms observed in covid-19 patients are malaise, dry cough, and high fever. symptoms of diarrhea, hemoptysis, and headache are not uncommon. 9 recently the centers for disease control and prevention (usa) expanded target symptoms of covid-19 to include chills, repeated shaking with chills, muscle pain, headache, sore throat, and loss of taste or smell. disease can be mild or progress toward dyspnea and/or hypoxemia, or even acute respiratory distress syndrome (ards) and septic shock, which then can lead to multiple organ dysfunction syndrome (mods). 10 the main reason for death outcomes following sars-cov-2 infection is respiratory failure, with changes in heart and liver function as a secondary or related consequence of disease. [11] [12] [13] epidemiologic data does suggest certain groups are at particular risk for severe disease outcomes (i.e., elderly, select preexisting conditions). although we know there is a link between disease severity, viral production, and a cytokine storm or cytokine release syndrome (crs), it is still unclear which molecular triggers fuel the onset of the cytokine storm and why it can quickly advance to ards or mods, with a fatal outcome in a subset of patients. 14, 15 it remains unknown if the observed cytokine storm and resulting leukocyte changes impact high-and low-risk individuals in the same way, and how these factors can turn an otherwise natural protective cytokine response against infection into a lethal pathogenic process.in this article, we summarize reports on blood cytokine levels and leukocyte activation to examine for differences in immunopathogenesis between mild and severe cases of covid-19 in patients fromchina. data were obtained from reports from april 2019 to april 2020 (supporting information fig. s1 ). we also discuss emerging concepts on the interphase between leukocyte biology and disease pathogenesis. last, we summarize findings from ongoing clinical trials in china and united states that seek to control the onset or damage caused by the cytokine storm to reduce both morbidity and mortality.the release of cytokines in response to infection can lead to mild or severe clinical manifestations. the hallmarks of a mild/nonlethal cytokine release response to infection include increased local temperature (heat), myalgia, arthralgia, nausea, rash, depression, and other mild flu-like symptoms. concurrent to immune activation, the body launches compensatory-repair processes to restore tissue and organ function. the term "cytokine storm" was first coined in 1993 to describe a graft-vs.-host disease. 16 the term has since been extended to describe the similar sudden cytokine releases associated with autoimmune, hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis, sepsis, cancers, acute immunotherapy responses, and infectious diseases [17] [18] [19] [20] cytokine storm occurs when an immune system is overactivated by infection, drug, and/or some other stimuli, leading to high levels of cytokines (ifn, il, chemokines, csf, tnf, etc.) being released into circulation with a widespread and detrimental impact on multiple organs. 21 the severe inflammatory responses induced by a cytokine storm start locally and spread systemically, causing collateral damage in tissues. 22, 23 to date, it is unclear what determinants of the host response to infection are responsible for triggering the inflammatory sequence leading to the clinical syndrome associated with high cytokine release. in general, it is believed to be caused by an imbalance in immune-system regulation (i.e., increase in immune cell activation via tlr or other mechanism, decrease in anti-inflammatory response, 25 in addition to nk cells, once myeloid cells such as resident macrophages are activated by ifn-, it amplifies subsequent tlr-mediated stimulation. this includes the release of high levels of tnf, il-12, and il-6, which, in turn, can further modulate nk cells. 26 although il-12 acts to increase nk ifn-secretion, high il-6 levels also may limit the immune response by its effects on the cytotoxic activity of nk cells via the down-regulation of intracellular perforin and granzyme b levels. 27 as disease progresses, t cell and antibody responses give rise to additional cytokine responses, leading to greater or sustained antigen release and added tlr ligands from viral-induced cytotoxicity. 28 once these responses are in motion, other host-or pathogen-related factors (i.e., decreases in pathogen load, anti-inflammatory responses, genetics) work together to prevent a dysregulated response or a crs that, if allowed to develop, could itself cause tissue damage and organ failure. for example, a lack of a negative feedback mechanism by il-10 and il-4 would be expected to increase the severity of cytokine responses toward a pathogenic crs or cytokine storm. 21 on the other hand, targeting treatment to disrupt the formation of cytokine storm by using pharmacologic agents, such as tocilizumab (anti-il-6), may stabilize the advanced cases from transitioning to a more critical state. 27, 29 at the onset of sars-cov-2 infection, there typically is a preferential infection of the respiratory track as a consequence of dropletbased viral transfer. however, a recent study 30 supports the theory that sars-cov-2 also could potentially infect intestine enterocytes directly through angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ace2). ace2 is highly expressed on differentiated enterocytes and may help to explain why diarrhea occurs with acute infection as well as the observed fecal shedding. consequently, having a broader infection footprint may impact the source of inflammatory cascades to include tissues other than the lung.in covid-19 disease, a cytokine storm is common in patients with severe-to-critical symptoms; at the same time, lymphocytes and nk cell counts are sharply reduced with elevations in levels of d-dimer, c-reactive protein (crp), ferritin, and procalcitonin. 31 consequences of a lethal cytokine storm exhibit diffuse alveolar damage characterized by hyaline membrane formation and infiltration of interstitial lymphocytes. 32, 33 the collateral tissue damage, organ failure, and poor outcomes of people with covid-19 and its accompanying uncontrolled inflammatory responses share similarities with sars and mers. in severe sars patients, the serum levels of ifn-, il-1, il-6, il-12, tgf-, mcp-1, and il-8 were higher than patients with mild-to-moderate symptoms. 34,35 il-1 , il-6, and il-8 levels also were increased in the patients severely infected by mers-cov. 36 leukocyte and cytokine changes with severe-to-critical sars-cov-2 infection are further detailed below.developing criteria to predict and diagnose a cytokine storm in covid-19 patients with surrogate biomarkers is key because the peak levels of circulating cytokines are not routinely monitored for a change in kinetics. in addition to crp and ferritin, increases in d-dimer and procalcitonin have also been associated with a higher likelihood of developing or continuing a cytokine storm in covid-19 patients. 37 of interest, elevated crp and ferritin levels are associated with the onset of a cytokine storm in patients receiving chimeric antigen receptor t cell therapy. 38 further study of the changes that occur in leukocyte and cytokine parameters, as described later, may help identify biomarkers for a cytokine storm in covid-19 patients. in the following sections, we review 28 recently published studies and examine the changes in circulating leukocytes and cytokine profiles of 3939 covid patients (see schematic for information on the process used for selecting literature in supporting information fig. s1 ).in humans, both monocytes and macrophages express ace2 and consequently can be infected by sars-cov and sars-cov-2, 39 which results in the activation and transcription of proinflammatory genes. 40 intriguingly, infection caused by sars-cov-2 appears to markedly down-regulate the expression of ace2 on peripheral blood (pb) monocytes on a per cell basis, which may be a secondary outcome to viral binding. 41 46 wen et al. 47 also observed that an abundance of inflammatory cd14 ++ il1 + and ifn-activated monocytes existed in the pb of covid-19 patients. in addition, sars-cov-2 was found to trigger macrophages through ace2, generating il-6 expression in the spleen and lymph nodes and il-6, tnf, il-10, and pd-1 expression from the alveolar macrophages. 47, 48 this added mechanism might promote lymphocytopenia and contribute to a cytokine storm, initiating in the lung as viral levels rise. 42, 48 autopsy reports indicated that inflammatory macrophages accumulated in the lungs of covid-19 patients. 49 in turn, reduced the duration of elevated blood levels for the inflammatory markers il-6 and crp. 54 however, the mechanism underlying sars-cov-2 ′ s ability to dampen initial innate responses at acute infection and suppress type-i ifns to maximize viral release still needs additional study.as covid-19 progresses, the number of neutrophils in circulation gradually increase; thus, elevated neutrophil levels may be useful for predicting the severity of disease. 55 zhang et al. 56 reported that the neutrophil-to-lymphocyte ratio (nlr) combined with igg might be a better predictor than neutrophil count alone in predicting the severity of covid-19. neutrophil extracellular traps (nets), which are extracellular webs of dna/histones released by neutrophils to control infections, also are known to exacerbate inflammation. 57, 58 previous studies have revealed that aberrant nets might contribute to ards, cystic fibrosis, excessive thrombosis, and cytokine storm (il-1 ). [59] [60] [61] [62] in severe cases of covid-19, elevated levels of netosis with cell-free dna and myeloperoxidase (mpo)-dna have been noted frequently. 63 indeed, when neutrophils from uninfected persons were exposed to serum from covid-19 patients in vitro, it triggered netosis, indicating that patient sera may have the capacity to promote netosis in neutrophils. 63, 64 apart from contributing to a cytokine storm, increased netosis likely also impacts the onset of venous and arterial thrombosis in covid-19 patients. 65 this finding raises the hypothesis that nets may be a central dysregulated pathologic mechanism driving cytokine release and multi-organ damage, ultimately leading to respiratory failure and coagulopathy. moreover, the transcriptional analysis 51 data on the nk cell response in covid-19 is limited. in sars, nk cells were found to be useful in predicting disease severity and cd158b + nk cells were associated with the presence of anti-sars-cov-specific antibodies. 66 despite the role of dendritic cells and t cells in respiratory infections, 70, 71 there is currently no available evidence to show a link between sars-cov2 infection and the modulation of myeloid or plasmacytoid dendritic cells nor reports of how t cells may impact the disease. 72compelling evidence exists that covid-19 is characterized by a marked decrease in circulating t and b lymphocytes, particularly in severe and critical stages of covid-19 infection. 47, 68, 73 of note, such lymphopenia in patients with severe covid-19 frequently occurs along with aberrant activation of monocytes/macrophages and an increase of neutrophils. 74 changes in leukocyte subsets associated with mild vs. severe infection outcomes are described in the following sections and summarized in figure 1 . t cell subsets change as covid-19 infection progresses from mild to severe. a single-cell sequencing study found target inflammatory genes were highly expressed by cd4 t cells, and cd8 ctls underwent clonal expansion in the recovery stage of covid-19 patients. 47 however, in patients advancing to severe disease, the number of t lymphocytes remained low as compared with mild-stage patients, with the levels of helper t cell subsets, including th1, th2, and th17, at below-normal levels. 68 in cd4 + and cd8 + t cells was associated with an increase in cd38 + (cd8 39.4%) hla-dr + (cd4 3.47%) t cells. 32 zheng et al. 81 and chen et al. 83 further reported that cd8 + t cells in the pb of covid-19patients exhibited an overactivated phenotype, which is indicative of a sustained adaptive immune response (whether effective or not) in addition to an innate immune response. of interest, activated cd8 + t cell responses appear to be ineffective as patients advance to severe stages of disease, as evidenced by the exhaustive phenotype of cd8t cells (hladr + tigit + cd8 + t cells). 81 consistent with an onset of t cell exhaustion, chen et al. 83 found that t cells in the pb of severe covid-19 patients expressed high levels of pd-1 and tim-3. the expression levels of pd-1 and tim-3 on t cells also was positively correlated with disease severity.activated t cells could also add fuel to the cytokine storm by further stimulating inflammatory responses from innate immune cells.for example, it was shown that the expression of il-1 , csf1, and csf2 on t cells may bind to the il-1r and colony stimulating factor receptor (csfr) expressed on monocytes, and further stimulate the activation of monocytes. 47 th1 cells in patients with severe covid-19 were reported to stimulate the production of il-6 by inflammatory monocytes, 39 which, together with th17 cells, 84 may directly join innate immune cells in sparking the release of proinflammatory cytokines further contributing to the cytokine storm and subsequent organ damage. 47, 84 regulatory t cells (tregs) play a critical role in dampening an excessive inflammatory response as well as in antiviral immune responses. 85 therefore, tregs may be central to maintaining a balance between antiviral immunity and the harmful cytokine storm. to date, the reports regarding the treg cells in covid-19 patients remain inconsistent.some studies found up-regulated treg cells in severe illness, whereas others reported that the number of tregs was reduced or unchanged in covid-19 patients. 68, 77, 86 therefore, the role of treg cells in the pathogenesis of covid-19 needs to be further clarified.circulating b cells appear to be restored to normal levels in patients upon recovery from covid-19 and convalescent plasma (cp) infusion (further discussed later) has been shown to be a potentially effective treatment as reported in 6 severe covid-19 patients. 87 these findings support the hypothesis that humoral immune responses that boost sars-cov-2-specific antibodies are important in the host's resolution of sars-cov-2 infection and likely would help protect against reinfection. 51, 88, 89 of interest, this ability to develop neutralizing antibody production (and memory) after infection may not be the same in all recovered patients. recent data suggests that as many as 30% of recovered patients who had a milder disease course may develop low titers of neutralizing antibodies, which may convey a higher risk for reinfection. 90 indeed, several studies have detected higher antibody titers after recovery from more severe disease when compared with milder cases (i.e., higher antibody titer in recovered elderly patients as compared with younger patients that often have mild or asymptomatic disease). this suggests a disease course with a stronger immune response may also lead to greater protection against reinfection. 90, 91 it is important to note that binding antibodies can also play a role in antibody-mediated phagocytosis and antibody-dependent cytotoxicity. it remains to be determined if patients with low total or neutralizing antibody titers will have higher reinfection rates.similar to cd4 + t, cd8 + t cells, and nk cells, b cells were also markedly decreased in severe covid-19 patients, as compared with mild patients, and the counts of b lymphocytes were negatively associated with viral burden. 51 aside from protection, it also remains undetermined if prior exposure may prime the body's response, leading to antibody-dependent enhancement (ade) effects for greater infection or an amplification of inflammation cascades. previously,thus, ade, if present, may hinder the host's ability to manage inflammation in lung and other tissues. 52 an analysis of 173 covid-19patients, analyzed for sars-cov-2-specific igm and iggs, found that those with severe or critical disease had a high titer of total antibodies as well as a high igg response, which were associated with a poor outcome and prognosis. 92 whether the increase in antibody titers during disease represents a secondary outcome of the host's response to high viral titers or whether an ade mechanism could contribute to a sudden rise in viral load and onset of a cytokine storm remains undetermined.many proinflammation cytokines, such as il-6, tnf, il-1, il-2, il-17, ifn-, g-csf, mcp-1 (macrophage inflammatory protein 1), ip-10 (ifn--induced protein 10), and others, were found to be significantly elevated in severe covid-19 patients (table 1 and fig. 1 ), a profile that is similar to that found in patients with sars and mers. 36, 93, 94 as shown in table 1 , the elevation of il-6 was most frequently measured and detected in severe cases of sars-cov-2 infection.zhou et al. 39 reported that the pathogenic gm-csf-producing th1 cells in severe covid-19 patients induced il-6 production from cd14 + cd16 + monocytes and, thus, accelerated the inflammation associated with a cytokine storm. elevated levels of il-6 also were found in patients with exacerbating disease progression as evidenced by chest ct. 95 moreover, chen et al. 96 reported that the serum sars-cov-2 viral load was closely associated with il-6 levels in critical patients (r = 0.902). high levels of il-6 may also contribute to an increase in neutrophil cells and decrease in lymphocytes. clearly, il-6 may impact the development of ards in covid-19 patients 97 and a rise in il-6 may be a useful marker for severe disease onset. furthermore, as lung-centric coagulopathy can also play an important role in the pathophysiology in the severe covid-19 patients, 98 increase:increase: il-6 (0-16 d);il-10 (0-13 d); il-2 and ifn-(4-6 d) 78 yunnan in column 3, n is the number of cases with available data. in addition, in columns 3 and 5, "n" is the number of cases in which leukocyte or cytokines changed overall, according to the corresponding report.tnf is a master proinflammatory cytokine that is involved in the pathogenesis of autoimmune diseases such as rheumatoid arthritis (ra); consequently, anti-tnf biologics have become a first-line treatment for such diseases. 104 high levels of tnf often are produced in the initial response to infectious disease. 105 a recent study shows that the level of tnf (60-130 pg/ml) was higher than that of il-6 (10-50 pg/ml) in the plasma of severe covid-19 patients. 14 therefore, further investigation is warranted to define how tnf impacts immunopathology as well as the effectiveness of anti-tnf therapy in severe covid-19 patients.in addition to examining il-6 and tnf, yang et al. 93 a th17-type cytokine storm caused by a mobilization of th17 responses has also been observed in both sars and mers patients. 109, 110 it was reported that a high number of ccr4 + ccr6 + th17 cells, which at least partially attributed to this immunopathology, was also present in covid-19 patient with ards. 84 markedly elevated cytokines (i.e., il-1, il-17, tnf, and gm-csf) in covid-19patients have been associated with th17 responses. 107 these findings suggest that the th17-type cytokine storm may lead or be associated with the onset of organ damage commonly observed in severe covid-19 patients. 84 taken together, staging of sars-cov-2 infection are commonly divided into four stages (mild/common/severe/critical), all of which may have different magnitudes of cytokine release. it is also possible that the qualitative features of the cytokine storm between disease stages may point to distinct host or pathogen triggers (e.g., cytokine storm with or without concomitant bacterial pneumonia). figure 2 summarizes the combined contribution of blood and lung tissue infiltrates, and shows how added factors such as an accompanying bacterial pneumonia may exacerbate cytokine responses.because of its central role in the pathogenesis of sars-cov-2 infection, the cytokine storm and its accompanying excessive inflammatory responses have become a therapeutic target in the treatment of covid-19 patients. immunotherapy strategies aimed at curtailing the cytokine storm are under investigation in several countries ( table 2) .additional therapies to indirectly reduce viral burden and secondarily reduce the incidence of a cytokine storm are summarized in supporting information tables s1-s4. strategies to date do not address a specific type of cytokine storm but assume a "one size fits all" approach in treating severe disease in all patients.clinical reports showing that elevated levels of il-6 are associated with the immunopathology and disease severity of covid-19 111 have provided a strong scientific rationale for examining the effects of il-6 or its receptor antagonists (e.g., siltuximab and clazakizumab or sarilumab and tocilizumab). in fact, tocilizumab has been recommended in china to treat covid-19 patients with bilateral pulmonary damage and severe symptoms. 112 early clinical reports of tocilizumab showed that fevers subsided in 20 severe patients within 1 d after the treatment and 95% of these patients achieved recovery sufficient to allow them to be released from the hospital within 2 wk. 113 guo et al. 114 showed that tocilizumab treatment (400 mg once through an i.v. drip 115 patients and restored the cd4/cd8 ratio, leading to a marked reduction in sars-cov-2 plasma viremia. 106 deng and colleagues have also suggested that upstream targets, such as cyclic guanosine monophosphate (gmp) -adenosine monophosphate (amp) synthase (cgas), anaplastic lymphoma kinase (alk), and stimulator of interferon genes (sting), may help reduce cell activation and cytokine release. 118 likewise, jak-stat signaling inhibitors (baricitinib and ruxolitinib) have also been proposed for preventing crs 119 ( where treated patients saw reductions in their levels of il-6 as well as a shorter duration in viral shedding. 54 ifn-beta-1b has also been noted as beneficial when added to antiviral regimen that includes lopinavir and ritonavir. 120mscs are adult stem cells that have the ability to self-replicate and which show potential for differentiation into multiple cell types. 121 mscs have the potential to impact anti-inflammatory activities by producing immunosuppressive cytokines and by directly interacting with and inhibiting the activation of immune cells. 121 (table 2 and supporting information table s1 ). (table 2 and supporting information table s3 ). clinics. [136] [137] [138] [139] [140] [141] [142] there also is evidence that the immunosuppressive features of tcm may convey beneficial effects in the prevention and treatment of a cytokine storm. 114 a retrospective study reported that matrine and sodium chloride injection could markedly improve lymphopenia in covid-19 patients, possibly by inhibiting pulmonary inflammatory cytokines. 143, 144 in an in vitro experiment, zhu et al. 145 found that liquiritin could markedly inhibit replication of sars-cov- inhibitors and, consequently, suggested that herbal medicines which included these agents might be most useful in dampening a cytokine storm in patients. 146 we anticipate additional tcm strategies will be identified for the management of cytokine storm in covid-19patients. for example, ulinastatin, a natural anti-inflammatory substance from fresh human urine is believed to inhibit cytokine release and subsequent tissue injury 147 and is currently under investigation as a treatment of covid-19 patients. 148 in addition to tcm, corticosteroid treatment has been shown to dampen the inflammatory cascade from a cytokine storm. 149 a recent study found that early and short-term administration of methylprednisolone could improve the clinical outcome in moderate-to-severe covid-19 patients. 150 although useful in critical patients as a tool for managing host inflammatory responses, corticosteroids are not recommended in high doses nor for prolonged periods of time as they may dampen normal immune responses that could help contain the viral infection. 146, 151, 152 nevertheless, there are a number of ongoing clinical trials (table 2 and supporting information table s4 ) that may show if and when safe and beneficial corticosteroid-based treatment is indicated for treating in covid-19.last, several immunomodulatory therapies, including recombinant human ifn-alpha, rhg-csf, i.v. immunoglobulin, antibody, vaccine, nutritional supplements (zinc, vitamin c, and vitamin d3), colchicine, and cellular therapy are also under investigation for inhibiting a cytokine storm (table 2 and supporting information table s4 ).it is generally believed that the cytokine storm triggered by sars- defining shared or population-specific "triggers and amplifiers" of a cytokine storm at specific disease stages will advance novel precision medicine strategies.other factors known to contribute to disease pathogenesis (such as host genetics and epigenetics, microbiome, mucosal infection apart from lung, immunoregulatory networks, aging, co-occurring disease, exosomes, complement, neurologic, endocrine, and polydrug environments, etc.) have yet to be fully investigated. for example, fogarty et al. 98 reported a potential 3-4-fold higher thrombotic risk in caucasians, which underscores the potential impact that race and ethnicity may have on disease outcomes. although coagulopathy seems to be a severe complication in covid-19 infection, it may not necessarily be related to disease severity or exclusively present during or after a cytokine storm. 156 it remains undetermined how the onset of coagulopathy in the absence of compromised lung capacity (ventilation/perfusion) or crs may be related to early press reports of higher stroke incidence in young and middle-aged infected patients in the united states. indeed, it has been proposed that, in predisposed individuals, alveolar viral damage may trigger an underlying inflammatory reaction promoting a microvascular pulmonary thrombosis or endothelial thromboinflammatory syndrome affecting microvascular beds beyond the lung (e.g., brain and other vital organs). 157 how immune factors identified in this review (e.g., netosis, il-6, macrophage activation, antibody response, etc.) may contribute to damage to microvascular beds or how this damage predisposes incidence of a crs remains to be determined. therefore, there is a need to identify leading molecular triggers of multi-organ failure after a cytokine storm in order to prevent added lethal outcomes.regarding therapy, the timing and the best ways to combine various treatments also remains to be determined (e.g., early antiviral therapy followed by anti-crs therapy when that occurs). 158 there is also a need to extend immunopathogenesis studies beyond adults. based on studies of covid-19 clinical features in pregnancy, it is known that neonates can be different from adults. 159, 160 for example, children rarely progress with a disease course requiring icu care. regrettably, the limited clinical trial activity focusing on children remains a missed opportunity to better address how to treat and limit transmission in this group. 161 greater advances in all of these areas will allow for selective treatments both to target key pathogenic components of the cytokine storm and further advance highly targeted precision medicine strategies. the authors declare no conflicts of interest.https://orcid.org/0000-0002-2628-4027luis j. montaner https://orcid.org/0000-0001-5799-6759there is a growing recognition that coronavirus disease 2019 , caused by severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2) possesses neurotropic properties and can lead to neurological manifestations similar to sars and middle east respiratory syndrome (mers). covid-19 is envisaged to have enduring cognitive, psychological and psychiatric consequences, however, data pertaining to this are albeit limited. there is a growing anticipation that covid-19 might cause delirium, depression, anxiety, fatigue, and post-traumatic stress disorder (ptsd) (rogers et al., 2020) . a recent report suggests immediate psychological distress, especially higher levels of depression, anxiety and ptsd symptoms in quarantined patients with covid-19 (guo et al., 2020) . as observed in sars survivors, covid-19 survivors may also have long-term psychiatric morbidities (mak et al., 2009 ).various mechanisms are being proposed to contribute to the neurobiological sequelae of covid-19. sars-cov-2 can transmigrate to brain by disrupting blood brain barrier (bbb) and interact with the angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ace2) receptor, expressed by brain tissue. the ace2 receptor has pleotropic roles in the stress response system and mood regulation (vian et al., 2017) . sars-cov-2 could affect the brain and behavior of people by causing i) direct neuronal damage, ii) immune injury, and iii) hypoxia and biogenesis.contextually, these mechanisms have consistently been implicated in the pathogenetic pathways of many psychiatric disorders. however, one pertinent question arises "how covid-19 associated immune changes will influence the risk, progression and outcomes of psychiatric conditions?"the genesis of a cytokine storm is evident in both infectious and non-infections disease states occurring throughout the body, including brain. it was used to describe the underlying mechanisms of multiple infectious diseases such as variola virus, severe influenza (h1n1, h5n1), and sars. the cns is particularly vulnerable to cytokine storms as most of the cytokines involved in cytokine storm are either produced within the brain or reach brain from periphery, especially in the context of disrupted bbb permeability .notably, the cytokine storm appears to drive chronic neurotoxic and neurodegenerative processes in conditions like post-traumatic brain injury, post-stroke and alzheimer's disease.multiple sclerosis, a classical example neuroinflammatory disorder of the cns is suggested to be associated with cytokine storm (link, 1998) . the acute spike in circulating inflammatory moieties has also been associated with post-operative cognitive decline (skvarc et al., 2018) .evidence of the cns impact of a cytokine storm in infectious diseases are relatively sparse.acute necrotizing encephalopathy (ane) is the most severe type of influenza-associated encephalopathy and a rare complication of influenza; this has been associated with intracranial cytokine storms. there is a significant lack of information whether cytokine storm leads to neuroinflammation in individuals with covid-19 infection. interestingly, a study based on ct and mri features for the first time reports the presence of covid-19 associated acute necrotizing encephalopathy, indicating a potential consequence of a cns cytokine storm in patients with covid-19 infection (poyiadji et al., 2020) .immunopathogenesis is one of the predominant etiological models of major psychiatric disorders. activation of immune-inflammatory pathways, both peripherally and in the brain has been linked with the genesis and progression of neuropsychiatric disorders. it is noteworthy that most of the neuropsychiatric conditions have consistently been linked to chronic low-grade inflammation. this implies a sustained low-level inflammation throughout the body. systemic inflammation causing neuroinflammation is a well-documented fact.the notion that cytokine storm can lead to neuropsychiatric disorders has not been comprehensively tested so far. most of the cytokines involved in a cytokine storm are associated with neuropsychiatric disorders like schizophrenia, and bipolar disorder. indirect evidence indicates that a cytokine storm could be involved in driving the manifestation of psychiatric symptoms. influenza infections have been shown to result into cytokine storm.besides this, sars and mers also lead to cytokine storm. contextually, influenza infections, sars and mers are shown to be associated with neuropsychiatric symptoms.based on this understanding, a neurobiological consequences of cytokine storm seems highly likely in neuropsychiatric conditions. there is a concern whether patients with psychiatric conditions will experience more psychiatric symptoms during covid-19 pandemic. a recent study reports that covid-19 has severe negative psychological impact in patients with pre-existing psychiatric conditions and these patients displayed higher risk of developing symptoms of ptsd, depression, anxiety, stress and insomnia (hao et al., 2020) . these patients with sars-cov-2 infection mostly exhibit a cytokine storm. does this mean that patients with pre-existing psychiatric disorders experience a higher risk of psychiatric episodes due to dramatic increase of inflammatory response elicited by cytokine storm? through there is a significant lack of data towards this notion, this seems to be a possibility. support towards this derives from studies showing coronavirus immunoreactivity based on the measures of antibody levels and seroprevalence of certain coronavirus strains in patients with recent onset psychotic symptoms (severance et al., 2011) . a study examining correlation between psychological distress and peripheral inflammation demonstrated positive correlation between the levels of depression and levels of c-reactive protein (crp) among patients covid-19 quarantined patients with depression symptoms (guo et al., 2020) . sars-cov-2 triggering new neuropsychiatric conditions were shown to be accompanied by elevated crp levels.we propose that sars-cov-2 associated immediate or new-onset neuropsychiatric manifestations are likely immune-mediated. the presence of a cytokine storm involved in the severity and mortality of covid-19 appears to escalate psychiatric manifestations. this also seems to exert deleterious effects on multiple organs and systems and lead to longlasting changes in brain and behaviour. the long-standing theory that chronic low-grade inflammation lead to psychiatric diseases may not constitute the full picture of the underlying pathway of immediate psychological distress. it is therefore assumed that the classical concept of chronic low-grade inflammation in psychosis may require a revision and may well be augmented by the cytokine storm model.most people suffering from covid-19 recover without experiencing severe neuropsychiatric conditions, with short-term delirium as the most common neuropsychiatric symptom. people with pre-existing neuropsychiatric conditions might have a reduced incidence of sars-cov-2 or might be protected from covid-19. this could be explained in the light of chronic-lowas of mid-april, 2020, severe acute respiratory distress syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2), the coronavirus responsible for covid-19, has infected more than 4·4 million people worldwide, killing more than 300 000. a multifaceted methodology is necessary for this pandemic to reduce mortality (panel). while awaiting safe and effective vaccines, and antivirals that substantially reduce death, we struggle to identify effective therapy for patients with covid-19 who have been admitted to hospital. early reports from china detailing clinical features (fever, confusion, respiratory distress, and coagulopathy) and laboratory features (lymphopenia, and elevated c-reactive protein [crp], d dimers, lactate dehydrogenase, soluble interleukin-2 [il-2] receptor-α, and ferritin) of severe covid-19 are reminiscent of cytokine storm syndrome. 1 cytokine storm syndrome is an umbrella term describ ing various frequently fatal hyperinflammatory con di tions, such as macro phage activation syn drome, haemo phagocytic lymphohistiocytois, and cytokine release syn drome. 2 there are many associated dis eases (eg, lupus and lymphoma) and triggers (eg, dengue and car t-cell therapy) that can result in cytokine storm syndrome. viral infections, including pandemic influenza strains, are common triggers, and sars-cov-2 can be added to the list. there are several pathophysiological path ways that can result in cytokine storm syndrome, but the best studied pathway is defective lymphocyte kill ing via the perforin pathway. homozygous defects in perforin pathway genes cause familial haemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis, and heterozygous mutations in these same genes are associated with secondary haemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis, including fatal h1n1 influenza. 3 whether similar, or novel, genetic defects contribute to the severity of covid-19-associated cytokine storm syndrome is unknown, but should be answered by genomic sequencing of patients admitted to hospital with covid-19-associated cytokine storm syndrome.regardless of mechanism, cytokine storm syndromes share features of inappropriately elevated proinflammatory cytokines (il-1, il-6, and interferon-γ] produced by a dysregulated host immune response, resulting in multiorgan failure. all cytokine storm syndromes are not identical, and covid-19-associated cytokine storm syndrome has some unique features, including propensity for early acute respiratory distress syndrome and clotting, while having higher serum ferritins and lower il-6 concentration than routinely noted in other cytokine storm syndromes. 1,2 nonetheless, covid-19 triggers a hyperinflammatory response in a substantial number of patients who require hospital admis sion. different therapies have been used over the years for treat ment of various cytokine storm syndromes. these therapies include broadly immunosuppressive approaches (eg, gluco corticoids and calcineurin inhibitors) and targeted immunomodulatory therapies (eg, anticytokines and janus kinase inhibitors). 1,2 on the basis of previous experience with other deadly coronaviruses (severe acute respiratory distress syndrome and middle east respiratory distress syndrome), who has recommended against glucocorticoid treatment of patients with covid-19. however, targeting of cytokines in other cytokine storm syndromes has proved to be effective and is attractive because of the lower frequencies of associated side-effects. thus, anticytokine approaches are being explored for treating covid-19associated cytokine storm syndrome.as il-6 is easily measured, and therapies targeting il-6 are available in china, early approaches to treating covid-19-associated cytokine storm syndrome involved il-6 blockade. there are now dozens of clinical trials studying blockade of il-6 or its receptor, and early publications of trials and non-trial cohorts are reporting mixed results. nevertheless, there is evidence that blocking il-6 signalling might benefit some patients with covid-19. 4 il-1 is another pro-inflammatory cytokine targeted to treat various cytokine storm syndromes.• safe and effective vaccines in the future • public health measures (eg, social distancing) • hospital or intensive standard of care (eg, proning) • anticoagulation for patients at high risk of clots (eg, elevated d dimers) • antiviral therapy-awaiting published effective treatment • anticytokine storm therapy (eg, interleukin-1 blockade) shutterstock storm syndrome, and was otherwise safe in this setting. 5 there are currently about a dozen clinical trials exploring il-1 blockade for covid-19-associated cytokine storm syndrome.while awaiting results of these clinical trials, case series of anakinra treating covid-19-associated cytokine storm syndrome are being published. three small cases series reported anakinra benefitting patients with covid-19. [6] [7] [8] now, in the lancet rheumatology, thomas huet and colleagues 9 describe a larger prospective, single-centre cohort study with a historical control cohort, demonstrating that anakinra significantly reduced requirement for invasive mechanical ventilation and death in patients who received anakinra (n=52) compared with historical controls who received usual care (n=44; hazard ratio 0·22 [95% ci 0·11-0·41], p<0·0001). patients who were admitted to hospital were consecutively enrolled on the basis of having laboratory-confirmed sars-cov-2, bilateral lung infiltrates on imaging, and critical pulmonary function before admission to the intensive care unit. admission to an icu or death occurred in 13 (25%) of 52 patients in the anakinra group compared with 32 (73%) of 44 patients in the historical control group. the investigators also demonstrated a significant reduction in oxygen requirement from a median of 7 l/min (iqr 6-9) to 2 l/min (0-4) within a week of starting anakinra therapy. there was an associated decrease in crp concentration in the anakinra group compared with the historical control group within 4 days of starting anakinra therapy (p<0·0001). the study has potential biases as do all non-randomised, non-blinded studies, but multivariate analysis was used to control for potentially confounding factors, such as body-mass index, without change in conclusions. other than seven patients in the anakinra group and four patients in the control group with elevated liver enzymes, there were no substantial side-effects. this study is the most definitive evidence to date that anakinra can benefit patients with covid-19-associated cytokine storm syndrome. the significant reduction in mortality associated with anakinra use for covid-19 in this study is encouraging in these challenging times.the choice of anakinra to treat deadly cytokine storms is wise because it has a remarkable benefit-to-side-effect ratio. it is a recombinant human protein that binds to both il-1α and il-1β with a half-life of about 4 h, has a large therapeutic window (1-48 mg/kg per day), can be given intravenously or subcutaneously, has a well established favourable safety profile, and works quickly and effectively for various cytokine storm syndromes. 10 a top priority in this pandemic is to learn effective therapy from clinical trial enrolment. however, it is difficult for health-care professionals in regions overwhelmed by covid-19 to witness so much death. although it is important to treat the virus of infected patients as best we can, if a cytokine storm syndrome is present, then that also must be managed to reduce mortality from an excessive host immune response. awaiting controlled trial results, anakinra provides hope for those severely affected by covid-19.since december 2019, coronavirus disease 2019 (covid-19) caused by severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2) has broken out in wuhan, china, and has spread rapidly in most countries of the world. recently, a cell surface protein, known as angiotensin-converting enzyme ii (ace2), has been identified to be involved in receptor-mediated endocytosis for sars-cov-2 entry to the cells [1] . the team of nanshan zhong found that 87.9% patients had fever after hospitalization and 15.7% patients developed to severe pneumonia [2] . in this outbreak of covid-19, some infected patients would suddenly worsen and developed acute respiratory distress syndrome (ards), and then shock, tissue perfusion disorders in the later stage, eventually die from multiple organ failure, and the aggravation was mainly caused by cytokine storm [3, 4] . that was described in detail in our last review [5] . therefore, how to block the cytokine storm and when to initiate anti-inflammation therapy is critical for reducing death rate of covid-19. the clinically severe phase of covid-19 is accompanied by high levels of cytokine signalling, all of which signal through the janus kinase-signal transducer and activator of transcription (jak-stat) pathway. baricitinib, is not only expected to interrupt the passage and intracellular assembly of sars-cov-2 into the target cells mediated by ace2 receptor, but also promises to be a specific drug that blocks cytokine storms by suppressing jak1/jak2 [6] . however, the clinical experience and data of baricitinib in the treatment of covid-19 are limited, and the mechanism of drug action, applicable patients and risks of the drug need to be recognized. in this paper, we will elaborate the role of cytokine storm mediated by jak-stat pathway in severe covid-19, the possible mechanisms of baricitinib blocking sars-cov-2 entry into the target cells and controlling the cytokine storm, the key points of pharmaceutical care based on the latest research reports, clinical trial progress and drug instruction from the us fda, so as to provide reference for the treatment of covid-19.cytokines, a group of small proteins secreted by stromal cells and immune system cells, used mainly for inter-cell signaling and communication and have a variety of biological functions such as regulating innate immunity, adaptive immunity, hematopoiesis, cell growth and differentiation, and repairing damaged tissues by binding to receptors. cytokines mainly include interleukin (il), interferon (ifn), tumor necrosis factor (tnf), colony stimulating factor (csf), chemokine and growth factor. when the human body is invaded by bacteria and viruses, the immune system will release a large number of cytokines [7, 8] . excessive and uncontrolled release of pro-inflammatory cytokines contributes to cytokine storm. in this outbreak of covid-19, some infected patients would suddenly worsen in the later stage and eventually die from multiple organ failure, and the aggravation was mainly caused by cytokine storm [4] . these pathological mechanisms may be closely relevant to the death of covid-19 patients [9] . a number of recently researches have analyzed the clinical characteristics of covid-19 patients, and consistently found that the lymphocyte count was significantly reduced in patients with pneumonia, especially those with severe pneumonia, while numerous cytokines (such as il-1β, il-2, il-6, il-8, il-10, tnf-α and ifn-γ) were significantly increased, which was the main cause of the cytokine storm, especially il-6 [9] [10] [11] [12] [13] . previous therapy for controlling cytokine storm with large doses of glucocorticoid may delay the clearance of coronavirus and cause complications of glucocorticoid therapy. in addition to clinical trials, glucocorticoids should not be used to treat lung injury or shock caused by covid-19 [14] .jak are a group of cytoplasmic enzymes with tyrosine kinase activity that facilitate the transmission of signals from the cell surface to its interior, which are extremely important in pro-inflammatory cytokine-mediated signaling process. stat, one of the most crucial cytokine-activated transcription factors in the process of immune response, is phosphorylated by jak, dimerized, and then transports into the nucleus through the nuclear membrane to regulate the expression of related genes. this pathway is so called jak-stat signaling pathway that promotes the cytokine storm mediated by excessive amounts of cytokine in a simple and efficient way [15] . there are 4 jak members: jak1, jak2, jak3, and tyk2 and 7 stat members: stat1, stat2, stat3, stat4, stat5a, stat5b, and stat6 [16, 17] . jak1, jak2 and tyk2 are expressed indiscriminately throughout the body, whereas jak3 is expressed in the haematopoietic cells [18] . activation of the jak-stat pathway is induced by cytokine binding to surface receptors and culminates in regulation of transcription by stats.various cytokines and growth factors transmit signals through the jak-stat signaling pathway, including il-2~7, gm-csf, epidermal growth factor (egf), platelet derived growth factor (pdgf), and ifn [16] . for example, ifn-γ signals via jak1 and jak2 which in turn activate stat1, whereas il-6, a jak-stat dependent cytokine, can signal via jak1, jak2, and/or tyk2 and activates stat3 in t cells [19] . as cytokine storm is relatively common in severe case and often leads to the exacerbation of covid-19, anti-inflammation therapy may help in preventing further injury. as we know, there are a variety of anti-inflammatory medications, including jak inhibitor. such drugs are predicted to be of particular importance in the treatment of severe covid-19.receptor-mediated endocytosis is the most common pathway for virus entry to the cells.recently, a cell surface protein, known as angiotensin-converting enzyme ii (ace2), has been identified for sars-cov-2 in humans and animals. ace2, expressed by cells in the kidney, blood vessels, heart, and most importantly in lung at2 alveolar epithelial cells, is the receptor used by sars-cov-2 to infect lung cells [1] . the ace2 receptor has several regulators among which ap2-associated protein kinase-1 (aak1) and cyclin g-associated kinase (gak), two pivotal regulators, mediate clathrin-dependent endocytosis [20] . baricitinib was expected to have a high binding affinity to aak1 and gak and interrupt the passage and intracellular assembly of sars-cov-2 into the target cells [21] . accordingly, baricitinib is suggested to be trialed on patients with sars-cov-2 acute respiratory disease in order to reduce the viral entry and the associated inflammation (nct04321993).baricitinib not only interrupts the passage and intracellular assembly of sars-cov-2 into the target cells but it also reduces the inflammation in patients with ards. in severe covid-19 cases, the jak-stat signaling pathway participates the cytokine storm. excessive amounts of cytokines bind to their receptors and activates jaks, which occurs upon ligand-mediated receptor multimerization, since two jaks are close enough for trans-phosphorylation [22] . the activated jaks phosphorylate the receptors, activate and phosphorylate their main substrate stats. phosphorylated stat dimerizes with other members of stat family with conserved sh2 domains. finally, the dimerized stats in the cytoplasm are transferred into the nucleus and combine to specific dna elements to regulate the expression of cytokine-responsive genes.subsequently, cytokine storm was finally induced.baricitinib is an atp competitive kinase inhibitor that inhibits selectively, effectively, and reversibly jak1/jak2. by suppressing jak1/jak2, baricitinib intracellularly inhibits the proinflammatory signal of several cytokines, such as il-6, il-12, il-23 and ifn-γ [6] . it has been demonstrated clinical benefits for the patients with moderate or severe ra, including reducing the incidence of structural joint damage [18] . this drug might to lower the hyper inflammation, or so-called cytokine storm caused by sars-cov-2, that would prevent damage to the lungs and possibly other organs (see fig. 1 ).however, there are some different views on the theory of baricitinib to treat cytokine storms, which needs to be clarified. in certain pathological conditions, the inflammatory process is widely recognized as a localized protective response of the body when it is attacked by pathogens, such as sars-cov-2. the jak-stat is the primary signaling pathway regulated by cytokines and is crucial for initiating the innate immunity, orchestrating the adaptive immune mechanisms, and finally constraining the inflammatory and immune responses [16, 23] . it seems that using a jak1/jak2 inhibitor to treat a viral disease might appear illogical given that the antiviral effects of ifn are largely mediated by the jak-stat signalling pathway. so, it is speculated here that in early asymptomatic disease and stages of the disease not requiring admittance to hospital, approximately 80% of covid-19 patients are able to clear the virus through endogenous antiviral mechanisms, certainly including the ifn. therefore, it is not recommended that baricitinib or other jak inhibitors be given to these individuals [24] .however, both covid-19 and sars are characterized by an over exuberant inflammatory response, akin to a so-called cytokine storm, and viral load is not correlated with the worsening of symptoms [9, 25] . the clinically severe phase of covid-19 is accompanied by high levels of cytokine signalling, all of which signal through the jak-stat pathway. this finding suggests that when hospital care is required for patients with a pathogenic sars-cov-2 infection, jak-stat pathway inhibition might be a potential strategy. in patients with moderate disease requiring hospital care, the peak sars-cov-2 load occurs within approximately 7 days of symptom onset, and later, as the viral titre decreases in some patients, cytokine storm, causes the severe phase of the disease [26] . baracitinib has shown favorable pharmacokinetic properties such as low plasma protein binding affinity, minimal interaction with cyp enzymes, and drug transporters [27] . currently, in the covid-19 outbreak, baricitinib is being combined with different antivirals, since this combination would decrease viral infectivity, viral replication, and control cytokine storm. as of baricitinib was approved by the european union for the treatment of ra patients in 2017.according to the us fda drug instructions, baricitinib is recommended for adult patients with moderately to severely active ra who have had an inadequate response to one or more tnf antagonist therapies. the recommended dose is 2 mg/d [30] . so far, there have been very few research reports about the extra-ra effects of baricitinib. as is known that targeting cytokines and cytokine receptors with biologics has revolutionized the treatment of many immune and inflammatory diseases. wallace dj et al. found that baricitinib signifiantly improved the signs and symptoms of active systemic lupus erythematosus in patients who were not adequately controlled despite standard of care therapy [31] . recent studies reported that baricitinib improved clinical signs and symptoms in patients with moderate-to-severe atopic dermatitis and induced rapid reduction of itch [32] .baricitinib has not been approved for cytokine storm caused by sars-cov-2. however, as absolute lymphocyte count(alc) ＜0.5×10 9 /l; absolute neutrophil count (anc)＜1.0×10 9 /l; hemoglobin level (hb)＜8 g/dl; egfr＜60 ml/min/1.73m 2 ; ast or alt>5 times uln.on the other hand, it has been reported that baricitinib is not an ideal option for management of covid-19 on the ground of some research reports on small samples [33] . an epidemiologic study reported that alc in the non-survivors is 0.6×10 9 cells/l (inter-quartile range: 0.5-0.8×10 9 cells/l). another study reported that alc in patients receiving icu care is 0.4×10 9 /l (inter-quartile range: 0.2-0.8×10 9 /l). unfortunately, baricitinib is not recommended in patients with alc＜0.5×10 9 /l, anc＜1.0×10 9 /l. based on the foregoing, baratinib is indeed not suitable for this group of patients receiving icu care. in fact, this did not conflict with the results of current clinical trials, which recommended baricitinib for moderate to severe covid-19 patients. according to recent research reports, baricitinib was generally well tolerated on the whole.smolen js analyzed 3492 patients with moderate to severe active ra who received baricitinib for 6637 total patient-years of exposure (median 2.1 yrs, maximum 5.5 yrs) and found no differences in rates of death, adverse events leading to drug discontinuation, malignancies, major adverse cardiovascular event, or serious infections were seen for baricitinib 4mg/d versus placebo. however infections including herpes zoster were significantly more frequent for baricitinib 4mg/d versus placebo [34] . coincidentally, a meta-analysis of baricitinib in patients with ra showed that 4 mg of baricitinib increased herpes zoster infection as compared to placebo and 2 mg of baricitinib [35] . an integrated analysis showed that during placebo-controlled period through week 24, there was 6 events (1.4 per 100 person-years) reported in patients who received 4 mg baricitinib [36] . another integrated analysis showed that older age, obesity, history of dvt/pe, and the use of selective cox-2 inhibitor were independent risk factors for venous thromboembolism [37] . in fact, 5 of the 6 patients who developed dvt/pe had some of these risk factors.the above adverse reactions data was obtained from a series clinical study of long course treatment with baricitinib. however, short-term use of baricitinib (i.e., 7-14 days) might reactivate no latent infections, including herpesviruses or tuberculosis, in covid-19 patients. it needs to be further demonstrated.based on the above evidence, pharmaceutical care of baricitinib mainly includes the following:①avoid use of baricitinib in patients with active, serious infection and active tb. ② baricitinib is not recommended in patients with alc＜0.5×10 9 /l, anc＜ 1.0×10 9 /l or hb＜8 g/dl. ③ prompt investigation of the cause of liver enzyme elevation is recommended. if increases in alt or ast are observed and drug-induced liver injury is suspected, interrupt baricitinib until this diagnosis is excluded. ④ baricitinib should be used with caution in patients who have risk factors such as older age, obesity, history of dvt/pe, and the use of selective cox-2 inhibitor.the following information is mainly from the drug instructions of the us fda. older adults: baricitinib is known to be substantially excreted by the kidney, and the risk of adverse reactions to this drug may be greater in patients with impaired renal function.patients with hepatic impairment: no dose adjustment is necessary in patients with mild or moderate hepatic impairment. the use of baricitinib has not been studied in patients with severe hepatic impairment and is therefore not recommended.patients with renal impairment: the recommended dose of baricitinib in patients with moderate renal impairment (egfr 30-60 ml/min/1.73m 2 ) is 1 mg once daily. baricitinib is not recommended for use in patients with severe renal impairment (egfr＜30 ml/min/1.73 m 2 ).as a cell surface protein, ace2 is involved in receptor-mediated endocytosis for sars-cov-2 entry to the cells. baricitinib, a jak1/jak2 inhibitor, might be a potential strategy. baricitinib would interrupt the passage and intracellular assembly of sars-cov-2 into the target cells by binding to aak1 and gak. on the other hand, the jak-stat signaling pathway participates the cytokine storm in moderate to severe covid-19 cases. baricitinib is expected to treat cytokine storm caused by covid-19 by suppressing jak1/jak2. and a number of clinical trials have been registered around the world, one of which has been completed with encouraging results. universally, participants were administered baricitinib (2-4mg, qd) for 1-2 weeks. we can refer to the current clinical trials to determine drug usage and applicable patients with covid-19. we look forward to more announcement of the results of these trials. baricitinib was generally well tolerated on the whole. the common and important adverse reactions are infections, abnormal blood routine, elevated liver enzymes and dvt/pe. whether the adverse reactions will occur during the short course treatment of covid-19 needs to be further demonstrated. baricitinib should be used with caution in patients who have the above risk factors. human data on use of baricitinib in pregnant women are not sufficient. when using baricitinib in patients with renal insufficiency, attention should be paid to dose adjustment or discontinuation.in december 2019, coronavirus disease 2019 (covid- 19) caused by severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2) was first identified in wuhan, china, and has spread rapidly in many countries. the team of nanshan zhong found that 87.9% patients had fever after hospitalization and in 15.7% patients this developed to severe pneumonia [1] . when covid-19 progresses from severe to critical, patients may develop severe cytokine storm, secondary acute respiratory distress syndrome, followed by shock, tissue perfusion disorders, and even multi-organ failure [2] . cytokine storm is an important factor in the rapid progression of covid-19. therefore, the treatment of cytokine storm is an important part of rescuing severe patients. currently, there is no specific drug for sars-cov-2 and cytokine storm induced by covid-19. the il-6 receptor antagonist tocilizumab has been approved by the us fda for the treatment of cytokine release syndrome (crs). since il-6 is one of the key cytokines involved in infection-induced cytokine storm, the treatment of cytokine storm induced by covid-19 with tocilizumab has broad prospects. "diagnosis and treatment plan of novel coronavirus pneumonia (seventh trial edition)" in china recommends tocilizumab as an immunotherapy drug for critical patients [3] . however, the clinical experience and data of tocilizumab in the treatment of covid-19 are limited. in this paper, several authors who participated in the treatment and consultation of critical and difficult patients and had specific experience in the clinical application of tocilizumab will explain the role of cytokine storm in covid-19, the mechanism of tocilizumab in treatment of covid19 and the key points of pharmaceutical care according to the latest research reports and clinical trial progress, so as to provide reference for the treatment of covid-19.cytokines, which are a group of small proteins secreted by cells and used mainly for inter-cell signaling and communication, have a variety of biological functions such as regulating innate immunity, adaptive immunity, hematopoiesis, cell growth and differentiation, and repairing damaged tissues by binding to receptors [4] . cytokines mainly include interleukin (il), interferon (ifn), tumor necrosis factor (tnf), colony stimulating factor (csf), chemokine and growth factor. when the human body is invaded by bacteria and viruses, the immune system will release a large number of cytokines [5, 6] . in this outbreak of covid-19, some infected patients would suddenly worsen in the later stage and eventually die from multiple organ failure, and the aggravation was mainly caused by cytokine storm [7] .it can be considered that cytokine storm is a kind of over-immune phenomenon produced by the body in response to external stimuli and then an uncontrolled release of cytokines will lead to systemic inflammation. in 1993, ferrara et al. first proposed the concept of cytokine storm in graft-versus-host disease [8] . then in 2003 after sars, the concept of cytokine storm gradually emerged due to the extremely high mortality associated with multi-organ failure [9] . in recent years, chimeric antigen receptor t (car-t) cells, as immunotherapy, have used transgenic t cells to attack cancer cells, and have shown remarkable efficacy against previously refractory malignancies. however, patients treated with car-t cells produce many potentially life-threatening toxic reactions, and one of the most clinically significant toxic reaction is crs. the clinical symptoms of crs involve multiple organ systems, with life-threatening complications including fluid-refractory hypotension and cardiac dysfunction, respiratory failure, coagulopathy, renal and liver failure. crs occurs because of the high level of immune activation of lymphocytes, macrophages, or myeloid cells with a subsequent massive release of inflammatory cytokines.in car-t cell-related crs, the marked elevation of il-6 is considered to be one main factor of the symptoms. the level of il-6 and ifn-γ increase after car-t treatment and then stimulate the differentiation of t helper (th) 17 cells, inducing immunologic response and the development of crs [10] . in many cases, cytokine storm and crs are the same concept [11] .previous therapy for controlling cytokine storm with large doses of glucocorticoid may delay the clearance of coronavirus and cause complications of glucocorticoid therapy [12] . therefore, it is urgent to find new and specific drug treatment methods.a data analysis of 138 hospitalized covid-19 patients was published in jama on february 7, 2020 [13] , and the course of disease was revealed for the first time in the deceased patients. neutrophil counts, d-dimer levels, blood urea nitrogen and creatinine levels continued to increase in the dying patients, while lymphocyte counts continued to decrease. it was suggested that the virus induced an increase in the number of neutrophils caused by cytokine storm, leading to clotting activation, hypoxia, shock, and acute kidney injury. these pathological mechanisms may be closely relevant to the death of covid-19 patients [14] . a number of recently published articles have analyzed the clinical characteristics of covid-19 patients, and consistently found that the lymphocyte count was significantly reduced in patients with pneumonia, especially those with severe pneumonia, while numerous cytokines (such as il-6, il-10, il-2 and tnf and ifn-γ) were significantly increased, and pointed out that the high levels of il-6 and other cytokines in vivo were the main cause of the cytokine storm [13] [14] [15] [16] [17] . jing et al. studied the lymphocyte subsets and cytokines in peripheral blood of 40 patients with covid-19, and found that the t cell count and cytokine levels of the survivors with severe infection gradually recovered to the same level as those with mild infection in the following time points [17] . as an inflammatory trigger il-6 was highly expressed in patients with covid-19, and could induce the differentiation of b lymphocytes and the production of antibodies, and also participate in the immune response of the body by inducing the proliferation and differentiation of t lymphocytes [18] . the team of haiming wei showed that after the sars-cov-2 infection, cd4 + t lymphocytes were rapidly activated to become pathogenic th 1 cells and generate gm-csf, etc. the cytokines environment induced inflammatory cd14 + cd16 + monocytes with high expression of il-6 and accelerated the inflammation. these aberrant and excessive immune cells might enter the pulmonary circulation in huge numbers and play an immune damaging role in leading to lung functional disability and quick mortality [19] . il-6 is also considered to be a key mediator of crs. thus, targeted drugs that inhibit il-6 can block crs or cytokine storm [20] .as a monoclonal antibody that can antagonize the il-6 receptor, tocilizumab has promising prospects. based on the efficacy of several studies on crs [21, 22] , tocilizumab is currently approved by the us fda for the treatment of severe crs in addition to idiopathic arthritis, rheumatoid arthritis, and giant cell arteritis. significantly, "diagnosis and treatment plan of novel coronavirus pneumonia (seventh trial edition)" in china [3] recommends that tocilizumab can be used in patients with extensive bilateral lung lesions and severe lung diseases, who have elevated il-6 levels in laboratory tests.the mechanism of tocilizumab in the treatment of covid-19 remains unclear. according to previous studies, il-6 is secreted by almost all stromal cells and immune system cells, such as b lymphocytes, t lymphocytes, macrophages, monocytes, dendritic cells, mast cells and other non-lymphocytes, such as fibroblasts, endothelial cells, keratinocytes, glomerular mesangial cells and tumor cells [23] . under normal circumstances, the level of il-6 in the body is very low, and it can be quickly synthesized to strengthen the body's defense function when there is an infection or injury. excessive release of il-6 can cause crs, and the more severe the crs, the higher the serum peak concentration of il-6. il-6 binds to its receptor il-6r to form a complex, and then binds to the signal transducer glycoprotein 130 (gp-130) to initiate signal transduction and trigger downstream signal transduction and gene expression. il-6r exists not only in membrane-bound form (mil-6r), but also in soluble form (sil-6r). in the classical signal transduction pathway, il-6 binds to mil-6r to form a complex, and then binds to gp-130, causing downstream reactions, such as anti-inflammatory effects, that are limited to such cells that express mil-6r. in the trans-signaling pathway, il-6 forms a complex with sil-6r and gp-130, which initiates intracellular signal transduction in the absence of mil-6r, and the pathway has inflammatory effects [24] . the next steps were to induce the synthesis of acute reactive protein through two completely different signaling pathways. one il-6 signaling pathway is mediated by the jak/stat tyrosine kinase system, while the other is mediated by the ras/mitogenactivated protein kinase (mapk)/nf-κb-il-6 pathway. the former is a major pathway [25, 26] .in the classical signal pathway, many cells cannot respond to il-6 signal because of the lack of expression of il-6r, while some of these cells can be stimulated by sil-6r-il-6 complex to respond to il-6 signal and cause cell signal transduction [25, 27] . the trans-presentation signal is suppressed by extracellular gp-130, and extracellular gp-130 can form a complex with sil-6r to prevent sil-6r from binding to membrane-bound gp-130 [23] .the classical signal is limited to the cells (macrophages, neutrophils, t cells, etc.) that express il-6r, and plays a leading role in the low level of il-6. however, when the level of il-6 increases, il-6 signal is widely expressed, because gp-130 is everywhere. in this way, il-6 trans signaling via the sil-6r can activate virtually all cells of the body and then regulate pro-inflammatory reactions. blocking of trans-signaling was effective in a variety of preclinical chronic and autoimmune disease models [28] . tocilizumab, which is a humanized anti-il-6r monoclonal antibody, can bind to both mil-6r and sil-6r and then inhibit classical and trans-signals. this may be its potential mechanism for the treatment of cytokine storm in covid-19 (see fig. 1 ).to date, several independent clinical trials have been initiated globally to explore the efficacy and safety of tocilizumab for the treatment of patients with covid-19.a prospective multicenter randomized controlled clinical study led by the first affiliated hospital of university of science and technology of china has been registered in the chinese clinical trial registry. this study included 188 patients with common type (including critical risk factors) and severe covid-19 and is expected to be completed in may 2020 [29] (see table 1 ).in the first phase of the study, all 14 covid-19 patients (the oldest patient was aged 82 years, including 9 severe patients and 2 critical patients) had diffuse lesions in both lungs before treatment, and 11 had persistent fever. after treatment with the new regimen of tocilizumab combined with conventional therapy, the body temperature of all 11 patients with fever dropped to normal within 24 h. meanwhile, the respiratory function and oxygenation index were improved in different degrees. ct scan showed obvious improvement of pulmonary lesions in 4 patients. therefore, for patients with severe covid-19 caused by cytokine storm, tocilizumab is a drug worthy of clinical research.in addition, genentech, a member of the roche group, announced that the us fda has approved a phase iii clinical trial for tocilizumab to treat severe covid-19 pneumonia on march 23, 2020. this is a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled phase iii study to evaluate the safety and efficacy of intravenous tocilizumab added to standard of care in adult patients hospitalized with severe covid-19 pneumonia compared to placebo plus standard of care. the primary and secondary endpoints include clinical status, mortality, mechanical ventilation and icu variables. patients will be followed up for 60 days post-randomization, and an interim analysis will be conducted to look for early evidence of efficacy [30] . fig. 1 the potential mechanism of tocilizumab in the treatment of cytokine storm induced by covid-19 sars-cov-2 severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2; il interleukin, mapk mitogen-activated protein kinase table 1 a multicenter, randomized controlled trial of tocilizumab in the treatment of covid-19 [29] alt alanine aminotransferase; ast aspartate aminotransferase; uln upper limit of normal tocilizumab is recommended for adults and pediatric patients aged ≥ 2 years with car-t cell-induced severe or life-threatening crs to be used alone or in combination with glucocorticoids (see table 2 for specific usage and dosage [32] ). doses exceeding 800 mg per infusion are not recommended in crs patients. the duration of a single intravenous drip should be maintained for more than 1 h. subcutaneous administration is not recommended for the treatment of crs. if no clinical improvement in the signs and symptoms of crs occurs after the first dose, up to 3 additional doses of tocilizumab may be administered. the interval between consecutive doses should be at least 8 h.tocilizumab has not been approved for crs in china. however, "diagnosis and treatment plan of novel coronavirus pneumonia (seventh trial edition)" in china [3] recommended that tocilizumab could be used in patients with extensive lung lesions and severe diseases, and those with high il-6 levels in laboratory tests. for the first dose of 4-8 mg/kg, the recommended dose is 400 mg, diluted to 100 ml with 0.9% sodium chloride injection, and the infusion time is more than 1 h. for patients with poor efficacy of the first dose, an additional dose (the dose is the same as before) can be applied after 12 h, with a maximum of 2 cumulative doses and a maximum of 800 mg for a single dose.since its introduction, tocilizumab has shown good efficacy and safety in the treatment of a variety of autoimmune diseases. ferfar et al. [33] summarized a number of literatures on tocilizumab treatment of takayasu arteritis and found that its use could reduce (or even stop) the dosage of glucocorticoids. samson et al. [34] prospectively observed 20 patients with giant cell arteritis treated with prednisone combined with tocilizumab (8 mg/kg, intravenous infusion once every 4 weeks), and confirmed the same findings at 52 weeks of follow-up. a randomized, double-blind, phase iii clinical study showed that 18 patients with takayasu arteritis treated with tocilizumab did not experience serious infections and deaths, nor did they have new and more prominent safety issues compared with the placebo group [35] . ferfar et al. [33] reviewed the use of tocilizumab to treat 38 patients with takayasu arteritis, including 2 cases of liver injury, 2 cases of infection, and 4 cases of leukopenia, and the incidence of adverse drug reactions reached 21%. this is consistent with the results of a chinese study on the safety of tocilizumab in the treatment of takayasu arteritis [36] . however, these studies are small in sample size and need to be further confirmed by multicenter large sample studies.based on the above studies, drug instructions of china and the us fda, the following adverse reactions need to be noted. the above adverse reactions data were obtained from a series of randomized controlled clinical studies of longcourse treatment with tocilizumab. however, whether the adverse reactions will occur during the short-course treatment of covid-19 needs to be further demonstrated.for all these reasons, the safety monitoring of tocilizumab mainly includes the following three points: (1) risk of serious infections including tuberculosis, bacteria, invasive fungi, viruses, and other opportunistic infections, leading to hospitalization or death. if severe infection occurs, tocilizumab should be discontinued until the infection is under control. perform a latent tuberculosis test and, if positive, start treating tuberculosis before starting tocilizumab. monitor active tuberculosis for all patients during treatment. (2) tocilizumab should be used with caution in patients with absolute neutrophil count (anc) < 2×10 9 /l, and is not recommended for patients with anc < 0.5 × 10 9 /l. tocilizumab should be used with caution in patients with a platelet count less than 100 × 10 3 / μl, and is not recommended for patients with platelet counts less than 50 × 10 3 /μl. (3) care should be taken when starting tocilizumab in patients whose alt or ast rises above the 1.5-fold upper limit of normal. for patients whose alt or ast rises above the 5-fold upper limit of normal, tocilizumab is not recommended.the following information is mainly from the drug instructions of china and the us fda.pregnant women it is known that tocilizumab actively crosses the placenta in late pregnancy and may affect the fetal immune response. it is not yet possible to predict drug-related birth defects and the risk of miscarriage. in animal reproduction studies [32] , intravenous administration of tocilizumab during organogenesis in cynomolgus monkeys may result in miscarriage or stillbirth at doses higher than the maximum recommended dose of intravenous administration of 8 mg/kg every 2-4 weeks. animal experiments have shown that inhibition of the il-6 signal may interfere with cervical maturation, expansion and contraction of the uterine muscle, which may be potentially dangerous to the fetus [32] .older adults current studies suggest that patients aged ≥ 65 years treated with tocilizumab have a higher rate of severe infection than patients ≤ 65 years. due to the higher infection rate of the elderly in general, care should be taken in their treatment [32] .patients with liver damage there is a lack of pharmacokinetic data on the use of tocilizumab in patients with liver damage.patients with renal impairment mild renal impairment (creatinine clearance < 80 ml/min and ≥ 50 ml/min calculated by the cockcroft-gault formula) did not affect the pharmacokinetics of tocilizumab. in clinical trials of giant cell arteritis, approximately one-third of patients had moderate renal impairment at baseline (creatinine clearance was between 30 and 59 ml/min), and no effect on tocilizumab exposure was found in these patients [32] .it has been confirmed by the recent reports on the clinical characteristics of covid-19 and the mechanism of disease progression that cytokine storm played a key role in the rapid progress of the disease. il-6 is one of the key cytokines involved in infection-induced cytokine storm. tocilizumab can block the downstream signal transduction by binding mil-6r and sil-6r and play a role in the treatment of cytokine storm caused by covid-19. currently, the usage and dosage of tocilizumab for covid-19 are still being explored. the clinical use of tocilizumab can be referred to drug instruction from the us fda for the treatment of crs or "diagnosis and treatment plan of novel coronavirus pneumonia (seventh trial edition)" in china. be aware of the risk of serious infection, neutropenia or thrombocytopenia, and liver damage caused by tocilizumab. there is no need to adjust the dose of tocilizumab in patients with mild or moderate renal insufficiency, and the data of using tocilizumab in pregnant women and patients with liver injury are insufficient.the official covid-19 deaths recorded in the uk is in excess of 38000, in the usa is more than 100000 and in the world is greater than 360000. excess death rate is widely acknowledged as the most accurate measure of mortality in the current covid-19 pandemic even more so than the cumulative daily count of covid-19 deaths. with the uk excess death rate has already exceeded 64000, is it appropriate to persevere with existing management of covid-19 infection without considering an alternative management?treatment of patients with covid-19 infection is mainly supportive. a proportion of patients also receive investigational treatment of one form or another with varying degrees of success. specific treatments are generally of two types. type i treatment is aimed at the virus either directly such as anti-viral favipiravir, oseltamivir, umifenovir, remdesivir and others or indirectly by other mechanisms such as chloroquine, hydroxychloroquine, azithromycin and others. type ii treatment is aimed at altering the immune status of patients either through conferring passive immunity by plasma rich in covid-19 antibody from patients who have recovered from covid-19 infection or by druginduced immune modulation/regulation. the rationale for using immune modulation is the "cytokine storm" 1,2 detected in patients with severe covid-19 infection. it is believed that excessive cytokines are the products of hyperactive immune inflammatory response mounted by the host against the virus. such dysregulated immune reaction akin to autoimmunity is thought to lead to the observed lung injury and correlated with grim clinical outcome.in order to counteract the "cytokine storm", specific (targeted) and nonspecific immune regulatory therapies have been tried or at least suggested as follows:specific immune regulatory investigational therapies include interlukin-1 inhibitor (anakinra), interlukin-6 inhibitors (sarilumab, siltuximab and tocilizumab), janus kinase inhibitor (baricitinib) and axl kinase inhibitor (bemcentinib).nonspecific immune regulatory investigational therapies include corticosteroids (including methylprednisolone), colchicine and interferon alpha and beta.a host of miscellaneous drugs have also been tried or suggested including: bevacizumab, eidd-2801, fingolimod, ivermectin, leronlimab, lopinavir/ ritonavir and tocilizumab.the multiplicity of therapeutic agents considered as possible investigational treatment highlights the fact that none so far proved to be optimally safe and effective. this may be due to our limited understanding at present of the mechanism(s) of development of the "cytokine storm" in terms of steps involved and sequence of events so that what is observed and presumed to be a cause and effect may indeed be epiphenomena rather than causally-related. this can explain the apparent failure of even the most specific and directed form of therapies mentioned earlier.the purpose of this contribution is to draw attention to the potential of certain therapeutic agents for treatment of the severe inflammatory complications of covid-19 infection which are believed to be the cause of respiratory failure and death of a significant number of patients rather than the viral infection per se. these agents are widely used in haematology as well as in other specialities. however, it would appear they have been overlooked in the treatment of covid-19 complications.hd iv ig is an established form of treatment for immune thrombocytopenic purpura (itp). the mechanism of action is believed to be down regulation of the immune response. 3 after the impressive success of this therapy as a definitive treatment of itp but mainly for the control of this condition to bring about a rapid increase in the platelet count whenever needed, it was tried in other autoimmune conditions and proved to be highly effective and well-tolerated. at present hd iv ig is used for the treatment of kawasaki disease, guillain-barre syndrome, chronic inflammatory demyelinating polyneuropathy and in a number of autoimmune dermatological conditions. since the severity of covid-19 infection is correlated with the development of severe immune (autoimmune) inflammatory reaction, the "cytokine storm", it is logical to expect hd iv ig also to be useful in this situation thanks to its immunomodulatory properties. indeed, there has been a published report from china of beneficial effect of hd iv ig in three patients with covid-19 infection. 4 the emergence of kawasaki like syndrome in association with covid-19 infection in children responsive to hd iv ig lends further support to treating "cytokine storm" of covid-19 infection with hd iv ig as it is recognised that kawasaki like syndrome is the paediatric form of the "cytokine storm" seen in adult patients infected with covid-19.this is a chimeric mouse-human igg1 monoclonal antibody that targets cd20, a transmembrane protein expressed in b cells. rituximab is primarily used in conjunction with chemotherapy to treat haematological malignancies such as large diffuse non-hodgkin lymphoma and chronic lymphocytic leukaemia. 5 following the discovery that concomitant autoimmune disorders such as rheumatoid arthritis improved following rituximab treatment for haematological malignancies, rituximab is now also used to treat an expanding range of autoimmune diseases including rheumatoid arthritis, 6 autoimmune haemolytic anaemia, pure red cell aplasia, itp, evans syndrome, 7 vasculitis (granulomatosis with angiitis), bullous skin disorders pemphigus, systemic lupus erythematosus, multiple sclerosis, chronic inflammatory demyelinating polyneuropathy to name but a few. the rationale for the use of rituximab in covid-19 infection to prevent and/or treat the "cytokine storm" depends on the multifaceted mode of action of rituximab in downregulating the immune responses by at least three major independent mechanisms (antibody dependent cellular cytotoxicity, complement mediated cytotoxicity and apoptosis). 8 based on these mechanisms rituximab has been successfully used to treat a wide range of immune/autoimmune disorders and for this reason it is expected to be useful for the treatment of "cytokine storm" because it involves hyperactive immune reaction. however, since we do not fully understand at this stage the precise mechanism of development of "cytokine storm" and whether it involves b or t cell or both, we cannot be certain without a clinical trial that rituximab use in this setting can be definitely efficacious. furthermore, the use of rituximab can be associated with severe reactions which are avoidable with certain precautions known by those familiar with its use. to my knowledge rituximab has not been reported to have been used or suggested for use in the context of covid-19 infection.thalidomide was promoted in the late 1950s for anxiety, sleep disturbance and morning sickness. it was realised in 1961 that thalidomide use was associated with birth defects mainly because of its antiangiogenic property. 9 thalidomide was not available for therapeutic use for nearly forty years until its anti-tumour effect in multiple myeloma was discovered in the late 1990s. since then its use has gained popularity as a first line treatment for multiple myeloma in combination with other chemotherapy, 10 in some forms of leprosy (erythema nodosum leprosum) 11 and tb (tuberculous meningitis), 12 as a second line treatment of graft versus host disease, 13 in crohn's disease, rheumatic disorders and in some dermatological conditions. 14 thalidomide is known as an antiinflammatory and a modulator of the immune responses through its effects on cytokines interlukin-1, 6, 10 and 12 but more importantly it selectively inhibits the production of human monocyte tumour necrosis factor (tnf)-alpha through enhanced degradation of tnf-alpha m-rna. 15, 16 through these complicated reactions it is highly likely that thalidomide will effectively dampen down the "cytokine storm" which in addition to causing lung injury, may well be the trigger of the state of hypercoagulability observed in covid-19 patients. tissue injury is a potent stimulator of thrombin generation and clot formation. it follows that treatment of "cytokine storm" would probably prevent and/or treat both lung injury as well as hypercoagulability. however, thalidomide has its own set of undesirable side effects including peripheral neuropathy, thrombocytopenia, anaemia and paradoxically venous thromboembolism. patients requiring treatment for the "cytokine storm" probably only need treatment in the short term whereas the side effects of thalidomide treatment, apart from sleepiness, are likely to appear after a relatively prolonged use. nevertheless, it would be prudent to add low molecular weight heparin in the prophylactic dose to the treatment protocol. to my knowledge thalidomide or its analogues have not been reported to have been used or suggested for use in the context of covid-19 infection.of the three investigational drugs i have proposed, thalidomide is the easiest to use because it is taken orally whereas the other two are administered intravenously. if proven safe and effective in a randomised controlled clinical trial, thalidomide is likely to become the drug of choice to treat and/or prevent "cytokine storm" fatal complication of covid-19 infection but the main drawback is the teratogenic effect of thalidomide if and when taken during pregnancy.all three proposed investigational treatments should only be administered to patients in the context of randomised controlled clinical trials in order to derive the maximum benefit from their use to guide the treatment of other patients in the future. timing of treatment is crucial for the success. since the proposed treatment is not meant to be for the viral infection but aimed at treatment for its severe inflammatory complication, treatment should be reserved in the first instance for patients whose conditions have deteriorated after hospital admission. success is measured in terms of recovery and prevention of the need for treatment in an intensive care unit (icu) and/or recovery and reduction of stay in an icu. since recovery can happen spontaneously with best supportive care, the proposed trials should have sufficient discerning statistical power in terms of patient numbers to demonstrate whether each of these three investigational remedies when used in conjunction with best supportive care either as single agents or in combination are superior to the control arm of best supportive care only. if and when such superiority has been demonstrated, the investigation may be progressed to administer the medicine(s) with proven anti "cytokine storm" activity on admission of patients with covid-19 infection to hospital in further randomised controlled trails with the aim of preventing rather than treating "cytokine storms". alternatively, early treatment for prevention of complications on admission to hospital versus late treatment for cases of diagnosed "cytokine storm" complication may be conducted as different arms of the same trails in one stage rather than in two stages to save patients' lives, time and effort.the differences between the current management of covid-19 infection and the alternative management is that we are aiming actively in the latter at reduction of the development of "cytokine storm" complication of covid-19 infections, reduction of the need for icu admission, and most importantly, reduction of the mortality rate. consequently, more patients will recover clinically and return to the community. they may develop sufficient protective immunity (likely to be more than conferred by vaccination) or may continue as virus carriers but this may not be such a bad thing because the infection is spreading in the community anyway unabated all the time in a silent manner as most infections are not symptomatic. infections symptomatic or otherwise are all contributing to the buildup of active protective immunity in the community at large the "herd immunity".to ease and eventually end the current lockdown safely without risking a second and subsequent waves of covid-19 infection, humanity is pinning its hopes on the development of a safe and effective vaccine which may or may not materialise, even in the long term, because the indications are, the immune response may not confer sufficient protection or is short-lived. virus mutation is another worrying consideration. the development of a safe and effective anti-viral therapy to covid-19 does not seem, at present, to be a brighter prospect either. i have presented a third approach: to take the sting out of the deadly covid-19 and convert it to a "tame" infection.when we deprive covid-19 of its "cytokine storm", we downgrade it to behave just like any other form of influenza. furthermore, the availability of safe and effective remedies proven by randomised controlled clinical trials for the deadly and most feared complication of covid-19 infection the "cytokine storm" is likely to make the decision to ease and eventually to lift the lockdown acceptable particularly in parts of the united kingdom and parts of the world in which there has been reluctance to ease the lockdown.the author(s) declared no potential conflicts of interest with respect to the research, authorship, and/or publication of this article.the author(s) received no financial support for the research, authorship, and/or publication of this article.hasan i atrah https://orcid.org/0000-0002-4487-4848the coronavirus infectious disease 2019 that is spreading at the global scale is caused by a severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2), an enveloped singlestranded rna virus belonging to the coronaviridae family, genus beta-coronavirus [1] . nonstructural proteins of this virus play a crucial role in virus replication while structural and auxiliary proteins are involved in morphogenesis and interfere with the host immunity response, respectively [2] .accumulating evidence suggests that the host immunity response is contributing in severe forms of mers-cov, sars-cov and sars-cov-2 infections [3] [4] [5] . this immune response has been associated with a higher intensive care unit (icu) admissions and mortality in covid-19. in fact, higher concentrations of granulocyte-colony stimulating factor (g-csf), interferon gammainduced protein 10 (ip10), monocyte chemoattractant protein 1 (mcp1), macrophage inflammatory protein 1alpha (mip1a), and tumor necrosis factor alpha (tnfα) in comparison to non-icu patients were reported in patients with covid-19 [5] . in another study, higher levels of interleukin-2 (il-2) receptor, interleukin-6 (il-6), interleukin-8 (il-8), interleukin-10 (il-10), and tnfα were found in deceased patients with covid-19 compared to patients who had recovered from the disease [6] .these immunologic reactions in severe covid-19 may characterize the cytokine storm that is associated with untoward clinicopathological consequences. the cytokine storm is an out-ofcontrol cytokine release that has been observed in some infectious and noninfectious diseases, leading to a hyperinflammation condition in the host ( fig.1) [7] . this uncontrolled cytokine response might be accompanied with more immune cells activation including t helper 17 cell (th17) differentiation from cd4+ lymphocytes. in fact, increased th17 responses were reported in mers-cov, sars-cov and sars-cov-2 [8] [9] [10] [11] .at least 10% of the patients with severe covid-19 will eventually present lung injury, acute respiratory distress syndrome (ards) and involvement of multiple organs within 8-14 days of the onset of their illness [12] . these severe cases that develop respiratory failure show a series of pathological findings such as hyaline membrane formation, inflammatory infiltration with multinucleated syncytial cells in their lung pathology and a burst of cytokine release leading to morbidity and mortality [6, 12] .the initial cellular entry phase of the sara-cov-2 requires binding of its envelope homotrimeric spike glycoprotein to the membrane-bound form of angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ace2) on the target cell [12, 13] . the attachment of the virus with ace2, as its cellular receptor, triggers internalization of the complex into the target cell, leading to the down-regulation of the ace2 [14] .ace2 internalization and its subsequent down-regulation would potentially result in unopposed function of angiotensin ii (angii) and decreased levels of angiotensin-(1-7) [14] . since angiotensin-(1-7) has a key counter-regulatory role in many of the angiotensin type 1 receptor (at1r)-related physiopathological functions, the sara-cov-2-mediated downregulation of ace2 and the resulting increased overall ratio of ang ii to angiotensin-(1-7) leads to the deterioration of the pulmonary function and lung injury [13, 15] .therefore, the imbalance of ace2/ace levels in covid-19 and the dysregulated angiotensin-ii /at1r axis of the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system (raas) may partially be responsible for the cytokine storm and the resulting pulmonary damage [16, 17] . the loss of the modulatory effect of angiotensin-(1-7) via its binding to the mas receptor (masr) that attenuates inflammatory response may be a further contributing factor to the hyper-inflammation status of severe cases of covid-19.beyond ace2 catalytic activity in raas and masr-mediated actions, it has interesting effects on multiple molecular pathways which are involved in inflammatory response and cytokine release.however, potential cellular and molecular mechanisms of the cytokine storm in covid- 19 have not yet been explored extensively.in this review, we specifically discuss the complex inflammatory molecular consequents of downregulation of ace2 in the context of sars-cov-2, with a particular emphasis on the complement system and [des-arg9]-bk or (dabk) in addition to ace/ angiotensin-ii/at1r and ace2/masr axes. we propose a unifying molecular model to better understand the complex molecular events behind out-of-control cytokine response in severe covid-19 patients.undoubtedly, this insight will be pivotal to obtain a harmonized therapeutic strategy to confront this deadly viral infection and to protect the lungs during the cytokine storm.the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system (raas), through its vasoactive peptides, regulates blood pressure, fluid volume, sodium and potassium balance. this elegant system also plays a significant role in the promotion and maintenance of inflammation [18] .it appears that activation of the raas system can induce inflammation in an independent mechanism of blood pressure through the at1 receptor (at1r) in the kidney and vasculature [19] .the secretion of profibrotic cytokines such as transforming growth factor beta (tfg-β) is stimulated during raas activation [20] [21] [22] . furthermore, increased production of ang ii and activation of at1r are accompanied with a pro-inflammatory response via activation of the complement cascade including c5a, c5b-9 [23] . this implies a cross-talk between raas and the complement system.ang ii can activate the nuclear factor kappa b (nf-κb) pathway [24, 25] via stimulation of the phosphorylation of the p65 subunit of nf-κb [26] . this will lead to increased production of il-6 [27] , tnfα, il-1b and il-10 [26] . after at1r activation, ang ii regulates mitogen-activated protein kinases (mapk) (erk1/2, jnk, p38mapk), which have important functions on cellular processes including the release of cytokines such as il-1, il-10, il-12 and tnfα (fig.2 ) [28] [29] [30] .ace2 enzyme is expressed in the heart, kidneys, testes, gastrointestinal tract and lungs [15, 31] .it cleaves the angiotensin i (ang i) to generate the inactive ang-(1-9) peptide, which can be changed to the vasodilatory peptide ang-(1-7) by ace or other peptidases. ace2 can also directly metabolize ang ii to generate ang-(1-7) [32] .sars-cov-2 uses ace2 in type ii pneumocytes of lung alveoli and club cells in bronchioles as the cellular entry receptor. very recently, tmprss2 (as a major host protease), and ace2 coexpression was reported among a subset of type ii pneumocytes in the lung [31] .after the attachment of sars-cov-2 spike (s)-protein to ace2, its intracellular binding site down-regulates ace2. consequently, following this down-regulation of ace2, ang ii level increases in the serum leading to augmentation of the ang ii/at1r axis activation, which is followed by trans-signaling of il-6-sil-6ra complex, in which the gp 130-mediated activation of stat3 occurs in the lungs' epithelial cells. although sars-cov-2 itself activates nf-κb through pattern recognition receptors, it is the simultaneous activation of nf-κb and stat3 that enhances nf-κb activation machinery (the il-6 amplifier). this hyper-activation of nf-κb via the il-6amp in the lungs induces a cytokine storm with subsequent ards that had been observed in severe covid-19 patients [33, 34] .indeed, down-regulation of ace2 which was accompanied with enhancement of ang ii levels in different types of lung injury triggered those pulmonary pathological changes that are commonly observed in ards [35] .given the above premises, it seems reasonable to speculate that depletion of ace2 and activation of ace/angiotensin ii/at1r axis might have a pivotal role in the clinical presentations of covid-19. in fact, higher circulatory levels of ang ii were reported in covid-19 patients than the control subjects and these plasma levels of ang ii were linearly associated with lung injury [36] . therefore, in contrast to earlier clinical experts' opinions, raas inhibitors should not be discontinued in stable cases of covid-19 because the discontinuation of ace inhibitors and arbs may potentially have detrimental effects on these patients [14, 37, 38] . in a recent study, the first clinical evidence has shown that ace inhibitors or arb therapy in covid-19 patients with hypertension were associated with a lower rate of disease severity, a trend toward lower il-6 levels, and higher circulatory cd3+ and cd4+ t cells counts [39] .the protective effect of ace2 in severe acute lung failure has been shown in animal models [40] .the accumulating clinical-epidemiological evidence about covid-19 implies that sars-cov-2 associated ace2 depletion is accompanied with a severe clinical course of disease in those clinical and epidemiological conditions that jeopardize the levels of ace2 expression including older age, male sex, and medical conditions (diabetes mellitus, hypertension and cardiovascular diseases, and obesity) [41, 42] . under these medical conditions, the covid-19 infection-induced ace2 depletion could not overcome already exaggerated ace/angiotensin ii/at1r axis activity.hence, administration of recombinant soluble ace2 to patients with severe covid-19 infection may be a therapeutic modality. however, it is worthwhile to consider targeting downstream of ace/angiotensin ii/at1r axis, such as il-6-stat3 axis [34] to combat the observed cytokine storm in covid-19 in order to prevent lung inflammation and end organ damage.ace2, ang-(1-7) and ang-(1-7) receptor mas are the constituents of the other arm of the ras system which counteracts and attenuates the effects of ace-ang ii-at1r axis [43, 44] . ace2 derives vasodilatory peptide ang-(1-7) from ang ii following a cleavage activity. this vasodilatory peptide has anti-proliferative, anti-thrombotic and anti-inflammatory activities [45] [46] [47] .ang-(1-7) reduces the expression of p38 mapk and nf-κb and inflammatory factors such as il-6, tnfα and il-8 [48] [49] [50] [51] . thus, ang-(1-7) per se has an anti-inflammatory effect and ameliorates inflammatory damages, as revealed in several animal studies [52, 53] . it has been shown that ang-(1-7) reduces inflammatory cardiac injury in diabetic hypertensive rats [52] and glomerular involvement in mesangial proliferative glomerulonephritis (mpgn) rat models [53] .the protection of vascular endothelium and renal tubular cells, diuresis and vasodilationdependent ang-(1-7) effects occur via masr [54, 55] . mas receptors express in the epithelium and bronchial smooth muscle; therefore, ang (1-7) could modulate acute and chronic inflammatory processes in the lung via activation of masr [56] . a range of physiological effects of ang- (1-7) is present in different tissues such as heart, brain and kidney by its action on masr [57] .ang-(1-7) also attenuates ang ii induced intercellular adhesion molecule-1 (icam-1), vascular cell adhesion molecule-1 (vcam-1) and mcp1 expression by masr activation leading to inhibition of the p38mapk and nf-κb pathways [58] . erk 1/2 pathway modulates production of il-10 [59] that induces differentiation of t-helper toward th2-type. th-2 regulates immune responses by producing anti-inflammatory cytokines like il-4, il-5, il-9 and il-13 [60] . additionally, il-10 is an anti-inflammatory cytokine that may be involved in the prevention of tissue damage [61, 62] . ang-(1-7) modulates the activity of erk 1/2therefore, ang-(1-7) has an anti-inflammatory function via modulation of nf-κb, mapk and erk 1/2 pathways. hence, it may be proposed that sars-cov-2 associated suppression of ace2, which would be accompanied with reduction of all mas receptor-mediated functions, leads to accentuation of the cytokines release and frank inflammatory responses. because ang-(1-7) exerts a critical role in counteracting the pro-inflammatory effect of raas, protecting from endothelial cell activation and resulting lung damage from inflammatory mediators in the cytokine storm, the administration of ang-(1-7) or one of its similar agents to patients with covid-19 pneumonitis has been suggested [35, 66] .the kinin-kallikrein system includes kininogen, kallikrein enzyme, bradykinin (bk-1-9 or bk), and [des-arg9]-bk or dabk [67, 68] . the active products of this system interact with two distinct g-protein coupled receptors, the bradykinin b1 receptor (bkb1r) and bradykinin b2 receptor (bkb2r); the main ligand of bkb1r is dabk and the ligand of bkb2r is bk [69, 70] . bkb1r could hardly be detected in peripheral tissues in normal states; however, it is expressed on the cell types involved in inflammation. therefore, it is an inducible pro-inflammatory receptor [71] . the expression of bkb1r, as a specific receptor of bradykinin pathway, is highly sensitive to inflammatory mediators such as lipopolysaccharide (lps) and interleukins [70, [72] [73] [74] . it is also up-regulated by cytokines such as il-1b and tnfα [75] [76] [77] . il-2, ifnɣ, epidermal growth factor (egf), and oncostatin increase the rate of bkb1r receptor mediated response [77] [78] [79] [80] . it should be mentioned that il-1b and tnfα-induced bkb1r expression is related to nf-κb activity [81] .sodhi et al. [82] showed that activation of bkb1r enhances the neutrophil attraction to tissue by release of chemokine c-x-c motif chemokine 5 (cxcl5). activity of this receptor leads to expression of fgf-2 [83] , and to increased levels of il-1b [84] and mcp1 (fig.3) [85] .dabk is a known pulmonary inflammatory factor [86] [87] [88] [89] . it is interesting that ace2 also cleaves terminal residue of dabk [90, 91] . this reaction results in deactivation of dabk. therefore, it could be postulated that covid-19-induced reduction of ace2 activity would be accompanied with increased activity of dabk and the resulting accentuation of the aforementioned inflammatory cascade, leading to increased cytokine release. hence, targeting the ace2 /dabk/ bradykinin b1 receptor axis has been suggested by some authors [92, 93] . to prevent or control ards in patients with severe covid-19. although several bkb1 antagonists have passed phase ii clinical trials, none have been approved yet for clinical use [71] .the complement system is an ancient system that contributes to innate immune response. this system includes many proteins and cleavage products that plays a key functional role in defense against microorganisms including viruses. the viral inactivation by the complement cascade involves virus uptake and clearance by phagocytic cells, coating virions resulting in prevention of attachment with their receptors, virus lysis by pore formation, and destruction of its membrane by membrane attack complex formation (c5b-9) [94] .following viral-induced complement cascade activation, inflammatory processes are promoted.complement factor 5a (c5a) is the strongest inflammatory peptide in the complement cascade that induces release of pro-inflammatory cytokines [95] [96] [97] [98] . ]. c5a can also induce secretion of tnf-α [99, 100] . terminal products of the complement cascade can induce the production of cytokines such as tnf-α and il-1 [98, [101] [102] [103] [104] . terminal complement component c5b-9 induces release of il-6 via activation of redox-sensitive transcription factor nf-κb and activator protein-1 (ap-1) [105] and monocyte chemoattractant protein-1 (mcp1) from vascular smooth muscle cells [106] . also, the increased production of c3a leads to production of pro-inflammatory cytokines such as il-1, il-6 and tnf-α [107] .the involvement of the complement system in the pathogenesis of syncytial virus infection, [108] [109] [110] . the hyper activation of complement components including c5a in sera and c5b-9 in lungs was observed in mers-cov-infected hdpp4-transgenic mice. the lung and spleen-induced pathological damages and inflammatory responses were alleviated through blockade of the c5a-c5ar axis in those transgenic mice [110] .gralinski et al. [109] showed that mice models deficient in c3(c3-/-) loads in the lung had milder sars-cov induced pathologic features such as better respiratory function, lower weight loss, reduced pathologic findings in respiratory system, and lower circulatory and tissue cytokines and chemokines, despite equal lung viral loads compared to the controls. these results showed that although the complement system had no role in virus replication, activation of complement system in the lungs of sars-cov infected mice might lead to immune mediated damages in the lungs [109] .the complement cascade can be activated by the lectin pathway (fig.4) . by priming the immune system and enhancing clearances of viruses and virus-infected cells [111] ], the lectin pathway may also be involved in covid-19 pathogenesis. recently, gao et al. [108] reported in a very stimulated macrophages [113, 114] . however, the c5a-c5r axis inhibition by the available pharmaceutical agents would be partial, and the activity of residual terminal complement components might remain. therefore, targeting the upstream activators of the complement cascade such as c3a-c3ar axis may be more effective in restraining the uncontrolled complement pathway activation in severe covid-19 [115] . very recently, the compstatin-based complement c3 inhibitor amy-101 was administered to a patient with ards due to covid-19, in which very good clinical responses with a high level of safety were reported [116] .the overall clinical benefits of targeting the c3a-c3ar/c5a-c5ar axis in order to control maladaptive immune-inflammatory consequences of the complement pathways in severe covid-the covid-19 cytokine storm, like the other cytokine storms in infectious and non-infectious conditions, may be considered as a complex network. the complex network of the cytokine response was described by tisoncik et al. [7] as "a series of overlapping networks, each with a degree of redundancy and with alternative pathways".our aforementioned pathogenesis of the so-called covid-19 cytokine storm through the four described distinct axes clarified that this cytokine storm complex network has many components which might cross-talk with each other in multiple known and unknown interfaces. these interactions in a network state imply the complex nature of the covid-19 cytokine storm. the dynamic equilibrium of the network components could be disturbed at multiple sites to emerge an untoward behavior. in covid-19 cytokine storm, this perturbation is initiated via attachment of the sars-cov-2 spike protein to its receptor, ace2, followed by the ace/ang ii/at1r axis activation leading to hyper-activation of nf-κb by il-6 stats axis [34] . in the normal dynamic equilibrium state, the ace/ang ii/at1r axis activation is counterbalanced by ace2/masr axis and production of ang-(1-7) that reduces the expression of p38 mapk and nf-κb and inflammatory factors such as il-6, tnfα and il-8 [49] [50] [51] . however, sars-cov-2 associated down-regulation of ace2 suppresses these immunomodulatory effects, leading to accentuation of the cytokine release response.we currently know that dabk is a pulmonary inflammatory factor whose deactivation by ace2 is deranged by covid-19-induced reduction of ace2 activity. this derangement is followed by ace2 /dabk/ bradykinin b1 receptor axis activation that creates a pro-inflammatory synergistic effect for sars-cov-2 associated ace/ang ii/at1r axis activation. the resulting effect would be a more inflammatory state, neutrophil recruitment and enhancement of pathological pulmonary changes that are observed in ards of severe covid-19.we have already discussed the involvement of the complement system in the pathogenesis of sars-cov-2 via its nucleocapsid (n) protein-mediated masp-2 auto-activation and binding to mlb in the lectin arm of c3a-c3ar/c5a-c5ar axis [108] . however, the increased production of ang ii and activation of at1r may be accompanied with pro-inflammatory response via activation of the complement cascade including c5a, c5b-9 [23] . this implies a cross-talk between ace/angiotensin ii/at1r axis and the complement system. similar to other complex networks, elements from the complex network of the covid-19 cytokine storm may experience much cross-talk with elements from known and unknown pathways and networks. for example, ang ii as an element from ace/ang ii/at1r induces tgfβ expression [22, 117] . tgf-β has a role in the differentiation of t helper 17 cells from naive cd4+ t-cells. th-17 cells generate il-17, gm-csf, il-21 and il-22. il-17 itself promotes the production of a vast amount of pro-inflammatory cytokines and chemokines [8, 118] . il-17 was among the cytokines that were significantly correlated with the lung injury murray score and disease severity in covid-19 [119] . an increment of the highly pro-inflammatory ccr6+ th17 in cd4 t cells was reported in covid-19 associated with ards [9] . therefore, targeting il-17 and t helper 17 responses in the cytokine storm of covid-19 have been suggested [8, 118] . therapeutic plasma exchange is a well-known therapeutic option that can be considered in the treatment of autoimmune diseases. the beneficial effect of this modality works through elimination of autoantibodies, complement components, immune complexes and cytokines.therefore, this option may be valuable in the treatment of severe covid-19 [120] . however, application of this therapeutic modality is a general approach to confront the cytokine storm.hence, other approaches may be considered in the treatment of the covid-19 driven cytokine storm in order to protect lungs from injury (table-1 ).according to the aforementioned axes which may be involved in the cytokine storm of severe cases of covid-19, some potential targets could be considered as therapeutic options.the first one is recombinant human ace2. there are some trials regarding the efficacy and safety of this agent in clinicopathological settings related to ace2 decrement such as congestive heart failure (chf) [121] , ards [122, 123] , and lung injury due to viral illness such as respiratory syncytial virus (rsv) [124] . the reported findings about safety and efficacy were promising. very recently, monteil et al. [125] reported that human recombinant soluble ace2 (hrsace2) can prevent entry of sars-c0v-2 to the human blood vessel organoid and human kidney organoid;this finding may suggest a highly compelling therapeutic intervention to protect lung injury in covid-19.we suggested ace2/bradykinin/dabk may be involved in the inflammatory response of sars cov-2; therefore, blockade of this axis by inhibiting bkb1r may ameliorate a part of the cytokine storm which occurs in covid-19 infection. lf22-0542 (safotibant) is a bkb1r antagonist with promising anti-inflammatory results [126, 127] . several clinical trials have been conducted to evaluate the effect of this drug in multiple medical settings; they have had promising results (fig.3) [71].regarding the pivotal role of the complement system in the cytokine storm and activation of th-17, every effort should be made to suppress the activation of this elegant cascade. c5a, as a potent component of this system, is a good target for alleviation of pro-inflammatory responses to severe covid-19. eculizumab is a monoclonal antibody with high affinity to c5 near its cleavage site [128] . this agent prevents the formation of c5a and c5b-9. it has been reported that this monoclonal antibody has beneficial effects in the treatment of diseases where their pathogenesis are based on complement activation [129] . in a preliminary study conducted by gao (fig.4) [130] .in conclusion, accumulating evidence suggests that sars-cov-2 driven ace2 down-regulation leads to an array of complex and intertwined molecular interactions via at least four axes consisting of dysregulation of the ace/angiotensin ii/at1r axis, attenuation of ace2/masr axis, increased activation of ace2/bradykinin b1r/dabk axis, and activation of the complement cascades, resulting in the observed cytokine storm in severe covid-19.the elucidation of molecular events of the aforementioned axes which might be involved in the pathogenesis of ards and lung injury in fulminant infections with sars-co-v-2 will promise novel therapeutic options for prevention or attenuation of the inflammatory cytokine release response that are observed nowadays in patients with severe covid-19.mm, in, jr, sf and mk interpreted and wrote the manuscript. in and mm supervised the study.all authors read and approved the final manuscript.an award was given to iraj nabipour by "novo nordisk pars" (the best innovator of diabetes in iran 2013). for the remaining authors none were declared.the technical assistance of mr. dara joukar in drawing of figures is gratefully acknowledged. the authors also thank ms. melissa t. yang, phd for her kind language editing of the manuscript.captions for figures: coronavirus disease 2019 (covid-19) is a clinical syndrome, caused by a mutational rna virus named as severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2). after initially occurring in china in december 2019, it spread all over the world and accepted as a pandemic by the world health organization (who) in march 11, 2020 . sars-cov-2, is a beta-coronavirus, similar to two other coronaviruses causing deadly infections during the last two decades, i.e. severe acute respiratory syndrome corona virus (sars-cov) and the middle east respiratory syndrome corona virus (mers-cov) [1] .although sars-cov-2 infections may be asymptomatic or cause only mild symptoms in the majority of the cases and less lethal than mers-cov infections, it may progress to interstitial pneumonia and acute respiratory distress syndrome (ards) in nearly 10-20% of the cases, especially in those having older age and co-morbidities. this subgroup of patients is notable with having very high levels of serum ferritin and d-dimer levels, hepatic dysfunction, thrombotic tendency, and disseminated intravascular coagulation (dic) implicating occurrence of macrophage activation syndrome (mas), also known as secondary hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis (shlh) [2, 3] . similar clinical and laboratory findings were also reported in patients with sars-cov and mers-cov infections [1, 2] .in this context, we aimed to review covid-19 infection, with special reference to its relationship with cytokine storm. for this purpose, pubmed and google academic were searched from april 11 to 26, 2020. original data in all studies (including case reports and case series) that addressed the definition, causes, and classification of covid-19 and hemophagocytosis, mas, hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis, and cytokine storm, published in the english language in peer-reviewed journals, were included. an additional search for fulltext articles with the same keywords was performed in the databases, subscribed by altınbaş university.results of our search were outlined as follows: firstly we discussed the pathogenesis and immunologic features in covid-19 infection, followed by normal interactions between innate immune system and viruses, background for cytokine storm secondary to covid-19 infection, and finally the management of the immunologic complications.fever, dry cough, shortness of breath, myalgia, fatigue, a tendency for leucopenia, and radiological signs of progressive pneumonia, which may cause ards, are similar clinical and laboratory findings seen in covid-19, sars-cov, and mers-cov infections. this may suggest that their pathogenesis may also be similar [2] . we believe that any hypothesis covering covid-19 pathogenesis should explain very high serum levels of both ferritin and d-dimer levels disproportionate with the severity of infection, as well as a tendency for monocytosis, rather than lymphocytosis, including a low number of natural killer (nk) and cytotoxic t cells, and finally tendency for dic. indeed, these striking features mainly reflect the presence of mas and cytokine storm.spike glycoproteins are the most immunogenic parts of the coronaviruses, which may bind to angiotensin-converting enzyme-2 (ace-2) receptors to enter the host cell. similarities were shown between spike glycoproteins of sars-cov and sars-cov-2. distribution of ace-2 receptor expression intensely on the surface of alveolar epithelial type ii cells, cardiac, renal, intestinal, and endothelial cells is consistent with the target organs involved and the clinical picture in covid-19 infection [2, 4] .sars-cov-2 spreads primarily with direct contact through droplets of saliva or discharge from the respiratory tract, when an infected person coughs or sneezes [1] . following binding to the cell surface receptor of ace-2 by the spike glycoprotein, it enters the cell cytoplasm, where it releases rna genome and replicates, resulting in the formation of new viral particles. then, the cell disintegrates and the virus spreads to other cells.as the immune system recognizes the viral antigens, antigen-presenting cells process these antigens and present them both to the natural killer and cd8-positive cytotoxic t cells in the context of major tissue histocompatibility (mhc) antigens as usual. this presentation activates both innate and adaptive immunity causing the production of large amounts of pro-inflammatory cytokines and chemokines. in some patients, this activation becomes so massive that cytokine storm develops, resulting in thrombotic tendency and multi-organ failure, and eventually causing death [5, 6] .another pathogenic mechanism independent from binding to cell surface ace-2 binding was also speculated, claiming that the virus might bind to the beta chain of porphyrins inside the erythrocytes, resulting in disturbance of heme metabolism and release of iron. however, this speculation needs further investigation and remains elusive [7, 8] .zhang at al. reported that the number of t lymphocytes including both cd4 and cd8 subtypes and especially nk cells are much lower than expected in patients with severe disease course [9] . the number of regulatory t cells is also very low. severe lymphopenia is a very early sign of the disease, preceding pulmonary problems, and tends to normalize as the patient improves. lymphopenia is included among diagnostic criteria in china. despite low numbers, both cd4 and cd8 positive lymphocytes express the high amount of hladr4 and cd38, showing hyperactivity. additionally, cd8 t cells harbor high concentrations of cytotoxic granules; i.e., 31.6% were perforin positive, 64.2% were granulysin positive, and 30.5% were both granulysin and perforin positive. total leukocyte and neutrophil counts and neutrophil/lymphocyte ratio (nlr) are increased especially in severe cases; nlr may be used as a follow-up parameter in patients with covid-19 infection [10, 11] . generally, the number of cd8 t lymphocytes recovers in 2-3 months, whereas it may take nearly a year for the memory cd4 t lymphocytes to recover in sars cov infection [9] [10] [11] [12] [13] .besides low numbers of peripheral lymphocytes, there is striking atrophy of the secondary lymphoid organs including the lymph nodes and spleen, confirmed by autopsy findings. necrosis-associated lymph node and spleen atrophy, significant splenic cell degeneration, focal hemorrhagic necrosis, macrophage proliferation, and increased macrophage apoptosis in the spleen have been reported. immunohistochemical staining showed decreased numbers of cd4 positive and cd8 positive t cells in the lymph nodes and spleen [14, 15] .on the other hand, monocytes and macrophages are increased, which may explain elevated levels of proinflammatory cytokines such as interleukin (il)-6, il-1, tumor necrosis factor (tnf)α, and il-8, which in some patients turn out to be a cytokine storm, as discussed more in detail later.the great majority of the inflammatory cells infiltrating the lungs are monocytes and macrophages. autopsy findings showed the presence of monocytes and macrophages and a moderate amount of multinucleated giant cells associated with a diffuse alveolar injury. however, pulmonary infiltrating lymphocytes were scarce and mostly cd4 positive. these findings were not different than those reported for patients with sars-cov and mers-cov infections [14] .in patients with covid-19, elevated d-dimer levels are important and persistent elevation confers to poor prognosis. development of dic is another problem, characterized by prolongation of prothrombin time and activated partial thromboplastin time, high fibrin degradation products, and severe thrombocytopenia, which may be life-threatening [16] .thrombotic tendency in covid-19 patients is probably caused by endothelial cell activation or damage due to viral binding to the ace-2 receptor. the presence of traditional risk factors for venous thromboembolism was found to be high among covid-19 patients. high levels of inflammatory mediators and immunoglobulins may lead to higher blood viscosity; mechanical ventilation and vascular interventions such as central venous catheterization may further induce vascular endothelial damage in severe or critically ill patients. anticardiolipin antibody levels were also found to be high in small groups reported. the combination of all these factors may lead to deep vein thrombosis or even possibly to lethal pulmonary thromboembolism. therefore, covid-19-infected patients, whether hospitalized or ambulatory need early and prolonged prophylaxis with low molecular weight heparin [9, 16] . on the other hand, ischemic changes in the fingers and toes mimicking vasculitis have been reported in patients with severe covid-19 [13] .the quick interpretation of these issues outlined above shows that the disease starts as a simple viral infection but goes out of control after a while and progresses towards a deadly result with development of the cytokine storm and serious organ damage. to understand why and how this process occurs, and what we can do to control this process, we need to know further details of the pathogenesis of covid-19 and cytokine storm.in the context of the normal innate immune system, macrophages, monocytes, dendritic cells, and neutrophils express a variety of pattern recognition receptors (prrs) that detect pathogen-associated molecular patterns (pamps), which are expressed by infectious agents. among prrs, the membranebound family of toll-like receptors (tlrs) recognizes mainly the pamps in the extracellular and to a lesser account in the intracellular milieu. the triggered signaling process leads to the expression of proinflammatory cytokine-inducing transcription factors, such as nf-kb, as well as to activate interferon regulatory factors that mediate the type i interferondependent antiviral response [17] . the second set of pathogen recognition sensors is present in the cytosol and includes another family of nucleotide-binding domain leucine-rich repeat (nlr) proteins (nlrp1, nlrp3, nlrp7, and nlrc4), the protein absent in melanoma 2 (aim2), and pyrin. these sensors are essential for the detection of endogenous dangerassociated molecular patterns (damps) expressed inside the cell. binding of damps activates nlrs, triggering the formation of multiprotein cytoplasmic complexes called inflammasomes, which convert procaspase-1 to active caspase-1. then, caspase-1 converts proil-1β to active il-1β, which is a very important proinflammatory cytokine [17, 18] (fig. 1 ). it should be noted that if these signaling activation processes are kept under control, they serve for the benefit of the human body.for the viruses, pamps are generally their nucleic acids. viral rna binds to endosomal tlr-3, tlr-7, and cytosolic receptors including rig-i like receptors (rlr's). rlr family consists of three members, namely, retinoic acid-induced gene i (rig-i), melanoma differentiation-associated gene 5 (mda5), and laboratory of genetics and physiology 2 (lgp2) [19, 20] . additionally, rig-i and mda5 have two cards (n terminal caspase activation and recruitment domains). upon binding of rna with rlr, card interacts with mavs (mitochondrial adaptor antiviral signal) protein, leading to activation of the gene coding type 1 interferons (ifns). type 1 ifns play important roles in coordinating cellular immunity reactions to viral infections, thereby contributing to normal antiviral immunity [21] .in normal conditions, virus-infected cells are destroyed by nk cells of the innate immunity and cd8 positive cytolytic t cells of the adaptive immunity, using perforin-mediated granulysin secretion. this leads to apoptosis of antigenpresenting cells and relevant cytotoxic t cells to avoid unnecessary activation after the antigenic activity is over. however, if a defect occurs in lymphocyte cytolytic activity, whether due to genetic problems or acquired conditions, this may lead to the inability of nk and cytolytic cd8 t cells to lyse infected and activated antigen-presenting cells, resulting in prolonged and exaggerated interactions between innate and adaptive immune cells. in this case, many pro-inflammatory cytokines, including tnf, interferon-γ, il-1, il-6, il-18, and il-33, are secreted in an unrestrained way causing a cytokine storm. the whole pathologic process starting with defects in lymphocyte cytolytic activity, going on with increased macrophage activity and whole immune system activation, resulting in a cytokine storm, ards, and multiorgan failure, is also called as mas [3, 22, 23] . this life-threatening condition is one of the major causes of death in covid-19 patients.there is no consensus or suggestion on which terminology should be used: cytokine storm, mas, or shlh? we chose to use the term cytokine storm secondary to covid-19; however, it would not be irrefutable for anyone to use mas or shlh terminology.among patients initially reported in wuhan, the occurrence of mas, cytokine storm, and ards were heralded by very high levels of serum pro-inflammatory cytokines and ferritin. in the past, significantly higher serum levels of il-6, ifn-α, ccl5, cxcl8, and cxcl-10 were also detected in patients with severe sars-cov or mers-cov infections compared to those with milder infections [24] .clinical and laboratory features of mas include sustained fever, elevated serum ferritin, and triglyceride levels, pancytopenia, fibrinolytic consumptive coagulopathy, liver dysfunction, and splenomegaly. besides, low or absent nk cell activity, elevated serum levels of scd25 and scd163, and the presence of hemophagocytosis, which is defined as the engulfment of blood cells, including fig. 1 generation of inflammasome and il-1 activation pathway eryhrocytes, leucocytes, or platelets by phagocytic cells, support the diagnosis of mas [3] .proposed predisposing factors for mas and cytokine storm secondary to covid-19 infection are discussed below:(1) impaired viral clearancethe main problem in covid-19 infection is impaired viral clearance, like sars-cov and mers-cov infections. these viruses have some strategies to combat against host defense mechanisms. sars-cov and mers-cov could produce vesicles having double membranes without prrs, and to replicate inside these vesicles [25] . these strategies lead to impaired antiviral immune response and viral clearance. although the pcr test is negative, the presence of virus inclusion bodies in pulmonary alveolar cells and macrophages at least for 2 weeks still supports the possibility of a failure of virus clearance [14] .(2) low levels of type i interferons another contributing factor is low levels of type i interferons, which are indeed very important in anti-viral response and viral clearance [21] . cellular proteins that recognize viral nucleic acids are mediated by stimulating interferons during viral infections. recognition of viral rna by mda5 is essential for anti-viral immunity, and deficiency of mda5 causes a tendency for viral infections in humans [26] . an accessory protein of mers-cov called as 4a, binds to doublestranded rna, thereby blocking mda5 activation and ifn induction [27] . it should be noted that people who died during the 1997 h5n1 influenza outbreak showed lymphoid tissue atrophy associated with high titer circulatory cytokines, including il-6 [28] . similar upregulation of pro-inflammatory cytokines together with downregulation of antiviral cytokine was observed in mers-cov infection [29] .(3) increased neutrophil extracellular traps (nets) neutrophils may kill the invading pathogens including viruses not only through engulfment of microbes, the formation of reactive oxygen species, degranulation, and secretion of antimicrobials but also through formation of nets. nets are networks of extracellular fibers, primarily composed of dna from neutrophils that bind and kill extracellular pathogens while minimizing damage to the host cells [30] . barnes et al. suggested that neutrophils may contribute to covid-19 pathogenesis utilizing nets, based upon autopsy findings. they also suggested that dornase alpha treatment may be beneficial for the management of this infection [31] . transfer of dna fragments to extracellular space may be due to the release of mitochondrial dna together with disruption of the plasma membrane or caused by a process known as netosis. netosis is a type of programmed cell death distinct from apoptosis and necrosis. viral rna and proinflammatory cytokines may stimulate the formation of both nets and netosis. although the exact role of nets in anti-viral immunity has not been elucidated yet, they might contribute to covid-19 pathogenesis [30] [31] [32] .(4) miscellaneous other mechanisms:pyroptosis is a highly inflammatory and caspase-1dependent form of programmed cell death that occurs most frequently upon infection with intracellular pathogens and is part of the antimicrobial response. it has been postulated that pyroptosis with rapid plasma-membrane rupture and release of proinflammatory intracellular contents may also play a role in covid-19 pathogenesis. rapid viral replication that causes increased pyroptosis may lead to a massive release of inflammatory mediators [33, 34] .liu et al. emphasized the importance of antibodies against spike glycoprotein (anti-s-igg) as promoters of proinflammatory monocyte/macrophage accumulation in the lungs. they suggested that viral-specific antibody response may cause pathological changes, which may be responsible for virusmediated lung injury [35] . golonka et al. speculated that glycoprotein s protein on coronaviruses may undergo a conformational change and enter the host cells through the fc region of igg. in other words, they proposed a mechanism permitting antibody-dependent enhancement of viral entrance to host cells [32] .as discussed above, the corruption of hem metabolism may be one of the causes of high serum free iron levels and may contribute to inflammation [8] . recently, iron-mediated cell death, known as ferroptosis, was reported to play a role in pathogenesis miscellaneous diseases [35, 36] . the role of ferroptosis in covid-19 pathogenesis and its place as a treatment target should be investigated.taken together, viral escape mechanisms to avoid anti-viral immunity, together with genetic or acquired defects in host defense, may impair viral clearance, resulting in mas and inappropriate immune activation, causing ards and multiorgan failure. why disease course is variable ranging from asymptomatic to lethal may be explained by genetic and host factors [37] . this may also explain why the number of deaths may be high in some families. given that genetic factors also play a role in primary hlh/mas cases, a meta-analysis was performed to analyze both the countries where hlh/mas cases are frequently reported and where the frequency of severe and lethal covid-19 infections are high [38] . interestingly, geographical distributions were found to be similar. genetic mutations causing a tendency for primary hlh may constitute a risk factor for severe disease course in covid-19. just the opposite, familial mediterranean fever (fmf)-associated genetic mutations may be speculated to confer milder disease course, based upon the historical hypothesis claiming that such mutations may confer resistance to some viral and bacterial pathogens. indeed, lower death ratios in covid-19 infections reported from turkey and israel may support this speculation (based on https:// covid19.who.int/accessed in 25.04.2020). interestingly, mas occurrence is not frequent in fmf despite being an autoinflammatory disease [39] .besides anti-viral agents, treatment of immunologic complications including cytokine storm using appropriate immunosuppressive and immunomodulatory drugs is essential [40, 41] . currently, there is no specific anti-viral agent or vaccine available for covid-19. however, there are many drugs, most of which are familiar to rheumatologists, which are used based on their pharmacological properties. corticosteroids (cs), chloroquine (cq), hydroxychloroquine (hcq), il-6r antagonists including tocilizumab (tcz), il-1 antagonists including anakinra, tnf inhibitors, and janus kinase inhibitors are among those agents used for this purpose [5, 9] , on the other hand, non-steroidal anti-inflammatory agents, especially ibuprofen, are not recommended in the treatment of covid-19 infection because of the observations that they may exacerbate the symptoms by increasing the ace-2 expression [42] .these two antimalarial agents are commonly used in rheumatology practice for treating patients with rheumatoid arthritis (ra), systemic lupus erythematosus (sle), and sjögren's syndrome, based upon their immunomodulatory effects. besides anti-malarial effects, cq and hcq have been reported to have anti-viral activity against many viruses such as dengue, ebola, sars, and h5n1 in the past. recently, they were reported also to be useful for covid-19 and were included in the guidelines of many countries including china and italy [43] [44] [45] [46] [47] [48] [49] .cq and hcq accumulate in lysosomes and raise the ph level of the endosome, which may interfere with virus entry and/or exit from host cells [48] . besides, these two agents may interfere with the ace-2 receptors, which sars-cov-2 upregulate their expression and enter the cell by binding to these receptors. cq and hcq may reduce glycosylation of ace-2 receptors, thereby preventing sars-cov-2 from effectively binding to host cells [48, 49] . recently, wenzhonget al. claimed that antimalarials might block the binding of the sars cov-2 virus to porphyrins and thus prevent the entering of the virus to the cell [8] . finally, they might block the production of pro-inflammatory cytokines including il-6, thereby blocking the pathway that subsequently leads to ards. whatever the mechanisms are, multicenter studies performed in china reported beneficial effects of these agents among patients with covid-19 [49] . although there are some opposite reports, it seems that cq and hcq will remain as main drugs for covid-19.one may wonder whether rheumatology patients already receiving hcq may be protected from covid-19 infections. recently, 22 patients with rheumatic diseases and receiving hcq treatment were reported to have covid-19 infection and one of them died. although the results of this study have not been reported yet, it seems that prophylactic treatment with hcq may not prevent covid-19 infection (twitter trial) (https://twitter.com/rheum_covid). we also observed that some of our patients developed covid-19 while receiving hcq. but rheumatic patients frequently have co-morbidities and use many other drugs as well. also, the usual daily dose of hcq is 200 mg, which is below the recommended dose for covid-19. therefore, we do not recommend prophylactic use of hcq to prevent covid-19 infection.covid-19 may enter inside the cell by endocytosis and invade the cell. ap2-associated protein kinase i (aak1) is a member of the numb-associated kinase (nak) family, which serves as a clathrin-mediated endocytosis regulator, and aak1 inhibitors may prevent viral entry into the cell [40, 50] . baricitinib is an inhibitor of the jak-stat pathway, which is used for suppressing proinflammatory cytokine production and systemic inflammation in ra. baricitinib is also a nak inhibitor, with a particularly high affinity for aak [40, 51] . based upon this basic data, stebbing j et al. suggested that baricitinib2-4 mg daily may be combined with antiviral treatment in severe covid-19 infections [40] ; however, inhibition of ifn production as a result of concomitant jak-stat pathway blockage may cause impairment of anti-viral immunity [52] . on the other hand, tofacitinib cannot inhibit aak1 and is not recommended for this purpose [40] . the tendency for general infections and the possibility of diverticulitis are other disadvantages of jak inhibitors [50] .as mentioned above sars and covid-19 infections may cause mas and cytokine storm. t lymphocytes are hyperactivated, and there is an enormous amount of proinflammatory cytokines including il-6 and il-1, which contribute to vascular permeability, plasma leakage, and dic, thereby causing pulmonary damage and ards, as well as multi-organ failure [22] . cytokine storm and related similar problems are also observed after the chimeric antigen receptor t cell (car-t) treatment [53] .tcz is a humanized anti-il-6 receptor antibody, inhibiting il-6. tcz is currently used not only for therapy of ra, temporal arteritis, and many other autoimmune rheumatic diseases [54] but also for the treatment of the cytokine storm, which may be induced by car-t treatment [53] .based on these observations, tcz treatment was also tried in patients with severe sars-cov-2 infection complicated with cytokine storm and ards. retrospective studies from china reported the resolution of fever and hypoxemia and improvement in serum crp levels and pulmonary ct findings [40, 41, [55] [56] [57] . our own experience is also consistent with these reports. for the treatment of cytokine storm, the recommended tcz dose is 8 mg/kg iv as single or divided two doses by 12-24 h intervals(maximum dose 800 mg). tendency for general infections, hepatotoxicity, hypertriglyceridemia, and the possibility of diverticulitis are the main disadvantages of tcz treatment [58] .as mentioned above, il-1 is another proinflammatory cytokine playing a dominant role in a cytokine storm, and sars-cov-2 may cause pyroptosis by il-1β [5] . anakinra is a recombinant il-1r antagonist (rhil-1ra) and is the first il-1 blocking biologic agent produced. anakinra blocks the binding of both il-1α and il-1β to il-1r, thereby inhibits the proinflammatory effects of il-1 [59] . anakinra was found to be beneficial in patients with severe sepsis without significant adverse effects based upon the data of phase 3 randomized clinical trial [60] . the recommended sc adult dose of anakinra ranges from 100 to 200 mg daily to 100 mg three times weekly; the pediatric dose is 1 mg/kg daily. the bioavailability of sc injections is 95%with a half-life of 4-6 h. in the presence of renal failure (gfr < 30 ml/min), it should be given in every 2 days. hepatic disease does not require dose adjustment. unlike tcz, anakinra does not inhibit crp synthesis directly; therefore, serum crp levels can be used to follow up systemic acute phase response [59] . another molecule produced for il-blockage is canakinumab, which is a high affinity, fully humanized, monoclonal anti-il-1β antibody with igg1/κ isotype. following sc injection of 150 mg, peak serum concentration is achieved in 7 days. the recommended dose interval is every 2 months [59] . the third molecule developed for il-1 blockade is rilonacept, which is a recombinant soluble il-1 receptor. the half-life of rilonacept is 6.3-8.6 days. the recommended loading dose is 2.2 mg/kg, with the maximum dose of 160 mg; the maintenance dose is half of the loading dose weekly [61] . the use of canakinumab or rilonacept for severe covid-19 infections has not been reported yet.tnf-α is a key proinflammatory cytokine contributing to various acute and chronic inflammatory pathologies, including some autoimmune diseases and septic shock. anti-tnf agents are commonly used for the treatment of rheumatoid arthritis, ankylosing spondylitis, and psoriatic arthritis. while serum tnf-α levels were moderately elevated in patients with sars, much higher serum levels were observed in patients with covid-19 infection, positively correlated with disease severity. although anti-tnf treatment was suggested as a potential treatment for covid-19, there is no sufficient data [40, 41] .systemic corticosteroid (cs) treatment is controversial in severe ards; nevertheless, many physicians use this treatment in patients with severe viral ards. its use is not recommended for patients with covid-19, based on the data from patients with h1n1, sars, and mers [5] . international guidelines recommend using moderate doses of systemic cs treatment for a short time, only when hemodynamic parameters are not improved following fluid replacement and vasopressor support [40, 41] . current use of systemic corticosteroid treatment during covid-19 infection is limited to patients having lethal complications related to cytokine storm such as ards, acute cardiac injury, renal failure, and to those patients with higher serum levels of d-dimer. since, there is no positive evidence coming from randomized clinical trials, who guideline dated march 13, 2020 does not recommend using systemic cs treatment for patients with covid-19 routinely [62] . in our opinion, methylprednisolone 40 mg once daily for 4-5 days, in addition to tcz treatment, may be helpful during cytokine storm and may also help to avoid rebound after tcz.ivig contains the pooled polyclonal immunoglobulin g (igg) supplied from the plasma of approximately a thousand or more healthy blood donors. in clinical practice, ivig is used in patients with immune deficiencies for the treatment of infectious diseases, as well as in treatment-resistant patients with autoimmune diseases as an immunomodulatory agent. previous favorable experience from patients with sars and mers suggested the use of a high dose of ivig (0,3-0,5 g/kg) in patients with serious covid-19 infection in the early phase of the disease [63, 64] . anticoagulation and hydration should not be overlooked for increased tendency to thrombosis during ivig treatment for covid-19 patients.colchicine is an anti-inflammatory and immunomodulatory agent, commonly used for the treatment of gout, fmf, and behçet's syndrome for a long time. colchicine was suggested to be useful for the treatment of some complications of covid-19 infection, based on its ability to inhibit il-1 production [41] . colcorona (colchicine coronavirus sars-cov2) trial is a phase 3, multi-center, randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled multicenter study to evaluate the efficacy and safety of colchicine in adult patients diagnosed with covid-19 infection and have at least one highrisk criterion. currently, the results of this study have not been reported yet (clinicaltrials.gov identifier: nct04322682).many other drugs and interventions were also proposed for the treatment of covid-19 and its complications. the use of low molecular weight heparin (lmwh) or unfractionated heparin, at doses indicated for prophylaxis of venous thromboembolism, strongly advised in all covid-19 patients hospitalized. if patients have a contraindication for anticoagulation, they should be treated with lower limb compression [65] .for the prevention and treatment of cytokine storm and possible lung fibrosis after covid-19 pneumonia, mesenchymal stem cells (mscs)-based immunomodulation treatment has been proposed as a suitable therapeutic approach. for this purpose, many studies are currently ongoing [66] . leng et al. concluded that iv transplantation of mscs was safe and effective in patients with covid-19 pneumonia, especially for those in critically severe conditions [67] . however, currently, there are no approved msc-based approaches for the prevention and/or treatment of covid-19 patients, but the first results of clinical trials seem promising.immune plasma transfusion, which is a passive immunization way, is an old method used in the treatment of many infections. experience with sars-cov infection showed that this treatment could work when given to the appropriate patient or even to family members caring for covid-19 patients at home [68] . however, based upon the experience from sars-cov and mers-cov infections, there is a risk of antibody-mediated disease enhancement after hyperimmune globulin transfusion [69] .in this short review, the relation between pandemic covid-19 infection and its immunologic complication mas was briefly debated. the mechanisms involved in cytokine storm development and why this complication occurs in some patients during covid-19 infection were discussed and possible therapies reviewed. this study has some limitations. firstly, the literature about covid is changing at great speed and the chinese literature could not be included in the manuscript. the lack of standard published studies and the differences in the treatment approaches between chinese and western sources (such as chinese medicine) remained an obstacle for making correct recommendations.although sars-cov-2 infections may be asymptomatic or cause only mild symptoms in most of the cases, immunologic complications such as mas and cytokine storm may occur in some cases. impairment of sars-cov-2 clearance due to genetic and viral features, lower levels of interferons, increased neutrophil extracellular traps and netosis, and increased pyroptosis create a background for such complications. the presence of genetic mutations causing a tendency for primary hlh may constitute a risk factor for severe disease course in covid-19.once, immunologic complications like mas/hlh occur, anti-viral treatment alone is not enough and should be combined with appropriate anti-inflammatory treatment. early recognition and appropriate treatment of mas and cytokine storm will decrease the morbidity and mortality in covid-19 infection, which requires the collaboration of infectious disease, lung, and intensive care unit specialists with other experts such as immunologists, rheumatologists and, hematologists.author contributions as of april 11, 2020, data were started to be collected by mehmet soy and turned into article. the article reviewed by gokhan keser, pamir atagündüz, fehmi tabak, isik atagündüz, and servet kayhan and structured as last version. the data were carefully reviewed hematologically by isik atagündüz, and additional contributions were made to the article with literature recommendations. data availability resource scanning was done in google academic and pubmed with appropriate keywords. original data in all studies (including case reports and case series) that addressed the definition, causes, and classification of covid-19 and hemophagocytosis, mas, hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis, and cytokine storm, published in the english language in peer-reviewed journals, were included.code availability no code or software.ethics approval it is a review article we have no ethical approval and we declared that all procedures performed in presents study were in accordance with the ethical standards of the institutional and/or national research committee and with the 1964 helsinki declaration and its later amendments or comparable ethical standards.consent to participate all of the authors accepted last version of the article and signed the author's disclosure.consent for publication all of the authors accepted last version of the article for publication and signed the author's disclosure.the substantially higher age-specific cfr and the age-specific ratio of confirmed cases in italy and spain (countries with low mean 25ohd level) suggest a potential link between severe vit d deficiency and severe covid-19, which can lead to a higher cfr. no direct link between the performance of health care systems, the age distribution of the nation, or vitamin a deficiency and the cfr of covid-19 were observed. our analysis of the published data on the status of vit d and crp levels (in the us) and laboratory data (crp levels) reported from 792 patients in china suggests that a proper supplementation of vit d across populations may reduce the number of severe covid-19 cases by up to 15 percentage points by lowering the risk factors related to cytokine storm. our analysis did not eliminate the possibility of the circulation of different sub-genera of covid-19 across the globe or other factors.the recent global outbreak of covid-19 imposed catastrophic impacts on every society, specifically among elderly populations. currently no treatment or vaccine has been produced which has led many researchers to look for approaches that can reduce the number of severe covid-19 cases and consequently reduce the mortality rate of the disease. time series analysis of the number of confirmed, deceased and recovered cases illuminates patterns of how covid-19 has impacted different populations, which may help us to better understand the defense mechanisms of the immune system against covid-19 and develop effective treatments for the viral infection. italy and spain have reported a substantially higher crude death rate than other countries [1, 2] despite presenting a higher ranking in overall health care system performance [3] . some experts have suggested analysis of age-specific case fatality ratio (cfr) and time-delayed adjusted mortality ratio for a more informative study of covid-19 infection [4, 5] . initial reports and data obtained from various studies suggest that the elderly (age ≥70 yo) have disproportionately been impacted by covid-19. the substantially higher cfr of the elderly population compels an age-specific analysis of covid-19 data. protection against viral infections is provided by the innate immune system and adaptive immune system. many individuals have died due to complications from some of the main risk factors for covid-19 such as ards, pneumonia, acute kidney failure, acute heart failure, and rhabdomyolysis.clinical data obtained from covid-19 patients in china reported high concentrations of cytokines such as gcsf, ip10, mcp1, mip1a, and tnfα in patients admitted to the icu, which indicates the presence of cytokine storm in severe covid-19 cases [6] . the innate (in very young populations) and adaptive (elderly populations) immune system plays an important role in regulating cytokine levels in viral infections. the impact of vit d in enhancing immune response (including flu and previous coronaviruses) has widely been studied and firmly established [7] [8] [9] . vit d can also suppress cytokine storm, which may substantially increase the chances of avoiding a severe case of covid-19 [10, 11] . some researchers have suggested a potential association between vit d and cfr during the 1918-1919 viral influenza pandemic, also through suppression of cytokine storm [12] . to the best of our knowledge, no randomized blinded experiment has yet reported vit d status and cytokine levels in patients with covid-19. c-reactive proteins (crp) are substances produced by the kidneys when the body is trying to fix damage to arteries, cells, and tissue from autoimmunity, infection, and other causes [13] . crp could be used as a nonspecific marker to indirectly measure the severity of a cytokine storm during a severe covid-19 case. in this article, we have used the reported patient-level data on the association between vit d and crp [14] to model and predict the potential impact of vit d supplementation in the management and alleviation of cytokine storm (estimated by patient-level crp data) which may lead to the reduction of severe covid-19 cases. country-level statistics on vit d deficiency, covid-19 mortality, age-adjusted cfr and other demographic variables have been investigated and discussed.data regarding the number of affected cases, deaths and recoveries from covid-19 was obtained from kaggle [15] as of april 1. the age distribution of the countries was calculated from a data set provided by the united nations [16] . age-specific cfr and age distribution of confirmed patients were calculated/estimated based on confirmed data available from national agencies including the spanish ministry of health as of april 1 [17] [20] and robert koch institute [21] the hubei data is estimated based on the results reported in a recent article [22] .time-adjusted case mortality ratio (cmr) was estimated as the number of deceased patients on day n divided by the number of confirmed patients on day n-8. the agespecific case fatality rate was calculated as the number of deceased patients divided by the total number of confirmed patients (within the age group) on each day. when the age brackets between the released data were different adjustments are considered based on the equal distribution assumption within the age bracket. age distribution of germany was used in our calculation to more accurately estimate the age adjusted cfr and ration of confirmed cases based on the raw data available by the national agency.the calculation of the actual mortality rate of covid-19 is a challenging task, as the number of deceased patients and the number of confirmed patients at time of infection is unknown [4] . stricter and more and bureaucratic screening policies implemented by many countries not only makes the calculation of the actual mortality rate more challenging, but also makes it difficult to determine a metric for the fair comparison of statistics between different countries. analysis of the time events reported from 41 deceased patients in wuhan (hubei, china) shows a median time of 8 days between admission and time of death, and 14 days between onset of symptoms and time of death (shown in inset in the figure 1 ) [23] .in order to determine a fair metric for comparison of the data between countries, a time delay of 8 days was used in calculation of mortality rate. the time-adjusted mortality rate (8 days) in each country reached a steady state and remained stable over (at least) the next 20 days as demonstrated in figure 1 . it appears that covid-19 is progressing across these countries with four different mortality rates. italy and spain have presented a substantially higher mortality rate compared to the other countries (28.3%, 34.6%, respectively). the mortality rate in the united kingdom, france, iran and the us (20.2%,17.4%,14.1%, and 13.5%, respectively) is substantially lower than italy and spain, however, it is higher than in china and switzerland (4.6%,5.0%, respectively). germany and south korea report the lowest mortality rates (2%, 1.8%, respectively). age-specific cfr age-specific cfr for the elderly with covid-19 for the age brackets of 70 yo ≤ age < 80 yo and age ≥70 yo was estimated from the available data and results are shown in figure  2 . italy, spain, and france are presenting a substantially higher cfr (>1.9) than germany, china, and south korea in the age bracket of 70 yo ≤ age < 80 yo. italy and spain present a considerably higher cfr (1.6) for patients age ≥ 70 germany, south korea, and china (hubei). author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. the considerable difference in cfr for covid-19 among the elderly in italy and spain suggests the possibility of unknown factors that substantially increase the fatality rate of covid-19 in the elderly. these variables include the age distribution of confirmed patients, the total number of tested cases (country screening policy), immune system among the population, and other factors.the ratio of confirmed patients in the age bracket of 70 yo ≤ age < 80 yo and age ≥ 70 yo (showing in figure 3 ) shows that elderly people have been disproportionately likely to display symptoms of covid-19. the age distribution of countries (shown in supplementary material) cannot explain the demonstrated gap in the ratio of confirmed elderly cases. a recent study has shown that 60% of patients confirmed with covid-19 do not show symptoms and can remain undetected [15] . it is not clear if this disproportionately high number of confirmed patients in italy, spain, and france is due to a targeted exposure of the elderly to the virus or the inability of their immune system in managing severe covid-19. all rights reserved. no reuse allowed without permission.author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.08.20058578 doi: medrxiv preprint in response to covid-19, countries have implemented different strategies for screening patients for the disease. germany and s. korea have committed to mass population screening while the uk, france, spain, italy, and the united states have limited their efforts to only tests patients with severe symptoms, such as shortness of breath. the ratio of confirmed cases to tested cases for each country (shown in figure 4 (a)) indicates that italy and spain have a substantially higher ratio of confirmed cases from testing (> 4.5 times higher than germany). this suggests that the actual number of patients with covid-19 in those countries is greatly higher than the reported figures. the majority of undetected covid-19 patients in those countries should thus be younger people who display mild symptoms. this could be a reason for the notably higher ratio of confirmed elderly patients with covid-19 in italy and spain compared to other countries, since the age distribution of the countries (shown in figure 4 (b)) cannot fully explain the reported numbers. in addition, the large number of patients with covid-19 and the highly contagious nature of the virus make it less likely for the virus to target a specific age group in those countries. all rights reserved. no reuse allowed without permission.author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.08.20058578 doi: medrxiv preprintthe ratio of confirmed to tested cases in each country. (b) age distribution of countries studied in this article [16] .age distribution of confirmed, hospitalized and admitted to icu casesthe age distribution of the patients who were hospitalized admitted to the icu and the deceased is illustrated in figure 5 . the results presented here demonstrate a pattern containing two peaks (one in very young patients and one in the elderly population). we hypothesis that cytokine storm and immunosuppression is a major reason for the admission of patients to icu [24] . a cytokine storm might have been activated by the innate immune system in the very young population (< 4 yo) while the adaptive immune system could have produced the cytokine storm in the elderly (highlighted in red in the picture). a substantially higher number of elderly patients (age > 60 yo) admitted to the hospital ( figure 5 (a)), and the notably higher ratio of deceased patients in the population ( figure 5 (d)) suggests the potential importance of management of the adaptive immune system in patients with covid-19. these results suggest the aberrant responses of the innate immune system in the elderly population may lead to cytokine storms which causes them to be admitted to the icu at a higher ratio. the higher ratio of deceased to admitted to icu patients in the elderly population (age ≥ 70) suggests the threshold for severe consequences of cytokine storm is substantially lower for them after aging. the high ratio of children (age < 4 yo) admitted to the icu might also be linked to the interaction of their innate immune system with covid-19. the very low ratio of deceased to admitted to icu patients suggest a high threshold against the consequence of this battle among them. i t z e r l a n d i r a n f r a n c e u n i t e d k i n g d o m i t a l y s p a i nall rights reserved. no reuse allowed without permission.author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint (which was not peer-reviewed) is the . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.08.20058578 doi: medrxiv preprint status of vit d deficiency in countries such as germany, s. korea, china, switzerland, iran, france, united kingdom, italy, and spain has been evaluated in different studies by measuring mean 25-hydroxyvitamin d (25ohd) concentration, and the results are shown in figure 6 . the figure shows that italy, spain, and france are the three countries with a mean 25ohd concentration smaller than the threshold defined for severe vit d deficiency. italy, with a reported mean 25ohd concentration of 19.9 and spain, with reported 25ohd concentration of 22.5, have presented the highest mortality rates despite having a better health system performance ranking. these nations' age distribution (shown in the supplementary material) does not justify such a trend. evaluation of the age distribution of the confirmed patients would suggest that italy and spain present a higher mortality rate than south korea, iran, and china, however, it does not fully explain the current gap. for example, the death rate (number of dead/number of the confirmed patients on the same day) among patients aged > 80 in italy (26%) is substantially higher than in south korea (17%). in addition, the age distribution variation within confirmed patients in european countries cannot explain the gap between italy/spain and germany, switzerland, france, and the uk. more importantly, the case fatality is substantially higher in italy and spain even if considering specifically at the elderly (age-adjusted cfr shown in figure 2 ). this led us to further investigate the impact of severe vit d deficiency on the increase in mortality rate. figure 6 -vit d status is compared via the mean concentration of 25ohd in each country. the data is obtained from independent studies in each country [25] [26] [27] [28] [29] [30] [31] . age distribution of the countries are illustrated in the inset at the top right [16] .the results presented in figures 2, 3 & 6 show that countries such as spain and italy with a severe vit d deficiency report a substantially higher mortality rate (crude) and adjusted cfr for ages 70 yo ≤ age < 80 yo and age ≥ 70 yo than germany, south korea, china, switzerland, iran, the us, and uk (countries with less severe vit d deficiency). a key issue is that these countries have not all used the same screening policy. as a result, countries that do relatively little testing tend not to detect mild disease but do show a similar rate of severe disease detection, since severe cases are eventually tested as symptoms worsen. thus, low-testing countries would exhibit a higher fatality rate. the large ratio of confirmed cases at age > 70 in countries with more restrict screening policies such as france, spain and italy compared to the countries with less restrict screening policy suggests that mild undetected diseases are more likely to be a part of the younger population. this suggests the impact of screening policy for comparison of the cfr for the elderly (age ≥ 70) is less sensitive than the impact of screening policy on the crude mortality rate.a sensitivity analysis was conducted where the mortality rate was adjusted based on the ratio of confirmed/tested cases and the result is provided in the figure 7 (inset). to reduce the error of our model we limited our analysis to the countries with a similar confirmed/tested case ratio (italy, france, iran, usa, china, switzerland) and excluded germany, south korea, and spain. in this analysis, we adjusted the mortality rate in each country based on the condition that a fixed confirmed/tested case ratio of 9.9% (confirmed/tested case ratio of france) exists in all data sets. this adjustment is done by including more undetected mild covid-19 cases in the raw data of other countries. in this modeling, we hypothesized that the undetected mild covid-19 in all countries is a population of subjects with confirmed/tested ratio of 4.95% (half of the current ratio of confirmed cases in france). the adjusted data (shown in figure 7 ) shows france and italy (countries with the lowest mean 25ohd levels) present a notable higher mortality rate than iran, us, switzerland. immunosenescence reduces the chance of survival in patients presenting with covid-19, perhaps because the body's line of defense may weaken through deficiencies in nutrients and vitamins. for example, it is well established that the expression of vit d receptors in interactions with immune cells such as t-cells, b-cells, and antigenpresenting cells leads to immune regulation by enhancing the innate immune system and suppressing the adaptive immune system [8, 9] . overactivation of the adaptive immune system can lead to cytokine storm and its suppression via vit d can reduce the cytokines level.clinical data from covid-19 patients suggests a higher risk for the development of severe covid-19 in patients with prior hypertension or diabetes [6, 6, [32] [33] [34] . patients with these conditions are treated with ace inhibitors and angiotensin ii type-i receptor blockers (arbs) which increase the expression of angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ace2) which can lead to severe infection with covid-19 [35] . variation in ace2 expression may play an important role in growth rate and severity of covid-19 [36] . the genetic mechanisms underlying hypertension and its association via ace2 expression to vit d has been widely investigated [37] [38] [39] . hypertension in severe covid-19 patients is characterized by an activated renin-angiotensin system (ras) in the lungs. vit d neuroprotective mechanisms during hypertension through the ace2/ang(1-7)/masr pathway helps to reduce the risk of ras [7] . intensive study of over 11,321 participants has demonstrated the impact of vit d on lowering the risk of ras [40] . trigger of ras through vit d deficiency [41] reduces lung efficiency by the development of fibrosis over time [42] . this suggests that patients in italy and spain with severe vit d deficiency may be at higher risk of severe covid-19.in addition, vit d plays an important role in regulating inflammatory cytokines (suppressing inflammatory and boosting anti-inflammatory cytokines [43, 43, 44] ) and crp [45] which substantially reduces the risk of infection and cardiovascular disease (cvd). a substantially high odds ratio of inflammatory cytokines [6] and crp [14] in patients with severe covid-19 further underlines the potential importance of vit d in boosting the immune system and reducing the risk factors for severe covid-19.the clinical data from confirmed covid-19 patients in china (up to 52 hospitals in 30 provinces) shows a substantially higher frequency of cases with crp ≥ 10 mg among patients with severe covid-19 (81.5%, 110 cases out of 135) than patients with a mild form of the disease (56.5%, 371 cases out of 658) [14] . the relationship between high crp and vit d has been widely investigated in different clinical studies. a recent history of cvd among covid-19 patients has shown another important risk factor for which an association with vit d needs to be investigated.crp production in the liver and its subsequent concentration in plasma is increased in response to inflammation. laboratory data collected nationwide from 3,840 participants (by nhanes in 2007-2008) and analyzed by li et al shows a strong relationship between severe deficiency of vit d and a high (positive) level of crp [46] . analysis of the reported data (without any adjustment of the demographic variables) is shown in figure 8 and suggests an odds ratio of 2 and risk factor of 1.4 for a high crp plasma in subjects with severely deficient vit d (25ohd < 25 ng/l). this means that subjects with a severe deficiency of vit d have 1.4 times higher risk for production of high crp. it is hypothesized that vit d deficiency increases the risk for cytokine storm in covid-19 patients and increases the concentration of crp in a similar fashion as it is reported in healthy controls ( figure 9 ). it is also hypothesized that risk if a high crp increases the chance of severe covid-19.sufficient supplementation of vit d might have inhibited damage to the body, leading to less frequent production of a high concentration of crp. the risk of high crp in patients with normal vit d levels is 0. 45 and reaches 0.63 in patients with severe deficiency of vit d. using the data provided in the table 1&2 , the risk of a severe covid19 given vit d status is calculated based on the equation 1. risk factor for high (positive) crp table 1 . the risk associated with crp status given severe covid19, and covid-19 given crp status is provided/calculated based on the data reported in a recent study [14] . table 2 . the risk associated with high crp given vit d status is provided/calculated based on the data reported in a study [46] . a recent study suggests a respective case fatality rate (cfr) of 2.3% and 10.5% for covid-19 patients with and without cvd history in wuhan (china). [22] . this makes it important to determine a mechanism for reducing the risk factor for cvd. [46] . the relative risk factor for an odds ratio of 1.9 [46] and an estimated baseline ratio of 0.1 is calculated as 1.7 based on equation 1 [47] .relative risk=odds ratio / (1−p0+(p0×odds ratio)) (2) where p0 is the baseline risk. normal status of vit among a population reduces the risk for cvd by 42% (calculated from a risk factor of 1.7). reduction the cvd% among a population will reduces the risk of a severe covid-19.based on the highly contagious nature of covid-19 and the notably lower percentage of confirmed younger cases (and their very low cfr) we suggest that young patients, especially very young children, do get infected but are nearly asymptomatic. the inability of the innate immune system in managing covid-19 and a shortage in memory b cells leads to misfire and overactivation of the adaptive immune system by producing a high level of cytokines (cytokine storm). the aberrant responses of the innate immune system in the elderly (compare to the younger patients) may increase the risk of the viral load [48] which intensifies the activation of the adaptive immune system and production of cytokine storm among this population. this cytokine storm (reported in covid-19 patients [49] ) brings complications such as ards, exacerbation of the effects of pneumonia, acute kidney failure, acute heart failure, and rhabdomyolysis [14] that in some cases becomes fatal. in addition, a weaker cytokine storm among the elderly population can be more fatal (than in the younger population) as the threshold for severe consequences of lung damage is substantially lower for them after aging. even moderate lung damage due to cytokine storm may lead to hypoxemia that in turn results in mortality due to underlying complications such as cvd.the time interval for the development of a notable adaptive immune response is estimated as a week, which is consistent with the current median time to death in covid-19 patients (14 days) [23, 50] . the possible role of ibuprofen in worsening covid-19 treatment [51] can be explained by its action on suppression of innate immunity [52, 53] which leads to overactivation of the adaptive immune system that may intensify the cytokine storm and become fatal in elderly patients [54, 55] . vit d, on the other hand, may help by boosting the innate immunity (to reduce the viral load) and by suppressing the adaptive immune system (which may further reduce cytokine storm) [8, 9] . the role of vit d in regulating immunity [8, 9] and reduction of cytokine storm may avoid the complications caused by a cytokine storm in the elderly population.italy, spain (countries with severe vitd deficiency) have a notably higher ratio of confirmed elderly patients (age ≥ 70 yo) and also a higher cfr among the elderly population (age ≥ 70 yo) than other countries such as germany, china, and south korea. a sensitivity analysis among the countries with similar screening methods (us, france, iran, switzerland, uk, and italy) shows france (a country with the more severe vit d deficiency) has reported a notably higher adjusted (a fixed confirmed/tested ratio) mortality rate which fits into the hypothesis.we suggested (based on the observed patient-level clinical data [6] ) that the aberrant responses of the innate immune system in the elderly (compare to the younger subject) may increase the risk of the covid19 viral load. the increased viral load causes overactivation of adaptive immune system that produces a cytokine storm. patient-level crp data were used as a surrogate marker of cytokine storm and its link and association with vit d status was used to suggest a potential link between vit d severe deficiency and the number severe covid-19 cases. our analysis suggested a 15% reduction in the number of severe covid-19 cases given a normal vit d status within a population. with the availability of data showing a direct link between vit d status and specific markers of cytokines, a more accurate estimation could be estimated.mers-cov, sars-cov-2 is also thought derived from bat coronaviruses. however, 20 it is not pathogenic for bat at all, because free dna in cytoplasm or blood cannot 21 bring up violent immune response in bat; but it can produce severe inflammations in 22 human. i hypothesized that the damage induced by free dna is a reason for severe 23 covid-19, which can explain many symptoms of this disease, such as cytokine 24 storm, ards and muscus plug, acute injuries of heart, liver and kidney, and some 25 special symptoms of covid-19. my hypothesis will be helpful for better understand 26 the etiology of severe covid-19. cytokines, 5,6 thus risk for "cytokine storm". in addition to these cytokines, free dna 56 can also destroy vascular endothelial cells directly: 7 in vitro study showed it can harm 57 human umbilical vein endothelial cells. the damage of endothelial cells will boost the 58 dysfunctions of multiple organs by cytokine storm, as described as follow. 59 meanwhile, cytokine storm will also promote the permeability of blood vessels. level 60 of lymphocytes is thought as the early identification of risk factors for severe 61 covid-19, [1] [2] [3] 8 while i hypothesized that it was related to free dna-related cytokine 62 storm and blood vessel damage, which can explain many symptoms of this disease, 63 including some "special" symptoms in covid-19, as shown in figure 1 . have no fever at admission to hospital, but most of them will develop a fever during 143 hospital. 2 i thought that the "delayed fever" was partly due to an increasing level of 144 free dna, in addition to the amplification of the virus. third, many clinicians found 145 that some severe covid-19 patients have experienced two or more "attack" even 146 after viral load was reduced. i thought that some attack was due to direct invasion by no research support for this manuscript.in december 2019, an outbreak of pneumonia cases was reported in wuhan, china. the outbreak was linked to the huanan food market. the new virus, 2019-ncov, so called then, was isolated on 7 january 2020 and identified as the cause of the outbreak (1). the 2019-ncov virus rapidly spread across china and many other countries and caused a rapidly growing global outbreak. on 11 february 2020, the who has named the disease covid-19, short for "coronavirus disease 2019" (2) and on 12 march 2020 the total number of covid-19 confirmed cases reached 125,260 globally with 80,981 cases in china and 44,279 outside of china and the covid-19 was declared to be a pandemic by the who (3) . as of 26 may 2020, covid-19 has been confirmed in 5,404,512 individuals globally with deaths reaching 343,514 with a morality of 6.4%, the united states had the highest number of confirmed cases (1,618,757 cases) (4).covid-19 is caused by the sars-cov-2 that belongs to the beta-coronaviruses subfamily. coronaviruses are enveloped, positive single stranded large rna viruses. although the first data available about covid-19 indicates possible animal-to-human transmission via wild animals in huanan seafood market in wuhan (5, 6) , epidemiological data and studies, after that, have increasingly demonstrated that the virus transmits human-tohuman, through droplets or direct contact, with the reporting that individuals who did not have direct contact with the huanan seafood market were diagnosed with covid-19 and with secondary cases occurring at hospitals among health care workers who had extensive contact with covid-19 patients. the virus was confirmed to spread through respiratory droplets from coughs or sneezes (7) (8) (9) with the ability of the host to shed the infection while asymptomatic (10) . studies are now also proposing the possible feco-oral transmission of the virus (11) .covid-19 patients are mainly adults older than 18 years old with a male predominance, the preconceived notion that pediatrics are not subjected to infection later changed with confirmed cases occurring in pediatrics in china and worldwide (12, 13) , however, mortality is still much more in the adult group above the age of 65 years. adults with pre-existing cardiovascular diseases, respiratory diseases, endocrine diseases, diabetics, or immunocompromised adults remain the most exposed to serious complication of covid-19 (14) .although many patients of covid-19 remain asymptomatic, some patients get pneumonia and 10% of cases require mechanical ventilation and icu admission. patients usually present with fever, dry cough, shortness of breath, headache, malaise, muscle, and bony aches. less common symptoms include sore throat, confusion, productive cough, hemoptysis, diarrhea, nausea, and chest pain (15) . progression to pneumonia is documented by radiological findings and usually occurs 1-2 weeks after the beginning of the symptoms. signs of pneumonia include decreased oxygen saturation, deterioration of blood gas, multi-focal glass ground opacities, or patchy/segmental consolidation in chest x-ray or ct. patients presenting late or deteriorating hospitalized patients usually suffer from acute respiratory distress syndrome (ards), acute respiratory failure, acute renal injury, and multi-organ failure (15) (16) (17) .complete blood picture of covid-19 patients usually shows lymphopenia with or without total leukopenia. a lymphocyte count <1.0 × 10 9 /l has been associated with severe disease (18) . a recent research has reported that severe cases of covid-19 tend to have higher neutrophil to lymphocyte ratio (nlr). nlr is calculated from a routine blood picture by dividing the absolute neutrophil count by the absolute lymphocyte count and indicates a patient's overall inflammatory status. increasing nlr is a risk factor of mortality not only in infectious diseases but also in malignancy, acute coronary syndrome, intracerebral hemorrhage, polymyositis, and dermatomyostis (19) . platelet count is usually normal or mildly decreased. creaction protein and erythrocyte sedimentation rate are usually increased while procalcitonin levels are normal and elevation of procalcitonin usually indicates secondary bacterial infection. lactate dehydrogenase, ferritin, d-dimer, and creatine kinase elevation is associated with severe disease. elevation in creatinine or liver enzyme levels (alt and ast) occurs in complicated cases progressing to multi-organ failure (18) .the newly emerging covid-19 is continuing to challenge medical health systems all over the world and the scenario is still getting worse. the covid-19 poses an increasing threat to humans with a fatality rate of 6.4 % so far (4). covid-19 infection is accompanied by an aggressive inflammatory response with the release of a large amount of pro-inflammatory cytokines in an event known as "cytokine storm." the host immune response to the sars-cov-2 virus is hyperactive resulting in an excessive inflammatory reaction. several studies analyzing cytokine profiles from covid-19 patients suggested that the cytokine storm correlated directly with lung injury, multiorgan failure, and unfavorable prognosis of severe covid-19 (16, (20) (21) (22) (23) (24) .the immune system has an exquisite mechanism capable of responding to various pathogens. normal anti-viral immune response requires the activation of the inflammatory pathways of the immune system; however, aberrant or exaggerated response of the host's immune system can cause severe disease if remains uncontrolled (25) . cytokines are an essential part of the inflammatory process. cytokines are produced by several immune cells including the innate macrophages, dendritic cells, natural killer cells and the adaptive t and b lymphocytes. during an innate immune response to a viral infection, pattern recognition receptors (prrs) recognize different molecular structures that are characteristic to the invading virus. these molecular structures are referred to as pathogen associated molecular patterns (pamps). binding of pamps to prrs triggers the start of the inflammatory response against the invading virus resulting in the activation of several signaling pathways and subsequently transcription factors which induce the expression of genes responsible for production of several products involved in the host's immune response to the virus, among which are the genes encoding several pro-inflammatory cytokines. the major transcription factors that are activated by prrs are nuclear factor kb, activation protein 1, interferon response factors three and seven. these transcription factors induce the expression of genes encoding inflammatory cytokines, chemokines and adhesion molecules. this sequence of events results in recruitment of leukocytes and plasma proteins to site of infection where they perform various effector functions that serve to combat the triggering infection (26) .three of the most important pro-inflammatory cytokines of the innate immune response are il-1, tnfα, and il-6. tissue macrophages, mast cells, endothelial, and epithelial cells are the major source of these cytokines during innate immune response. the "cytokine storm" results from a sudden acute increase in circulating levels of different pro-inflammatory cytokines including il-6, il-1, tnfα, and interferon. this increase in cytokines results in influx of various immune cells such as macrophages, neutrophils, and t cells from the circulation into the site of infection with destructive effects on human tissue resulting from destabilization of endothelial cell to cell interactions, damage of vascular barrier, capillary damage, diffuse alveolar damage, multiorgan failure, and ultimately death. lung injury is one consequence of the cytokine storm that can progress into acute lung injury or its more severe form ards (27) . ards leading to low oxygen saturation levels is a major cause of mortality in covid-19. although the exact mechanism of ards in covid-19 patients is not fully understood, the excessive production of pro-inflammatory cytokines is considered to be one of the major contributing factors (15) (16) (17) .accumulating evidence suggests that some patients with severe covid-19 suffer from a "cytokine storm." analysis of cytokine levels in plasma of 41 covid-19 confirmed cases in china revealed elevated levels of il-1β, il-7, il-8, il-9, il-10, fgf, g-csf, gm-csf, ifn-γ, ip-10, mcp-1, mip-1a, mip1-b, pdgf, tnf-α, and vegf in both patients admitted to the icu and non-icu patients compared to healthy adults. all patients included in the study had pneumonia and 1/3 of the patients were admitted to icu and six of these patients died (16) .a multicenter retrospective study of 150 covid-19 patients in china evaluated predictors of mortality for covid-19. the study analyzed data from 82 cases who resolved from covid-19 and 68 cases who died from covid-19 and reported significantly higher levels of il-6 in mortality cases than resolving cases (20) . another study analyzing data from 21 patients in china reported increased levels of il-10, il-6, and tnf-α in severe cases (n = 11 patients) compared to moderate cases (n = 10 patients) (21) . a similar study by gao et al. assessed 43 patients in china and reported that levels of il-6 were significantly higher in severe cases (n = 15) than in mild cases (n = 28) (22) . similarly, chen et al. studied a total of 29 covid-19 patients, divided into three groups according to relevant diagnostic criteria, and found that il-6 was higher in critical cases (n = 5 patients) than in severe cases (n = 9 patients) and that il-6 was higher in severe cases than in mild cases (n = 15 cases) (23) .no much data is available yet regarding severe pediatric covid-19 patients. a study that evaluated eight critically ill chinese pediatric covid-19 patients treated in the icu, with ages ranging from 2 months to 15 years, reported increased levels of il-6, il-10, and ifn-γ among other laboratory findings (24) .cytokine storm (cs) is a critical life-threating condition requiring intensive care admission and having a quite high mortality. cs is characterized by a clinical presentation of overwhelming systemic inflammation, hyperferritinemia, hemodynamic instability, and multi-organ failure, and if left untreated, it leads to death. the trigger for cs is an uncontrolled immune response resulting in continuous activation and expansion of immune cells, lymphocytes, and macrophages, which produce immense amounts of cytokines, resulting in a cytokine storm. the cs clinical findings are attributed to the action of the proinflammatory cytokines like il-1, il-6, il-18, ifn-γ, and tnf-α (27) .cs has been reported in several viral infections including influenza h5n1 virus (28, 29) , influenza h1n1 virus (30) , and the two coronaviruses highly related to covid-19; "sars-cov" and "mers-cov" (31, 32) . both pro-inflammatory cytokines (e.g., il-1, il-6, and tnf-α) and anti-inflammatory cytokines (e.g., il-10 and il-1 receptor antagonist) are elevated in the serum of cs patients. the main contributors to the interplay of the cytokine storm are il-6 and tnf-α. in the absence of an immediate and appropriate therapeutic intervention, patients develop ards as a result of acute lung damage followed by multi-organ failure and resulting in death. hence, the cs should be treated immediately, otherwise mortality can result (28) . in addition to anti-viral therapies that can directly target the virus, anti-inflammatory therapies that diminish the cytokine responses are suggested to decrease both the morbidity and mortality in covid-19 patients.the early recognition of cs and the prompt treatment can lead to better outcome. several biological agents targeting cytokines have been proposed for treating cs. il-1 receptor antagonist, anakinra, which is used in treatment of rheumatoid arthritis, was proven to be helpful in cytophagic histiocytic panniculitis with secondary hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis, a disease associated with severe cs (33) . tocilizumab is a recombinant humanized il-6 receptor antagonist that interferes with il-6 binding to its receptor and blocks signaling. tocilizumab is used in treatment of rheumatoid arthritis, juvenile idiopathic arthritis, giant cell arteritis, and has proven valuable in treatment of cs triggered by car-t cell therapy for hematological malignancies (34) . downstream inhibitors of cytokines, e.g., jak inhibitors, are also being explored in treating cs.as il-6 is the most frequently reported cytokine to be increased in covid-19 patients and as il-6 elevated levels have been associated to higher mortalities, tocilizumab is a candidate drug to be used in managing the cytokine storm accompanying covid-19. encouraging results have been reported in china where tocilizumab was used in treatment of 21 patients with severe and critical covid-19. clinical data showed that the symptoms, hypoxygenmia, and ct opacity changes were improved immediately after the treatment with tocilizumab in most of the patients, suggesting that tocilizumab could be an efficient therapeutic agent for treatment of the cytokine storm associated with covid-19 (35) . the us food and drug administration (fda) has approved roche's phase iii clinical trial of the use of tocilizumab in hospitalized patients with severe covid-19 pneumonia. the trial is planned to include 330 patients with severe covid-19 pneumonia (36).cytokine storm appears to be one of the common causes of mortality in the recently declared pandemic of covid-19. therapeutic approaches to manage the covid-19 cytokine storm might provide an avenue to decrease the covid-19 associated morbidity and mortality and is the focus of upcoming studies.all authors contributed to gathering of data, writing, editing, and revising of the manuscript.immune responses, clinical presentations, and radiological patterns are quite heterogeneous among the multitude of people affected by the widespread covid-19 syndrome. 1 one of the worst scenarios is sustained by the so-called cytokine storm, historically labelled as secondary haemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis (shlh), which is a complication most commonly encountered in viral infections. 2 influenza viruses, ebola virus, cytomegalovirus and, more recently, sars-cov-2 have been implicated in triggering the cytokine storm. 3 this cytokine storm may provide the possible mechanism on why certain subpopulations are more likely to die of covid-19 than others.when the immune system mounts an effective adaptive response against sars-cov-2, the infection can be cleared and clinical manifestations are absent or prone to complete recovery. this successful result is mediated by an antiviral cd4 + t helper (th) cell commitment, associated with activation of cd8 + cytotoxic t lymphocytes and with a b cell-driven response leading to the production of specific antibodies. 4 however, when the human organism fails to develop an adequate adaptive immune reaction, viral persistence and the consequent prolongation and amplification of innate immune mechanisms, associated with dysfunctional adaptive responses, can cause a 'hyperinflammatory' state underlying the cytokine storm typical of acute respiratory distress syndrome (ards). 5 in other words, the massive and continuous release of proinflammatory cytokines and chemokines is responsible for a severe, even deadly, attack against the lung. besides the comorbidities (respiratory, cardiovascular, metabolic, oncologic, etc.) involved, the senescence of the immune system plays a role in the worst outcomes observed in the elderly. 6, 7 during childhood and adolescence, there are instead very high numbers of naïve t lymphocytes, ready to differentiate and to engage a successful fight against eventual new pathogens. 5 indeed, children are currently paying a very low death toll to sars-cov-2 infection.on the basis of the above considerations, the present review will focus on the pathogenic mechanisms underpinning the lung damage induced by the cytokine storm triggered by sars-cov-2, as well as on potential therapies targeting such a very severe condition.mechanisms of viral infection sars-cov-2 is an enveloped, positive-sense and single-stranded rna β-coronavirus, similar to coronaviruses responsible for severe acute respiratory syndrome (sars) and middle east respiratory syndrome (mers). 8, 9 its nucleocapsid consists of genomic rna and a phosphorylated n protein, which is embedded within phospholipid bilayers and surfaced by two spike proteins. 10 the latter include the spike glycoprotein trimmer (s) and the hemagglutininesterase (ne), among which the type iii transmembrane glycoprotein m and the envelope e protein are interposed. 10 the s glycoprotein binds to the cell membrane receptor angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ace2), expressed within the lower respiratory tract by type 2 alveolar epithelial cells. 11, 12 this key function of s glycoprotein is primed by tmprss2, a human type 2 transmembrane serine protease, which thus facilitates virus entry into host cells. 11 the s glycoprotein comprises a s1 subunit mediating the cellular tropism of sars-cov-2, and a s2 subunit that is responsible for virus-cell membrane fusion. 13 this fusion is followed by penetration of viral genomic rna into the cytoplasm. once inside target cells, single-stranded viral rna is recognised by the intracellular toll-like receptor 7 (tlr7) located in endosomes. 14 as a consequence of this infectious process, sars-cov-2 rna drives the translation and assembly of viral proteins inside the endoplasmic reticulum and golgi apparatus. the newly formed vesicles, which contain viral particles, fuse with cell membrane thus releasing the virus.tissue destruction spreads throughout sars-cov-2-infected cells, which trigger innate immune responses mediated mostly by macrophages. indeed, tight intercellular communications occur between ace2-expressing lung epithelial cells and macrophages. 15 within the context of class i major histocompatibility complex (mhc-i), macrophages present viral antigens to t lymphocytes, thereby leading to t cell subset commitment and activation. 16 the subsequent th1-featured adaptive immune response should contribute to clear viral infection via the release of antiviral cytokines such as type i interferons (ifns). however, it has been previously reported that severe infections caused by sars coronavirus may be associated with low levels of ifn production. 17 therefore, this pathobiologic scenario could be characterised by polarisation towards an aberrant t cell lineage and a dysregulated cytokine secretory pattern.indeed, it has been shown recently that sars-cov-2 infection can prime cd4 + t lymphocytes to differentiate into pathogenic th1 cells, secreting high amounts of interleukin-6 (il-6) and granulocyte macrophage-colony stimulating factor (gm-csf) ( figure 1 ). 18 such a cytokine milieu promotes activation of cd14 + cd16 + monocytes, which in turn release il-6 and may migrate from blood to lung, thus possibly becoming alveolar macrophages or dendritic cells ( figure 1 ). 18 in addition, severely ill covid-19 patients develop dysfunctional immunophenotypes of cd4 + and cd8 + t lymphocytes, characterised by a high co-expression of surface markers such as pd-1 (programmed cell death protein-1) and tim-3 (t-cell immunoglobulin and mucindomain containing-3), which predisposes to a rapid t cell exhaustion during viral infections. [19] [20] [21] [22] in fact, in patients with severe disease, innate immune mechanisms can fail to induce an effective virus-targeted cytotoxic response, normally implemented by activated cd8 + cells. 23 furthermore, the adaptive immune response induced by sars-cov-2 might be also shaped as a predominant th17 profile. 24 cross-talking innate and adaptive immune pathways lead lung epithelial cells, activated monocytes/ macrophages and t lymphocytes to massively one of the most important cytokines produced as a consequence of sars-cov-2-induced tlr-7 signalling is il-6, a pleiotropic proinflammatory mediator that promotes the proliferation of myeloid progenitor cells and the growth and activation of leukocytes, as well as induces pyrexia and the synthesis of acute phase proteins such as c reactive protein (crp) ( figure 2 ). 25 il-6 plays a central role in immune responses by stimulating the differentiation of t follicular helper cells (tfh) and contributing, together with tgf-β, to development of th17 cells ( figure 2 ). 5, 24 through activation of the socs-3 (suppressor of cytokine signalling-3) pathway, il-6 can also suppress phosphorylation of signal transducer and activator of transcription-4 (stat-4), thus impairing the activity of cd8 + cytotoxic and natural killer t cells. 5, 25 furthermore, via up-regulation of il-4 and down-regulation of ifn-γ, il-6 inhibits antiviral th1 cell commitment and favours th2 cell differentiation. 5 elevated levels of il-6 are associated with severe lung injury. 26 il-6 can suppress the functions of t lymphocytes, dendritic cells and macrophages aimed to eliminate coronaviruses, thereby dampening the ability of the immune system to clear such infections. 27 therefore, il-6 overproduction can probably be induced by some viruses such as sars-cov-2, with the aim of escaping immune surveillance.active il-1β and il-18 originate from their inactive precursors via a cleavage catalysed by caspase-1, a proteolytic enzyme operating within the context of the multiprotein intracellular inflammasome complex, 28 highly susceptible to activation induced by viral molecules. il-1β and tnf-α, mostly generated by activated macrophages, are present in high concentrations in bronchoalveolar lavage fluid (balf) from patients with ards and stimulate neutrophil functions. [29] [30] [31] tnf-α also causes the apoptotic death of lung epithelial and endothelial cells. 32 high il-8 balf concentrations have been also detected in subjects with ards. 31 il-8 is a powerful chemoattractant and activator of neutrophils, whose apoptosis is inhibited by this chemokine. thus, upon release from monocytes/macrophages and alveolar epithelial cells, il-8 plays a key role in stimulating neutrophil survival and recruitment to the lungs. 31 il-8 synthesis is effectively stimulated by il-17a and il-17f secreted by il-6-dependent th17 cells, which are likely involved in triggering the cytokine storm associated with lung neutrophilic infiltration. 24 indeed, high numbers of th17 lymphocytes can be found in peripheral blood of patients with severe sars-cov-2 infection. 33 with regard to inflammatory cell influx into sars-cov-2-infected lungs, a key pathologic function is also exerted by gm-csf, which mediates relevant intercellular communications between pathogenic th1 cells and cd14 + cd16 + monocytes ( figure 1 ). 18 high numbers of cd14 + cd16 + monocytes are detectable in covid-19 patients with severe involvement of lungs, where these cells actively participate in journals.sagepub.com/home/tar 5 induction and amplification of tissue infiltration by macrophages. 18 another proinflammatory mediator potentially involved in the cytokine/chemokine storm characterising severe sars-cov-2 infection is the chemokine ip-10. in fact, it has been previously shown that ip-10 is up-regulated in bronchiolar and alveolar epithelial cells, as well as in t cells and monocytes/macrophages infiltrating the lungs of subjects with sars. 30 ip-10 exerts a strong chemotactic action on t lymphocytes, monocytes and natural killer cells. 30 moreover, high blood levels of ip-10 were detected in patients died of sars. 34 it is thus very likely that ip-10 significantly contributes to the recruitment of monocytes/macrophages into the lungs of sars patients. virus-induced production of ip-10 could also be responsible for a fast mobilisation, followed by a subsequent apoptosis of t cells 30 ; this mechanism might be implicated in the impairment of t lymphocyte response against sars-cov-2.taken together, the above considerations suggest that, in critically ill covid-19 patients, cytokine storm and cytokine dysregulation lead to remarkable pathological consequences. indeed, the cytokine storm elicits immunological changes that can potentially weaken the immune response aimed to clear sars-cov-2 infection. t lymphocyte-dependent protective responses against sars-cov-2, mediated by both cd4 + and cd8 + t cells, may potentially fail because of the overproduction of il-6 and tnf-α. in fact, these cytokines can inhibit t cell proliferation and activation, thereby contributing to the development of lymphopenia in severely injured sars-cov-2 infected patients. 16, 18 consistent with such a speculation, it has been reported that high levels of both il-6 and tnf-α coexist with relatively low counts of cd4 + and cd8 + t cells. 21 it has been also hypothesised that a suppression of functionally exhausted th1 lymphocytes might be concomitant with an immunological shift towards th2-driven responses. 1, 16 all the above immunological changes likely occur more often in the elderly, because of a negative impact of aging on the protective efficiency afforded by the adaptive immune network against new viral infections. 6 cytokine/chemokine-mediated injury of lung endothelial and epithelial cells may impair the integrity of blood/air barrier, thereby promoting vascular permeability as well as alveolar oedema, infiltration by inflammatory cells (i.e. neutrophils and macrophages) and hypoxia. 32 in addition, the presence within the cytokine storm context of fibrogenic factors such as tgf-β could favour tissue remodelling and lung fibrosis, 30 thus further compromising gas exchange.in clinical setting, there is an urgent need to detect the laboratory parameters which can be useful to diagnose cytokine storm. a recent metaanalysis of 21 studies globally including 3377 patients and 33 laboratory biomarkers suggests that elevated serum levels of il-6 and ferritin, paralleled by high numbers of white blood cells and associated with low lymphocyte and platelet counts, could provide a valuable diagnostic platform for critical covid-19 illness. 35 such data are partially consistent with those of a very recent explorative study carried out on 127 hospitalised covid-19 patients, which showed that, when compared with the group of less severe subjects, more severe patients were characterised by high blood levels of il-6, fibrinogen, sialic acid, crp and neutrophils. 36 in particular, neutrophil-tolymphocyte ratio (nlr) resulted to be significantly higher in severely ill patients, 36 thus suggesting that the decreased lymphocyte count might be indicative of the existing impairment of the immune system.several drugs, currently approved for treatment of various diseases and acting on different molecular targets, are potentially useful to lessen the strength of the cytokine storm triggered by sars-cov-2. 37 however, their utilisation in covid-19 patients is mostly empirical, because of lack of published controlled trials showing a reliable profile of efficacy and safety. such drugs include il-6 receptor antagonists, il-1 receptor antagonists, jak/ stat (janus kinases/signal transducers and activators of transcription) inhibitors, corticosteroids, hydroxychloroquine and azithromycin.an effective inhibitor of il-6 pathogenic action within the context of sars-cov-2-induced 6 journals.sagepub.com/home/tar cytokine storm appears to be tocilizumab, a recombinant humanised monoclonal antibody targeting the il-6 receptor, currently utilised for treatment of rheumatoid arthritis. 38, 39 a retrospective chinese study, performed in 21 severely ill covid-19 patients, showed that tocilizumab safely lowered fever and crp, as well as improving hypoxemia and computed tomography (ct) scan lung lesions. 40 on the basis of these positive results, a randomised controlled trial has been approved in china with the aim of testing tocilizumab in subjects with elevated il-6 levels and interstitial pneumonia (chictr2000029765). 3 tocilizumab is also undergoing clinical investigation in italy (trial tocivid-19 -nct04317092). current chinese and italian guidelines recommend the use of tocilizumab for treatment of covid-19 infection. 16 in particular, italian guidelines suggest that tocilizumab should be utilised in patients with interstitial pneumonia and severe respiratory failure, characterised by high blood levels of il-6 or crp/d-dimer/fibrinogen/ ferritin. 16 inhibitors of jak/stat (signal transducers and activators of transcription) signalling pathways such as baricitinib, a drug that is currently utilised to treat rheumatoid arthritis, can be potentially useful for treatment of cytokine storm. indeed, by targeting the jak/stat signal transduction system, baricitinib interferes with the functions of adaptor-associated protein kinase 1 (akk1) and cyclin g-associated kinase (gak), which are implicated in viral endocytosis. 44 fedratinib is a specific jak2 inhibitor able to reduce il-17 expression, as well as to repress gm-csf biological actions. 24 therefore, this drug could contribute to attenuate the cytokine storm associated with severe sars-cov-2 infection. another jak inhibitor is ruxolitinib, a drug that is currently utilised for treatment of myelofibrosis. ruxolitinib has been shown to induce relevant clinical benefits in some covid-19 patients treated in southern italy (unpublished observations). however, further studies are needed to corroborate and validate such positive preliminary data.the use of systemic corticosteroids for treatment of covid-19-associated cytokine storm could be of some value. in fact, by modulating cytokine production, these drugs might repress hyperinflammation associated with covid-19-related ards. 45 some interesting observations suggest that in community-acquired pneumonia corticosteroids could increase the rate of therapeutic success, and also decrease the number of hospitalisation days and the time occurring to reach clinical stability. 46 however, it has been reported that early use of hydrocortisone in subjects with mers could delay viral clearance. 47 moreover, utilisation of methylprednisolone in sars-cov-2 infected patients with advanced ards and progressive disease appears to ameliorate respiratory symptoms and ct abnormalities, but does not seem to prolong overall survival. 48, 49 nevertheless, because of the lack of control arms, such conclusions based on observational studies should be considered with extreme caution.chloroquine, and especially its less toxic derivative hydroxychloroquine, could block sars-cov-2 entry inside target cells by interfering with glycosylation of ace2 receptors. 50 this drug also acts by suppressing tlr7 signalling and by inhibiting endosomal acidification, essential for viral replication. 5 moreover, hydroxychloroquine prevents endolysosomal fusion. the therapeutic action of hydroxychloroquine can be potentiated by azithromycin, capable of reducing the proinflammatory activity of il-6 and tnf-α. 51, 52 conclusionthe dramatic outbreak of sars-cov-2 infection is currently associated with an ongoing progress in the knowledge of underlying pathogenic mechanisms, which is shedding partial light on the immunophenotypic traits characterising infected patients more susceptible to the development of heavy lung damage caused by cytokine storm. indeed, an impairment in anti-viral immune response and the concurrent aberrant hyperinflammatory reaction can facilitate, especially in elderly people with comorbid conditions, the occurrence of the most severe forms of covid-19-related illness. a better understanding of cytokine storm pathobiology is also making it possible to explore the therapeutic efficacy of il-6 receptor antagonists and jak/stat inhibitors, which, however, require to be carefully evaluated by definitely needed randomised controlled trials.il-6 plays a central role in the covid- 19 cytokine storm ( an extra figure to illustrate this point would be needed)with in the domain of therapeutic implications, some subheadings can go like ' il-6 inhibitors'steroids hydroxychloroquine, azithromycin 4. comment regarding line 41-49, page 3. the dysregulation and impairment in adaptive immunity spur the cytokine storm. however, the damage is likely mediated by both adaptive and innate immunity, as is evident from numerous elevated cytokines in severe covid-19.5. the introduction on page 3 starts with non-specific general comments. i suggest to wrap it in a few lines and delve into the topic of cytokine storm with salient facts before the reader loses interest. a suggestion to start with would look like ' cytokine storm, or historically labeled as secondary hlh, is a complication most commonly encountered in viral infections. influenza, ebv, cmv, and the most recent covid-19 have been implicated in the triggering of the cytokine storm. the cytokine storm may provide the possible mechanism on why certain sub-populations are more likely to die of covid-19 than others' please provide appropriate references 6. line 57-60, page 3, line 1-6, page 4. the references enlisted are not related to covid-19, and they do not provide a beyond doubt proof that the senescence of the immune system is the risk factor for covid-19. while it may well be true, we would need experimental studies to prove that. it may be written as 'besides the comorbidities involved, the senescence of the immune system plays a role in the worst outcomes observed in the elderly.'7. line 17-25. the point has already been discussed above. suggest avoiding redundancy.8. line 25-33 is out of context. the jump from the senescence of the immune system to targeting the cytokine storm for therapeutics is out of context.9. line 30-38 page 6, the reference needs to be provided.10. line 3, page 7, reference 3 is a letter to the editor. please avoid using secondary evidence to support a basic idea. it is preferable to credit the original experimental studies to illustrate a point. please make sure of this on all the other references.11. line 34-58 the il 1 beta is discussed as a stimulator of neutrophil function. then the manuscript talks about il-6, and then it talks about il-8, gm-csf, and ip10.the organization of the manuscripts describing the cytokines is disorganized. suggest that start with important interleukins such as il-6 (supporting with a figure that needs to be added) and then talk about other important interleukins in a group fashion. interleukins with similar functions need to be clumped together. if there is any unique function related to the cytokine that should be mentioned separately. the manuscript lacks the bigger picture of how all the interleukins connect the dots. describing them one by one does not help develop a bigger picture.12 line 16-17, page 18. it should be written as critically-ill or critically ill. please proofread the manuscript for grammatical errors.13 line 14-20 summarizes the cytokine events. although it does mention the salient features in the cytokine storm, it lacks the stepwise organizational approach of summarizing it.14. before the therapeutic implications are discussed, the article should address how to diagnose cytokine storm as a clinician. to fulfill the criteria, the h score has been devised, which uses ferritin value of greater than 2000 by which time many patients have already died. based on the studies done on covid-19, the authors should provide a fair idea when a clinician should be comfortably able to diagnose cytokine storm clinically and think about using therapeutic interventions.page 11, page 12 therapeutic implications of cytokine storm: the article starts with medications such as favipiravir, lopinavir-ritonavir, which is out of context. they work through a separate mechanism as antivirals and have little to do with cytokine storm. regarding hydroxychloroquine, the piece that mentions the role of cytokines should be kept.16. start with the commonly used drugs. tocilizumab is most commonly used; after that can talk about jak inhibitors and steroids. discuss the pros and cons of tocilizumab why it may or may not work in a clinical setting. the high viral load which drives the cytokine storm would be unsuppressed by the use of tocilizumab is the fear of the scientific community.in december 2019, the emergency of the novel coronavirus pneumonia in wuhan china, posed a serious and urgent threat to the medical and health public in the world [1] . on 11 february 2020, the world health organization (who) officially named 2019-ncov as severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2), and the disease caused by it as coronavirus disease 2019 . on 30 january 2020, the who declared covid-19 as the sixth public health emergency of international concern, then on march 11, who made an assessment that covid-19 can be characterized as a pandemic. it is the third highly pathogenic coronavirus emerged rapidly since sars-cov in 2003 and mers-cov in 2012 [2] , which made public health care institutions around the world face greater challenges.sars-cov-2 showed a similar pattern of infection, clinical features and even faster transmission rate [3] than the two coronaviruses have already erupted [4] . however, it is of particular attention that acute lung injury (ali), systemic inflammatory response syndrome (sirs), or acute respiratory distress syndrome (ards) occur in sars-cov or mers-cov infected patients, as well as in severe patients with covid-19 [5] . cytokines have been found that play a key role in driving the appearance of these clinical features and are also at the core of inflammation development [6, 7] . consistent with the previous findings, severe covid-19 patients showed significantly increased in cytokines such as il2, il7, il10, gscf, ip10, mcp1, mip1a and tnfα, with the characteristics of a cytokine storm [8] . when sars-cov-2 infects the body, the inflammatory response plays an antiviral role, but the strong cytokine storm due to the unbalanced response will make a huge damage on patients. therefore, taking some strategies to suppress effectively the cytokine storm is an essential way to prevent the deterioration of patients with covid-19 and save the patients' lives, which is of great significance for the treatment of critically ill patients and reducing the mortality rate. in this review, sars-cov-2 and the occurrence mechanisms of cytokine storm induced by it will be introduced in detail, including the ways in which cytokines are activated and released, how they cause cell and organ damage, and therapeutic interventions to prevent or quell this harmful process. decreased (83.2%) [17] , and abnormally elevated alt and ast [24, 25] , proinflammatory cytokines such as il-1β, il-6, and tnf-α increased, d-dimer, c-reactive protein (crp), and procalcitonin (pct) also increased [8] . in addition, patients' plasma angiotensin ii (ang ii) levels were significantly increased, which was related to viral load and lung injury [24] .clinical manifestations and pathology studies have shown that patients with covid-19 mainly performed lung injury [26] , and most of the deaths due to multiple organ failure caused by ards [5, 27] . in addition, icu patients showed higher levels of plasma cytokines, like il-6 [28] , d-dimer, crp, and pct [29] , suggesting that inflammatory responses played a key role in these injuries, and may also be related to the severity of the patients [30] even the cause of death. owing to the lack of direct evidence, it is unclear how the process of inflammatory response involved cytokines is fully completed, but it is certain that the manifested clinical features are directly related to the violent occurrence of inflammation.cytokine storm refers to the overproduction of inflammatory cytokines that having a wide range of biological activity from a variety of tissues cells (mainly for immune cells), which due to different infection and a loss of negative feedback on the immune. in turn, those cytokines drive a positive feedback on others immune cells and continue to recruit them to the sites of inflammation, begetting the growing inflammation exponentially and organ damage. in short, it is the unceasing extreme activation and attack of the autoimmune system. the main cytokines involved are interleukin (il), interferon (ifn), tumor necrosis factor (tnf), colony stimulating factor (csf), chemokine family, growth factor (gf), etc. they are divided into pro-inflammatory factors (such as il1β, il6, il12, tnf, ifnγ) and anti-inflammatory factors (such as il4, il10, il13, tgfβ) based on their functions. cytokine storms are a crucial cause of ards, systemic inflammatory response, and multiple organ failure [31] . moreover, the viruses invade lung epithelial cells and alveolar macrophages to produce progeny nucleic acid which stimulate infected cells to release cytokines and chemokines, activating macrophages and dendritic cells etc [13] . much more chemokines and cytokines are released from these cells to attract more inflammatory cells to migrate to the site of inflammation from the blood vessels, thereby cascading amplification the inflammatory response.it has long been believed that well-coordinated and rapid innate immune response is the first line of defense against viral infection. the cytokines synthesized and secreted by immune cells are involved in the induction period and effect phases in all inflammatory reactions, more importantly, activating the initiation of cytokine transcription mechanism to promote secretion is the key link. when immune cells in the body detect the pathogen-associated molecular pattern (pamp) from the virus through the pattern recognition receptor (prr) on the cell membrane, immediately, the innate immune response system is activated [32] . among the prrs, the most typical is toll-like receptor (tlr3). tlr3 is a transmembrane receptor, extracellular accessory proteins md-1, md-2 and rp105 are involved in the recognition of pamp [33] . macrophages are the key cells for host defense. tlr3 on macrophages specifically recognizes the intermediate product ds-rna of virus replication, followed by the recruitment recruits signal transfer proteins myd88, tirap, tram or trif in the cytoplasmic tir domain. activation of various kinases (iraks, tbk1, and ikks) and tumor necrosis factor receptor-related factor 6 (traf6) according to the different adaptors, eventually nf-κb, mapk, or jnk-stat pathways were activated to promote the transcription of inflammatory cytokines, and produce ifn, il-1β and il-6, etc., coordinating local or systemic inflammatory responses [34] (figure 1 ). il-1β and il-6 are the major pro-inflammatory cytokines released during viral infections [35] . il-1β enhances inflammatory responses of bronchia and alveolar in patients with lung injury. at the same time, acute phase proteins from hepatocytes stimulated by il-1β and il-6 activate the complement system, and the complement cascade further increases vascular permeability.prr activates multiple cytokine transcription and delayed ifn-α and -β response il-6 has always been an important star factor in cytokine storms. in virus-infected lesions, il-6 can respond to il-1, tnf-α, or tlr signals, trigger cis-regulatory modules, and activate the nf-κb transcriptional signaling pathway and the binding site of the nuclear factor il-6 (caat/ebpβ) [36] . but the most important is that il-6 combines with transmembrane receptor il-6r to generate the il-6/il-6r complex. then the signal transduction component gp130 dimerization induced by the complex, and activated janus kinase signal transduction and transcription activators [37] (figure  1 ). high levels of il-6 can activate the coagulation system and increase vascular permeability, providing conditions for the rapid spread of inflammation [37] . as reported that higher levels of il-6 in severe patients with covid-19, which proves that high levels of il-6 may cause greater damage to lung tissue [8] . it has been verified in vitro that sars-cov s protein induces upregulation of il-6 and tnf-α in mouse macrophages through the nf-κb pathway [38] . the cytokine-mediated inflammatory response pathway is a series of intersecting networks, each one has a degree of redundancy and with alternate pathways. the combinations of tlr and ligands initiate signal cascaded amplification and lead to the activation of multiple cytokine pathways, which is the main research focus of current inflammatory responses.through the regulation of cytokines and chemokines, conventional lymphocytes (t cells and b cells) differentiate into specific effector cells and localize at the site of infected. for instance, cd4+t cells differentiate into th1 cells and produce ifn-γ to activate macrophages and other types of cells because of the induction of il12, thereby triggering defense against intracellular pathogens. at the same time, ifn-γ can induce the transcription of multiple chemokines. besides, il-6 induce the differentiation of cd8+t cells into cytotoxic t cells, which eliminated the viruses in the way of lysing infected cells suicide. the consumption of cytotoxic t cells may be the cause of the decrease in lymphocytes in most patients with covid-19 [8] . it has been found t lymphocytes are a vital source of many chemokines and express multiple molecule receptors [39] . such as neutrophils and macrophages are drawn to the region of injury by il-8 and mcp-1chemotactic influences, respectively, while secreting chemokines to recruit more cells to participate in the battle with pathogens. it is now accepted that each cell can respond to multiple chemokines just by expressing a single type of receptor. it is this complex relationship between chemokines and their receptors that makes chemokines rapidly replenish in various microenvironments, and the inflammatory storm continues to develop [35] . according a report, the proinflammatory cytokines like tnf, il-6 and chemokines il8, ccl3 (mcp-1), ccl5, ccl2 and cxcl10 were significantly up-regulated, while the anti-inflammatory factor such as il10 was lacking in sars patients [31] , which showed that the lack of anti-inflammatory factors can cause an imbalance in the inflammatory response and promote cytokine storm.acute lung injury (ali) is a common consequence of cytokine storm in lung tissue and systemic circulation [40] . recently, pulmonary pathology of sars-cov-2 infection showed, the major changes of the lung tissue showed diffuse alveolar damage, alveolar edema and proteinaceous exudates, thickening of alveolar walls, evident desquamation of pneumocytes and hyaline membrane formation indicated ards [26] . and multinucleated giant cells in the alveolar cavity, inflammatory infiltration of lymphocytes in the pulmonary mesenchyme [27] . in addition, the patient's pathological results confirmed that the number of cd4+t and cd8+t cells in peripheral blood reduced but over-activated. the high proinflammatory effects th17 cells increased that concentrating ccr4+/ccr6+, and cd8+t cells contain high concentrations of cytotoxic granules, mainly perforin and granulysin, which can cause severe immune damage in patients [27] . these evidences showed that patients with extensive acute lung injury and multiple organ failure, which may be caused by the activation of the body's immune system, including innate immunity and adaptive immunity, resulting in a strong inflammatory storm.angiotensin converting enzyme 2 (ace2) has been proved to be a cellular receptor for sars-cov-2 [41] . in addition, 21 mutations were found in the sars-cov-2 spike glycoprotein binding region, suggesting coronavirus evolved gradually for adapting to human hosts [42, 43] . though ace2 exists in various tissues such as coronary arteries, vascular endothelium, and renal tubular epithelium [44] , macrophages and pulmonary alveolar epithelial are mainly attacked targets [30] , which explains why contribute to acute lung injury mainly. currently, it is generally believed that sars-cov-2 is considered susceptible to all populations. in animal models, it has been demonstrated that older rhesus monkeys are more susceptible to sars-cov [45] , and the up-express of ace2 in the lower respiratory tract induced by smoking may increase sensitivity to sars-cov-2. genetic analysis of ace2 found that mutant expression was higher in east asian populations, which may indicate that there are differences for sars-cov-2 infectivity among different populations [46] . in addition, rapid virus replication causes cell pyroptosis, immune evasion, and cell lysis triggered by anti-fc antibodies, all of which trigger the release of mass pro-inflammatory cytokines and chemokines. therefore, the covid-19 patient's clinical symptoms exacerbated may be the result of a combination that cytopathic effects directly caused by the virus infection and immunopathology injury caused by violent cytokine storms.from the molecular modeling structural analysis results of 2019-ncov receptors, the receptor binding domain (rbd) of sars-cov-2 has more effective interaction with ace2 compared to sars-cov [47] . the binding of s protein to ace2 is the first step for the virus to enter target cells, accomplished by proteolytic cleavage and fusion of the viral and cellular membranes [13] . it was speculated that sars-cov-2 might also cause lung tissue injury in the same pathogenic mechanism [48] . on the one hand, when sars-cov-2 infects alveolar cells, s1 and ace2 transmembrane domains combine to reduce the level of ace2, resulting in the renin angiotensin system (ras) tilts towards the ace-ang ii axis [49] . meanwhile, the production of ang ii is absolutely or relatively elevated, which causing macrophagocyte infiltration, inducing cytokines and adhesion molecules increase, including il-6, monocyte chemotactic protein 1 (mcp-1), vascular cell adhesion molecule 1 (vcam-1), selectin e etc., causing endothelial dysfunction [50, 51] . besides, down-regulation of ace2 reduces protective effects against acute lung injury [49] , leading to increased pulmonary capillary permeability and pulmonary edema, and severe patients may die of respiratory failure. on the other hand, cell experiment studies in vitro have shown that sars-cov s induces shedding of the ace2 extracellular ectodomain and promotes virus entry into cells through dependence on tnf-α converting enzyme (tace). but the function of free sace2 is unknown currently, which may also mediate inflammation and tissue injury [52] . in addition, the binding of virus and ace2 might also be involved in intracellular pathway recognition.pyroptosis is a new inflammatory form of programmed cell death, inflammation storms caused by sars-cov-2 infection may be related to cell pyroptosis. research evidences from chen et al. showed that sars-cov viroporin 3a protein activates nlrp3 (nod-like receptors protein 3) inflammasome causing il-1β production [53] . reduced cell counts and increased il-1β in serum of covid-19 patients may indicated activation of cell pyroptosis. when a variety of extracellular pamps are recognized by tlrs [54], which triggers activation of the nf-κb signaling pathway and upregulation of inflammasome related components, including inactivated nlrp3, proil-1β, and proil-18. subsequently, nlrp3 oligomerize and it was connected with the pro-caspase-1 through the adaptor protein asc to form a multiprotein complex, thereby activating caspase-1 [55] . activated caspase-1 recruits and incises members of the polymerizes gasdermin family such as gsdmd in the pathway downstream [56] , simultaneously, incises the precursors of il-1β and il-18 forming active il-1β and il18, which are released into the extracellular to recruit more inflammation cells to aggregate and expand the inflammatory response [57] . besides, the active cleavage fragment of gsdmd caused extensive cell perforation by inserting into the lipid bilayer, resulting in cell swelling and lysis, which was followed by release of contents such as cellular matrix and cytokines [58] . a mass of endogenous molecules from immune intracellular are released, such as oxidized phospholipids and cellular matrix, which are called damage-associated molecular patterns (damp). similar to pamp known as alarm singles, they can also be recognized by nlrp3, thereby progressively magnify the inflammatory effects and cause cell pyroptosis [59] (figure 2) . covid-19 patients often have lymphopenia, but further research is still needed to prove whether it is also related to this mechanism.intracellular signaling mechanism of cell pyroptosis induced by pamps ifn is a core family in innate antiviral immunity ， type i interferons (ifn-α and -β) are essential especially for the innate immune response against viruses and other microbial infections. the binding of type i interferon and tis dimer receptor (ifnar) activates the jak-stat signal transduction pathway, in which jak1 and tyk2 kinases phosphorylate, stat1, stat2 and irf9 form a complex. these complexes enter the nucleus and initiate the transcription of ifn-stimulated genes (isg) [60] . in vitro studies have found that rapid replication of sars-cov in mice induces significant but delayed ifn-α/β response, accompanied by a large influx of pathogenic inflammatory mononuclear macrophages (imm) [61] , leading to lung cytokines and chemokine increased, vascular leakage and virus-specific t cell apoptosis, further hinder virus clearance. in addition, studies have demonstrated that coronaviruses can rapidly replicate in host cells and encode proteins (nsp1) that antagonizes ifns response by blocking stat1 phosphorylation [13, 62] . meanwhile, structural proteins m and n inhibit ifns signaling by deactivating traf3, tbk1/ikks, and some other mechanisms, respectively [63] . the coronavirus structural and nonstructural protein against the delayed response of ifns further amplifies the inflammatory response by promoting viral replication, followed with the increase of viral pamps. in turn, the pamps inhibit delayed ifn signaling and stimulate prr-induced abnormal inflammatory responses [64] . above all, it should be clear that these putative antiviral mechanisms have been confirmed in stepby-step studies. whether they are really important in infectious viruses and systemic antagonist pathways need to be further studied.generally considered that antiviral antibodies play a much important role in the viral clearance. according to reports, the response to anti-s-neutralizing antibodies (nab) in dead patients developed significantly faster (14.7 vs 20 days) and higher level than patients who had recovered during sars [65] . in a sars-cov macaque experimental model, inoculated with s protein antibody, it has been found that anti-s-igg facilitate severe lung injury in the early stages of infection via eliminates wound healing macrophage response and tgf-β production as well as promote inflammatory macrophages and the production of factors mcp-1 and il-8 [66] . these evidences suggested that anti-s-igg may also play an important role in lung injury caused by acute sars-cov-2 infection during acute infection period [66] . since fcr was blockaded reducing the production of inflammatory cytokines, it is considered that the virus-anti-s-igg complex may promote cytokine release by binding to fc receptors on the surface of macrophages, or additionally through antibody-dependent cell-mediated cytotoxicity (adcc) directly lyses target cells [67] . whether this complex is associated with antibody-dependent enhancement (ade) [68] or complement system activation in patients with covid-19 during viral replication [55] remains to be proven by further studies.in sum, the rapid spread of sars-cov-2 has forced all medical institutions to carry out research and prevention and control worldwide. all efforts are being made to slow the spread of covid-19 in order to provide better public-health recommendations, and to develop timely diagnostics, therapeutics and vaccines. the mentioned above potential mechanisms are based on two outbreaks of coronavirus and current partial research [69] , many new mechanisms still unknown. new treatments are developed based on existing experience in combating viral infections. however, at present, treatment strategies for sars-cov-2 infection are only supportive, more important is no effective antiviral therapies for covid-19. here we assume and discuss that sars-cov-2 likely associate similar cytokines storm. therapeutic interventions targeting these pro-inflammatory cytokines and chemokines may help alleviate adverse inflammatory responses.corticosteroids are usually used to suppress inflammation responses, which were the main means of immunomodulatory therapy during the sars epidemic. but the early patients were found increased plasma viral load and secondary infections [70] . in some studies, early administration of ifn is beneficial in reducing viral load and moderately improves clinical performance, and combination with ribavirin also made certain therapeutic effect [71] . ifn-λ inhibited the recruitment of inflammatory cells and the production of il-1β without excessive stimulation for the immune system, which might become a potential therapeutic direction [72] . besides, the results from the management of patients with covid-19 by xu et al, showed that an artificial liver blood purification system can quickly clear inflammation mediators to suppress cytokine storms, however, repair system may be delayed for excessive clarity [73] . however, these strategies still need to be tested for clinical effectiveness. in addition, there is evidence that the serine protease tmprss2 plays an important role in sars-cov-2 entry into cellular but tmprss2 inhibitors can prevent entry, this may become a treatment option. and more, sars-cov-2 was neutralized by serum from recovery sars patients [41] , showing a good therapeutic effect. therefore, the use of intravenous immunoglobulin may be a viable option for the urgent treatment of pulmonary inflammation, meanwhile, which means that vaccine development may be the most effective means, but current vaccine production faces many obstacles. this requires researchers to explore via international cooperation.studies have found that there may be individual differences in susceptibility to cytokine storms. the innate immune response of healthy people is highly variable, which can be genetically confirmed the tlr receptor. for example, sepsis patients with single nucleotide polymorphisms (snps) of tlr1 hypermorphic variants, which is associated with increased susceptibility to organ dysfunction, death, and gram-positive bacteremia infection [74] . tlr4 is the major contributor to lipopolysaccharide (lps), and its variants can make individuals susceptible to sepsis, genome-wide association studies (gwas) have linked tlr4 polymorphisms to pathogen susceptibility and disease severity [35] . future researches likely reveal potential genetic variations that affect host cytokine storms during infection. in addition, the body's immune pathological damage is closely related to the viral load, and the degree of the cytokine storm is an essential connection point. if plasma cytokines are monitored dynamically to assess the degree of cytokine storm, timely and effectively, which may be of great benefit to the care of critically ill patients.the inflammatory response is an essential part of the immune system to function, otherwise pathogen will be difficult to eliminate. sars-cov-2 might induce excessive and prolonged cytokine responses, resulting in lung damage and multiple organ failure. so far, most studies have focused on the direct measurement of those cytokines and chemokines in peripheral blood, but in the context of the rapidly changing cytokine environment after virus infection, we have no round understanding the cause of the vigorous inflammatory response. a comprehensive understanding of the factors. although existing researches have shown that during the occurrence of pathogenic hcov infection, the violent cytokine storm, caused immune pathological damage and may be the real "dead killer" in critically ill patients. at the same time, human autopsy and animal models studies provided some evidences for the pathogenic mechanism of inflammatory cytokines, derived from imm and neutrophils. however, current researches are limited, and detailed molecular biology principles and broader epidemiology are lacking. therefore, future researches should not only focus on the identification of specific inflammatory response signaling pathways, in patients and animals infected with hcov, but of course, include the scientific and effective application to control the spread of the virus worldwide.the authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.introduction is plasmacytoid dc. it is also supposed to be the reason behind aggressive disease course in dengue and other viral infections. [3] human sars-cov-2 virus causing covid-19 also leads to dreaded course due to cytokine storm in lung tissue, leading to fatality. [4] intervention to inhibit such cytokine storm from being generated can prevent cases from fatal outcome. worldwide, deaths due to covid-19 are increasing day by day. measures to curb these deaths are underway with no obvious benefits. patients at risk are the elderly and those with comorbid illness such as diabetes, hypertension, chronic airway diseases, and cancers.inhibition of the cytokine storm may prevent the emergence of fatal lung injury, as observed in many case reports, the cytokine milieu was higher in patients, landing in icu as compared to non-intensive care unit patients. the recruitment of cytokine in the cytokine storm that results in fatal disease is similar to the activation of airway epithelial cells immune response. airway epithelial response to viral infection is release of various cytokines such as interleukin-6 (il-6), tumor necrosis factor-α (tnf-α), granulocyte colony-stimulating factor (csf), and granulocyte-macrophage-csf (gm-csf). [5] high il-6 levels are associated with disease severity, but ablation of il-6 signaling, by il-6 receptor antibodies, can lead to uncontrolled virus replication resulting in greater mortality. [6] tnf-α, on the other hand, leads to impair viral replication, enhances cytotoxic activity and cytokine production by leukocytes, and activates endothelial cells. [7] elevated levels of tnf-α have been associated with greater morbidity during infection with highly pathogenic virus, and blocking activity of tnf-α attenuates immunemediated pathology.gm-csf is elevated in covid-19, [8] gm-csf leads to the activation of dcs and macrophages. which in other case should have recruited macrophages to clear viral-infected cells by phagocytosis? but that seems to be have been overwhelmed by immune-mediated injury to lung and mortality due to cytokine storm. [5] one thing is crystal clear that fatal course of covid-19 is the result of mature immune response and resultant cytokine storm, leading to fatal lung injury. hence, children have mild/moderate disease, but it is the elderly who are at risk.worldwide focus is on targeting il-6, tocilizumab-il-6 receptor humanized antibody has shown promising result in dealing with covid-19 patients. it was previously used to treat rheumatoid arthritis.other studies are focusing on targeting gm-csf. however, all these measures also put at the risk of increased viral replication. [6] such measures can potentially cause more morbid outcome or prolonged course of disease. it may also lead to increased community transmission.nicotinamide leads to the inhibition of poly adp ribose polymerase (parp) activity. this, in turn, inhibits inducible nitric oxide synthase expression, reduced free radicals and pro-inflammatory cytokines with restoration of adenosine triphosphate. [9] nicotinamide is also used to mitigate acute lung injury due to bleomycin. [10] nicotinamide and its structurally similar isoniazid, pyrazinamide are used to treat tuberculosis, nicotinamide is used in treating hiv. [11] in cases of covid-19 infection and resultant cytokine storm, leading to acute lung injury, if we focus on restoration of atp by nicotinamide supplementation, this approach may mitigate inflammatory response and ultimately outcome.elderly population is otherwise deficient in niacin, putting them at increased risk of tissue injury due to covid-19 and poor recovery of tissue damage. niacin supplementation will help them in restoring tissue damage. [12] it may result in better outcome. aging leads to slower metabolism and reduced absorption of dietary niacin.targeting cytokine storm is what everyone targeting and it seems apt, but if we think of tissue restoration and prevention of damage due to cytokine storm, then supplementation of key factors needed for mitigating tissue injury should be taken into consideration. niacin supplementation has shown reduction in pro-inflammatory cytokines although in animal model. [13] in vitro studies done on endotoxemia due to lipopolysaccharide, i.e., outer membrane of gram-negative bacteria, known for inducing cytokine storm due to cytokine activation through aberrant pathway, leading to sepsis, were reduced by nicotinamide supplementation in a dose-dependent manner. [14] a systematic review of such supplementation suggested that vitamin b deficiency may weaken host immune response; they should be supplemented to the virus-infected patients to enhance their immune system. therefore, b vitamins could be chosen as a basic option for the treatment of covid-19. [15] this systematic review also suggested role of vitamin b3 (nicotinamide) as of potential use. vitamin b3 treatment significantly inhibited neutrophil infiltration into lungs and produced strong anti-inflammatory effect during ventilatorinduced lung injury (vili). [15] in one study done on mice, nicotinamide was associated with hypoxemia in vili, but even they mentioned that neutrophil-induced lung injury was reduced due to niacin supplementation. [16] parp plays an important role in the immune response of lung. [17] parp-1 inhibitor decreased the levels of il-6 and active plasminogen activator inhibitor 1 in the lungs, attenuated leukocyte lung transmigration, and reduced pulmonary edema and apoptosis. [18] parp is known to have pathogenesis in mechanical vili. [19] considering the molecular mechanism of covid-19 targeting parp is a sensible approach, out of which nicotinamide can be economical way to deal with parp inhibition. parp inhibitors can be repurposed in acute lung injury. [20] parp inhibitors in clinical development mimic the nicotinamide moiety of nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide. hence, nicotinamide, which is the first parp inhibitor, has activity against parp-1, parp-2 can be used as parp inhibitor. [21] the body's niacin requirement is met not only by nicotinic acid and nicotinamide present in the diet but also by conversion from the dietary protein-containing tryptophan. the relative contribution of tryptophan is estimated as follows: 60 mg of tryptophan = 1 mg of niacin = 1 mg of niacin equivalents. [22] nicotinamide recommended daily allowance is 0.3 mg/kg/day as recommended daily allowance. however, the dose needed for parp inhibition is between 300 and 500 mg/kg. it is a very high dose of nicotinamide. adverse effects of nicotinamide are rare and have occurred mainly with high oral doses (≥6g/day), which include nausea, vomiting, liver toxicity, headache, fatigue, and dizziness. [23] we must also know that dealing with immunity, one must be sure of timing of the administration of antioxidant to modulate immunity as suppression. following figure may explain it in better way.reactive oxygen species (ros) levels decide immune responses. the levels of ros lead to the physiological responses of inflammatory cells. high levels of intracellular ros levels result in exaggerated inflammatory responses associated with cytokine storm, and relatively low ros levels give hypoinflammatory response, leading to immunosuppression. ros levels in the intermediate range result in normal immune cell function.the use of antioxidants may only be beneficial during periods of exaggerated inflammatory responses but may be detrimental during periods of relative immunosuppression. thus, the efficacy of antioxidants is dependent on an individual's inflammatory response profile with timing and duration of antioxidant administration critical to demonstrating a salutary effect. as a therapeutic intervention, individualizing dosing will likely be a crucial element in optimizing the potential of an antioxidant strategy. [24] declaration of patient consent patient's consent not required as there are no patients in this study.nil.there are no conflicts of interest.since december 2019, the scientific community all over the globe has been confronted with an unprecedented challenge, a battle against a new infectious agent, the severe acute respiratory syndrome-coronavirus (sars-cov)-2, subsequently defined a pandemic by the who, with a worrisomely high mortality rate. although in the majority of patients the coronavirus 2019 disease causes only mild-to-moderate symptoms, a consistent proportion of infected subjects could develop respiratory failure, acute respiratory distress syndrome (ards) and sepsis. 1 from an immunological perspective, the severity of covid-19 seems to correlate with an increased amount of several cytokines, in particular interleukin (il)-1β, il-2, il-6, il-7, il-10, tumour necrosis factor-α (tnfα), granulocyte colony-stimulating factor (g-csf), interferon (ifn) γ-induced protein 10 kda / cxcl10, monocyte chemoattractant protein 1, macrophage inflammatory protein 1-α both in serum and affected tissues. 2 3 in addition, cd4 + t cells are activated to become pathogenic th1 cells and generate g-csf, thereby augmenting the expression of il-6 in cd14 + cd16 + monocytes. 4 such massive release of pro-inflammatory mediators, further fuelled by positive feedback loops and aberrant activation of the immune system, resembles the socalled cytokine release syndrome, a group of conditions sharing the same pathogenic mechanism, although with a different aetiology. 5 in covid-19, this cytokine storm accounts for the two main causes of mortality in this disease: (1) ards and (2) secondary haemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis (shlh), the latter occurring in a small subset of patients. 6 needless to say how comforting it was to hypothesise a therapeutic role of immunosuppression in severe covid-19, and over the last few weeks, increasing evidence supported that these immunomodulating compounds may be beneficial in severe covid-19. 6 7 however, to guide therapeutic decisions, the heterogeneity under the umbrella of cytokine storm syndromes must be appraised. 5 covid-19 and cytokine storms in adults initially described in the early 1990s, following the administration of the anti-t-cell antibody muromonab-cd3, the cytokine storm has been linked to different other conditions and therapeutic agents overtime, thereby broadening the spectrum of this disease. 8 to cite: alunno a, carubbi f, rodríguez-carrio j. storm, typhoon, cyclone or hurricane in patients with covid-19? beware of the same storm that has a different origin. rmd open 2020;6:e001295. doi:10.1136/ rmdopen-2020-001295nowadays, the term 'cytokine storm' applies to several fields of medicine being a potentially serious complication of immunotherapy and several infectious, neoplastic and autoimmune diseases.haemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis (hlh) is a t-cell-driven hyperinflammatory, hyperferritinemic condition characterised by persistent ifnγ-dependent stimulation of toll-like receptors (tlrs), antigenpresenting cells and t-cell uncontrolled activation, ultimately leading to a cytokine storm. 9 according to the 2019 histiocyte society recommendations, hlh therapeutic strategies are based on the concept that it is a heterogeneous disease of variable aetiology and severity; hence, treatment should be tailored to control hyperinflammation, with glucocorticoids, intravenous immunoglobulin, cyclosporine and etoposide being the historical anchor drugs, and to treat identified disease triggers. other immunomodulating agents like il-1 or il-6 inhibitors are only recommended in selected cases including the macrophage activation syndrome (mas), a subtype of shlh associated with systemic juvenile idiopathic arthritis (sjia), adult-onset still's disease (aosd) and other autoimmune disorders. 10 a context of infection by a new viral agent adds another layer of complexity to the management of the cytokine storm, thus challenging the translation of the evidence from autoimmune diseases. the causal relation between sars-cov2 and shlh relies in its ability to bind tlrs and induce the above-mentioned cascade via activation of the inflammasome and release of il-1ß. 11 importantly, lung tissue samples collected from patients with sars-cov during the sars epidemic in the early 2000s have been reported to exhibit hemophagocytosis features. 12 however, not all patients with covid-19 develop a fully blown shlh, and those with worse prognosis may neither fulfil hlh-2004 diagnostic criteria (table 1) 13 nor reach the hlh-probability calculator (hscore) cut-off values. the authors who developed the hscore pointed out that as each underlying disease is associated with peculiar biologic abnormalities, the cut-off values for laboratory criteria may need to be set accordingly. 14 ruan et al described significantly higher ferritin levels in severe covid-19, putting forward the hypothesis that it can represent a prognostic marker in this disease. however, the mean ferritin values in patients with better prognosis were still over the hlh-2004 cut-off (≥500 µg/l), and it is unclear how many of the deceased patients reached the hscore ferritin cut-off (2000 ng/ml) and at which stage of the disease. 15 recently, it has been proposed that aosd, mas, catastrophic anti-phospholipid syndrome and septic shock, characterised by similar clinical picture and very elevated serum ferritin levels, are included in the so-called hyperferritinaemic syndrome. 16 interestingly, an association between pulmonary involvement and hlh was reported in patients with sjia mediated by gene pathways related to the ifnγ response, 17 and lung imaging pattern and inflammatory mediators appear to be similar to those of patients with covid-19. on this basis, covid-19 with pulmonary involvement could be considered itself a hyperferritinaemic syndrome, regardless of concomitant shlh. 12 the identification of hemophagocytosis features in covid-19 lung tissue, the assessment of ferritin and proinflammatory cytokines trends overtime, along with receiver operating characteristic curves computed with data of patients with covid-19 would add significant knowledge on this matter. in particular, this would allow (1) to confirm whether covid-19 is yet another hyperferritinemic syndrome, (2) to clarify whether current hscore cut-off values are reliable in these patients or should be redefined and (3) to understand the actual extent of the cytokine storm in all patients with covid-19, regardless of the severity, and ultimately to support clinicians in the decision of when and in whom to start immunomodulating therapy and with which compound. moreover, it is important to understand whether in severe forms of covid-19associated pneumonia, ferritin is a mere acute phase protein or rather an active pathogenic mediator. in addition, in light of the pro-inflammatory role of ferritin enriched in heavy subunits (heavy ferritin), it could be of interest to evaluate the heavy:light ferritin ratio in covid-19. 18 finally, the potential usefulness of the ferritin:erythrocyte sedimentation rate ratio, which may be an immediate, inexpensive and easy-to-implement biomarker, needs to be considered. 19 covid-19 and cytokine storms in children despite earlier reports outlined that covid-19 morbidity and mortality in children was very low, 20 very recently, several children with a novel multisystem inflammatory disease resembling toxic shock syndrome (tss) and atypical kawasaki disease (kd) with proven sars-cov2 infection have been observed in the uk. likewise, an increased frequency of kd has been reported in italy. 21 22 tss is a rare, life-threatening condition due in most cases to toxins produced by staphylococcus aureus bacteria but also related to group a streptococcus. tss is characterised by fever, diffuse macular erythroderma, desquamation 1-2 weeks after onset of rash, hypotension and multisystem involvement of three or more of the following organ systems: gastrointestinal, muscular, mucous membrane, renal, hepatic, hematologic, central nervous system. 23 however, to be classified as probable or definite tss, the clinical picture is necessary but not sufficient and either of the two above-mentioned bacteria need to be isolated from biologic samples. in the current circumstances, whether viral isolates may be also considered remains to be elucidated, as it is tempting to speculate that the sars-cov2, alone or in combination, could be triggering or facilitating the tss. on the other hand, kd is an acute systemic vasculitis characterised by fever, nonsuppurative conjunctival injection, rash, oral mucositis, extremity changes and cervical lymphadenopathy, and along with scarlet fever, meningococcaemia and other conditions represent a differential diagnosis of tss. it comes with no surprise that elevated il-1b and il-6 levels in addition to a monotype profile shifted to intermediate monocytes are common hallmarks in kd. 24 mas is a complication in about 2% of patients with kd; however, the incidence is likely underestimated as many clinical and laboratory features of both diseases overlap and the hlh 2009 criteria have low sensitivity and specificity for the diagnosis of mas complicating kd. 25 recently, classification criteria for mas in the paediatric population have been released and will allow to provide more reliable epidemiological data. 26 on this basis, it is conceivable that what is defined as 'a novel multisystem inflammatory disease' may be yet another condition caused by the covid-19-induced cytokine storm. the existing evidence, although limited, that unlike adults children with covid-19 and a good prognosis display normal ferritin levels, underscores the importance to measure this molecule in those with severe covid-19 and the above-mentioned multisystem inflammatory disease. [27] [28] [29] furthermore, comparing the vascular involvement in the young and lung involvement in the adult/elderly will help not only to characterise the pathogenic mechanisms behind sars-cov2 infection but also to gain understanding towards differential responses across the lifespan. the latter may be useful to define personalised medicine algorithms or better adjust the existing ones.most of the aspects of the hyperinflammation during covid-19 remain therefore to be elucidated, and it is not known who will develop the cytokine storm, when and at which extent. nonetheless, several immunomodulating agents inhibiting the activity of ifnγ, il-1β, tnfα, il-6 and the janus kinase 1 and 2-signal transducer and activator of transcription pathway are under investigation for the treatment of selected cases of covid-19. despite being the mainstay of treatment of hyperinflammation, immunomodulatory agents are double-edged swords in a viral infection. they must be managed with caution, and special attention needs to be considered when referring to non-viral hyperinflammation treatment guidelines. in this regard, the location, the timing and the viral phase deserve some considerations that should guide treatment with these compounds. first, it must be noted that disease timing is associated with distinct organs involved. although originated in the lungs, the 'viral response phase' leads to a 'host inflammatory response phase' that is responsible for the hyperinflammation and thus, cytokine storm. 30 the exact overlap between infection phase and organ involvement needs to be more precisely defined, but it is tempting to speculate that underlying immune and inflammatory mechanisms differ across these phases, which will have clear implications for the therapy. it is conceivable that local immune activation in the lungs precedes the general hyperinflammation observed at the systemic level. the multi-organ failure observed in the late stages of covid-19 severe infection is aligned with this notion. alternatively, it may be hypothesised that an uncontrolled replication in the lungs due to a poor innate or cd8 + -mediated viral clearance may facilitate viral spreading via the vasculature to the systemic compartment. the fact that sars-cov2 binds the ace2, which is expressed both in lungs and the vascular endothelium, may support this idea. an in-depth characterisation of the draining lymph node microenvironment should be pursued to better delineate infection kinetics and, hence, disease stages.second, during the acute inflammatory response to infective agents, we observe a rapid (within 30 min) increase of tnfα and il-1β levels and a subsequent rise of il-6. the high levels of il-6 last for longer, while tnfα and il-1β levels rapidly decrease (within 24-48 hours). 31 therefore, clinical trials need to clarify the outcome of treating patients with immunosuppressants at different disease stages and with different extent of pulmonary involvement. in this regard, interim results of the french corimuno-toci open-label randomised controlled trial have been recently announced. 32 a total of 129 patients being hospitalised for covid-19 moderate or severe pneumonia not requiring intensive care upon admission were enrolled in the study and randomised 1:1 to receive standard of care with or without tocilizumab. a significantly lower proportion of patients needed ventilation (non-invasive or mechanical) or died by day 14 in the tocilizumab group confirming that early intervention may be a major determinant to ensure adequate tackling of the cytokine storm.furthermore, treatment with glucocorticoids may be beneficial for patients who develop ards, especially in the light of cost, availability, knowledge of the drug and previous use in hyperinflammation. however, they have been linked to exacerbation of covid-19-associated lung injury. 33 trials are needed to investigate the optimal dosage and timing of glucocorticoids for covid-19 treatment.finally, as only some of the patients with covid-19 are (yet) being treated with antiviral agents, clinicians should pay attention to viral load and find a balance between ablating the cytokine storm via the use of immunomodulating agents without significantly affecting the host defence against the virus, thereby preventing uncontrolled replication. in this regard, the ideal scenario would be to combine treatments for the cytokine storm with effective antiviral therapy, thus reinforcing the need for disease stratification in benefit of the treatment decision-making process.in conclusion, although the cytokine storm we observe in covid-19 is similar to that observed in other diseases, this scenario is more complex than initially thought due to the heterogeneity of hyperinflammation. in addition, the question remains on whether is it a general phenomenon or rather a reaction of the lung possibly in relation to a massive viral invasion secondary to a lack of antiviral response. only a deeper understanding of the origin and the different phases of the cytokine storm in relation to the whole clinical picture and disease evolution will allow to draw a definitive conclusion on the nature and natural history of this process. a better characterisation of the host immune response across disease stages, systemic/lung phase transition and viral lung tropism is needed. the acquisition of such notions will allow to confirm whether covid-19 can be considered a hyperferritinaemic syndrome by itself and to optimise the management of this condition based on disease stage stratification, viral load and cytokine signature to ultimately tailor the therapeutic approach and improve disease prognosis.the coronavirus disease 2019 (covid-19) caused by the severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2) is now overwhelming, spreading throughout the world, and has been declared a global pandemic by the who. so far, more than 4 million confirmed cases have been reported by who worldwide, including more than 290,000 deaths. and the treatment for the critically ill patients of covid-19 remains a challenge.the first report of pathological characteristics of the patient who died from severe infection with sars-cov-2 demonstrated an increased concentration of highly proinflammatory cytokines. 1 actually, the cytokine storm mediated by overproduction of proinflammatory cytokines has been observed in a large population of critically ill patients with covid-19. 2 cytokine storms can result in cardiovascular collapse, multiple organ dysfunction, cardiac arrest, and death. epinephrine, a vasoactive agent, has been routinely employed to the critical situation such as cardiac arrest. however, it remains uncertain whether epinephrine can also benefit the cardiac arrest following cytokine storms occurred in covid-19 patients. this is a question that is easy overlooked but deserves deep consideration.in a study published in nature, 3 staedtke et al used subcutaneously implanted osmotic pumps to continuously release epinephrine, norepinephrine or dopamine into mice treated with lipopolysaccharide (lps). mice with epinephrine, not norepinephrine or dopamine, showed an exacerbated disease course with higher levels of interleukin 6, tumour necrosis factor and chemoattractants compared with lpstreated controls. this result revealed that epinephrine may fuel the cytokine storms. and the effect of epinephrine in initiating cytokine storms was further confirmed in a different model system of severe bacterial infection. actually, it was known that immune cells such as macrophages activated by inflammatory stimuli induce catecholamines and respond to them in an autocrine manner, which amplifies the inflammatory response. 4 even the idea that epinephrine acts to promote cytokine storms seems to be counter-intuitive since the molecules of this class are used routinely to treat the low blood pressure associated with cytokine storms, these integrated evidences suggest that epinephrine can stimulate further cytokine and catecholamine release and this autocrine amplification cascade might worsen cytokine storms in those covid-19 patients. therefore, the clinic reassessment of the benefit of epinephrine for rescuing cardiac arrest caused by cytokine storms in those covid-19 patients is urgently needed.we retrospectively analysed 206 patients who diagnosed as covid-19 and suffered a rescue treatment with epinephrine at tongji hospital in wuhan, china from january 27 to march 1, 2020. it was noticed that only 4/206 (2%) of patients were survivors and discharged from hospital eventually. the severity of the disease may account mostly for the poor outcome. however, as expected from the established role of epinephrine in fueling the cytokine storms, the aggravated cytokine storms may have also played a role in the failure of the rescue.beyond rapid defibrillation and early initiation of cardiopulmonary resuscitation, there are few therapies that have been identified to improve survival for cardiac arrest patients reliably. the use of epinephrine during resuscitation is a mainstay of agent in cardiac arrest, however, the safety and effectiveness of this agent remains controversial. 5 6 vasopressin has been proposed as an alternative to epinephrine in cardiac arrest, based on the finding that its levels were markedly higher in successfully resuscitated patients than in patients who died. 7 compared with epinephrine, vasopressin has several advantages. first, it increases arterial peripheral resistance without resulting direct myocardial stimulation. moreover, it is more resistant to acidosis and has a longer half-life. most importantly, it does not fuel the cytokine storms. although, for common cardiac arrest, compared with epinephrine, no advantage from the use of vasopressin has been identified in any of the outcomes from clinical studies, but for cardiac arrest in those covid-19 patients, vasopressin still should be fully assessed considering the cytokine storms occurred in this special population which might limit the use of epinephrine.clinical decision making must balance the risks and benefits of treatment. therefore, it is time to reevaluate the effect of epinephrine use in covid-19 patients with cytokine storms, and other agents such as vasopressin should be compared with epinephrine and fully assessed for their opportunities as an alternative strategy.the elevated circulating levels of cytokines associated with a variety of infectious and immune-mediated conditions are frequently termed a cytokine storm. here, we explain the protective functions of cytokines in ''ideal'' responses; the multi-factorial origins that can drive these responses to become pathological; and how this ultimately leads to vascular damage, immunopathology, and worsening clinical outcomes.defining cytokine storm: basic concepts in the cytokine response recent reports of elevated serum cytokine levels associated with coronavirus disease 2019 (covid-19) have raised questions about the relationship between cytokine storms and the severe complications associated with this infection. the goal of this primer is to provide an introduction into the current concepts, largely through the lens of sepsis (hotchkiss et al., 2016) , that help understand the underlying causes of cytokine storms and how they interact with coagulation and vascular health and to briefly discuss how this may help understand the pathophysiology of covid-19. historically, the recognition of sepsis as a clinical condition was associated with the presence of bacterial infections in the blood. this definition has expanded to include all infections or suspected infections that result in immune dysregulation characterized by systemic inflammation and remote organ injury. we will discuss how elevated levels of inflammatory cytokines (most notably interleukin [il]-1, il-2, il-6, gm-csf q4 , interferon [ifn] g, and tumor necrosis factor [tnf] ) interact with the complement and coagulation systems to induce disseminated intravascular coagulation (dic), respiratory failure (acute respiratory distress syndrome [ards]), hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis (hlh; histiocyte is another term for macrophage), and multi-organ failure. finally, given the current covid-19 pandemic, the potential contribution of different cytokines to viral sepsis is a topic of interest that may provide an opportunity for interventions.one conceptual framework for how the immune system functions is the idea that the innate ability to recognize an invading organism provides signals that condition cells of the immune system to respond appropriately. this is associated with an amplification of the protective response that is proportionate to pathogen burden but is also influenced by regulatory mechanisms that limit immune hyperactivity. as infection is controlled, there is typically an inflection point associated with entry into a phase of resolution and repair that allows a return to homeostasis ( figure 1a ). cytokines have a direct role in the activation of anti-microbial effector functions but also provide the regulatory signals that specify, amplify, and resolve the immune response. a cardinal feature of these secreted proteins is that they have short half-lives, which will typically restrict communication to those cell types within lymphoid tissues and at sites of inflammation. at high-enough levels, cytokines can also have systemic activities, and the colony stimulating factors produced at sites of microbial invasion can promote emergency granulopoiesis in the bone marrow associated with increased production and mobilization of neutrophils and monocytes. for those infections with systemic involvement, the presence of increased levels of cytokines will impact a wide range of physiological processes. consequently, under some circumstances, enhanced innate recognition, elevated t cell responses, or a failure to resolve can manifest as levels of cytokines in the circulation that exceed normal thresholds and that result in collateral damage. there are many experimental and clinical conditions that illustrate this state (figure 1 ), and the terms cytokine storm, cytokine release syndrome (crs), or hypercytokinaemia have been used to describe a variety of conditions that have diverse etiologies and outcomes.under ideal circumstances, the immune system will provide a proportionate and appropriate response that mediates resistance to invading microorganisms and allows the host to survive infection. for many infections, the coordinated production of sustained circulating levels of proinflammatory cytokines is a natural consequence of an appropriate innate and adaptive response critical for pathogen control.many of the cytokines associated with different forms of sepsis can cause fever, induce cell death, and impact vascular physiology and coagulation. as a result, they have the potential to cause significant and widespread collateral tissue damage. thus, the benefits of sustained levels of circulating cytokines that promote microbial control are balanced by the need to limit immune-mediated damage to the host. from an experimental and clinical perspective, perhaps the most easily recognized form of a cytokine storm is the presence of supra-normal levels of cytokines associated with tissue damage beyond what could be attributed to the pathogen ( figure 1a ). there are other forms of cytokines storms that vary in magnitude and kinetics and that do not necessarily have an underlying infectious cause (described below; see figures 1b and 1c) . nevertheless, in any of these circumstances, the ability to neutralize cytokines to mitigate tissue damage and allow disease resolution highlights that these high levels are not just markers of inflammation but also key contributors to disease. iii. the immune response is not unfettered one of the major themes in immunology over the last 30 years is the increased emphasis on the checks and balances that limit every facet of innate and adaptive cell-mediated and humoral immunity. these include specialized regulatory cell types imbued with anti-inflammatory properties as well as multiple mechanisms that mitigate the deleterious effects of cytokines. since the overproduction of cytokines represents a major challenge to host health, the presence of these regulatory pathways suggests that they may result from evolutionary pressure to balance pathogen control and tolerance of collateral damage in order to survive infection. for example, the receptor-ligand systems for cytokines are characterized by the presence of soluble receptors, receptor antagonists, and decoy receptors expressed at high levels in the tissues and serum. these antagonists can buffer surges in cytokine activity and limit immunopathology. in addition, il-10 exemplifies the ability of cytokines to antagonize inflammatory cell populations and prevent immune hyperactivity. nevertheless, these protective mechanisms have their limits, and excessive or sustained production of cytokines can override these regulatory mechanisms.the successful response to an infection is invariably accompanied by some level of inflammation, and this is apparent by the elevated production of cytokines and/or clinical symptoms. ideally, the magnitude of the response is related to pathogen burden and is restricted to the organ systems that are involved. microbial pathogenesis is a critical determinant of these events, whereby variables such as the replicative potential of the microorganism, cell and tissue tropism, production of toxins, and immune evasion strategies will influence the duration and magnitude of the immune response, whether there is local versus systemic involvement, and the potential for sequelae. these principles are of obvious relevance to many primary microbial challenges, but all of humanity is persistently infected with a range of potentially lethal pathogens, which are generally restrained in the immune competent host but can cause sepsis in the immunocompromised host. this reality illustrates the concept that hosts need to be able to tolerate the presence of in-fections that can be life threatening with the production of cytokines that can be damaging. the idea that resilience in the face of infection is a balance between protective and pathological responses is not new and is discussed here (ayres, 2020) .before describing the diverse events that can drive the innate and adaptive responses that are the basis of a cytokine storm, it is helpful to consider the clinical consequences of high levels of cytokines ( figure 2 ). these can converge on profound changes to the target tissues and the physiology of the host, where not a single organ is spared and host survival is threatened. a hallmark of a cytokine storm is persistent fever and non-specific constitutional symptoms (weight loss, joint and muscle pain, fatigue, headache). progressive widespread systemic inflammation leads to a loss of vascular tone that is manifested as a drop in blood pressure, vasodilatory shock, and progressive organ failure. in this context, respiratory failure is the most prominent but will also impact the heart, central nervous system, and kidneys. some of the clinical manifestations have been associated to specific cytokines: il-6 and tnf are linked with fever and with constitutional symptoms. capillary leak syndrome, which refers to an increase in capillary permeability to proteins and is manifested clinically by hypotension, edema, acute respiratory failure, and kidney injury is thought to be driven by il-2. in patients treated with il-2 or a monoclonal antibody (okt3) that targets the cd3 complex on t cells, thereby inducing il-2, this can be a significant clinical problem. abnormalities revealed by clinical laboratory assays are often driven by the underlying driver of crs. in patients with concomitant hlh, pancytopenia (reduced red blood cells [rbcs] , white blood cells [wbcs] , and platelets), elevated triglycerides and ferritin predominate with accompanying hepatosplenomegaly. patients with concurrent tumor lysis exhibit elevated uric acid, ldh, lactate, and acute kidney injury. hemostatic imbalance manifest by dic and thrombocytopenia (reduced platelet numbers) can be observed in almost all clinical syndromes associated with crs. the levels of these endogenous molecules are important prognostic indicators of secondary complications and organ damage: elevated triglycerides may cause pancreatitis, uric acid can induce kidney failure, and spontaneous intracranial cytokine storms have many different underlying causes that can manifest with different kinetics. (a) the solid line depicts the natural arc of an immune response to infection over a period of days to weeks that transitions to a resolution phase as a pathogen is controlled. for microorganisms with a high replicative potential, changes in the magnitude and duration of the immune response can result in systemic immune pathology. the two dotted lines illustrate different arcs associated with a cytokine storm through either an increased amplitude or a failure to enter the resolution phase. (b) the rapid and widespread engagement of adaptive responses by bacterially derived superantigens or therapeutic interventions can lead to a rapid surge in immune activity (h-days) associated with supra-physiological levels of circulating cytokines. (c) certain cancers that have a systemic component can lead to sustained (weeks to months) responses associated with elevated cytokine production. likewise, chronic autoimmune diseases such as juvenile idiopathic arthritis (jia) and lupus can have flares associated with increased cytokine production. there are also genetic defects closely linked to aberrant cytokine production, enhanced signaling, or a failure to fully control certain viral infections, which can cause periodic spikes in immune hyperactivity. ll hemorrhages are observed with profound thrombocytopenia. thus, treating the underlying driver of crs is a cornerstone of management to avoid further organ injury.the increased production (myelopoiesis) and mobilization of monocyte and neutrophil populations from the bone marrow is a response to many acute infections and cytokines (figure 2 ). these populations are typically considered proinflammatory, are imbued with a range of antimicrobial activities, and are recruited to sites of inflammation where they can respond to pathogen-associated molecular patterns (pamps) and damage-associated molecular patterns (damps) by producing il-1, il-6, il-12, and tnf (table 1 ). in many experimental models, such as the injection of high doses of lps q5 to mimic gram-negative infections or cecal ligation and puncture to model bacterial peritonitis, these innate responses are dominated by neutrophils and monocytes and are sufficient to induce a cytokine storm that eschews the normal kinetics of an immune response ( figure 1 ). there are also examples where primary genetic defects associated with inappropriate activation of the inflammasome can lead to sustained production of il-1 by macrophages that results in a relapsing-remitting disease associated with periodic fevers ( figure 1c) . a major function of macrophages in the red pulp of the spleen is to remove senescent or damaged rbcs (erythrophagocytosis), and for some pathogens or erythrocytes, this process is critical for the clearance of infected cells. however, the sustained production of ifng and tnf can lead to macrophage activation syndrome associated with hlh, which contributes to the anemia that is characteristic of sepsis and almost all systemic infections (al-samkari and berliner, 2018).while the ability to engage innate responses can be sufficient for the development of cytokine storms, the activation of t cells and their ability to produce high amounts of effector cytokines (il-2, ifng, and tnf) are also important. two of the best examples that illustrate how the rapid engagement of t cells can result in cytokine storms come from the development of therapies to enhance t cell function for the treatment of cancer. the clinical trial of an agonistic antibody to the costimulatory molecule cd28 present on t cells provides a notable illustration of how the simultaneous activation of a large number of t cells results in the rapid induction of a cytokine storm (suntharalingam et al., 2006) . the authors description of these events is sobering: ''within 90 minutes after receiving a single intravenous dose of the drug, all six volunteers had a systemic inflammatory response characterized by a rapid induction of tnf-a followed by il-2, il-6, and il-10 and ifng accompanied by headache, myalgias, nausea, diarrhea, erythema, vasodilatation, and hypotension that progressed to pulmonary infiltrates and lung injury, renal failure, and dic. reduced lymphocytes and monocyte counts occurred that correlated with the peak cytokine levels.'' a frequent observation associated with experimental and clinical examples of cytokine storms is a transient reduction in peripheral blood t cell counts. this has been perceived as an indicator of immunosuppression and attributed to death of immune cells, but the sequestration of wbcs in affected tissues, which includes adherence to vascular endothelium, may account for this apparent loss of peripheral wbcs. another example occurred with patients with acute lymphoid leukemia, in which this b cell lymphoma expressed cd19. in these two patients, their t cells were genetically modified to express a chimeric antigen receptor (car) that recognized cd19 and that would allow these modified t cells to eliminate the tumor cells. after infusion of the car t cells, there was a rapid onset of a crs characterized by 100-to 1,000-fold increase in levels of ifng and il-6 that were temporally correlated with systemic inflammation and fever and evolved into the macrophage activation syndrome (grupp et al., 2013) . these examples, from therapeutic interventions, highlight that the rapid, widespread activation of t cells can bypass many of the natural negative cell-extrinsic checkpoints and have a systemic impact on patient physiology.there are other more natural examples where microbial context is important to understand the basis for t cell hyperactivation. this is illustrated by the ability of bacterial toxins, such as superantigens associated with streptococcus and staphylococcus aureus, to crosslink the major histocompatibility complex (mhc) and tcr, thus leading to polyclonal activation of t cells, high levels of cytokine secretion, and the development of toxic shock syndrome. another example is the mosquito-transmitted dengue virus, in which secondary challenge with a heterologous virus can result in dengue hemorrhagic fever characterized by high levels of cytokines, alterations in vascular permeability, and dic. surprisingly, analysis of postmortem tissues highlighted the presence of edema in the lungs but relative absence of tissue inflammation (srikiatkhachorn et al., 2017) . this lack of overt cellular infiltration can be disconcerting to cellular immunologists trying to understand how cytokines mediate tissue damage. the last major influenza pandemic in 2009 was caused by the h1n1 strain and in some patients was associated with the presence of coagulopathies and haemophagocytosis. analysis of a cohort of fatal h1n1 infections highlighted that while these patients did not have any overt preexisting immune deficiencies, many had gene mutations that had previously been associated with the development of hlh, indicating their possible role as risk factors for mortality (schulert et al., 2016) . similarly, in patients that lack perforin, the inability to clear the herpesviruses ebv q6 and cmv q7 results in sustained t cell production of ifng and tnf that results in macrophage activation and hlh. these types of more persistent situations where the underlying causes may not be resolved are not restricted to infectious settings but can manifest in other conditions. these include malignancies and autoimmune diseases as well as in the context of transplantation ( figure 1c) , and in these examples, an overt cytokine storm is not apparent, but flares in disease can result in crs. the vascular compartment, coagulation, and complement as discussed above, some of the prominent clinical features of cytokine storms are characterized by dic, capillary leak syndrome, and loss of blood pressure, which indicates the crosstalk between cytokines and hemostasis. in the absence of systemic inflammation, the vascular endothelium employs numerous mechanisms to maintain barrier function and prevent aberrant coagulation. a common feature of many systemic infections, however, is endothelial cell death (a consequence of cytolytic infection or immune-mediated pathways), which gives rise to vascular damage and the development of capillary leak syndrome. as endothelial cells would be exposed to circulating ll immunity 53, july 14, 2020 3 primer immuni 4400 cytokines and other immune mediators, there are multiple systems to maintain their quiescence under inflammatory duress. an evolutionary conserved component of the hemostatic response to tissue damage and to systemic infections includes the development of coagulation to prevent blood loss. as part of this process, fibrin deposition and the recruitment of platelets can form clots to seal areas of trauma. in many settings, elevated systemic cytokine levels are associated with a transient drop in platelet numbers in the circulation, likely reflecting their consumption. although there is continuous basal production of neutrophils from the bone marrow, systemic cytokines can initiate emergency granulopoesis and increased recruitment of these cells into circulation. there, inflammatory mediators will promote neutrophil release of nuclear dna to form neutrophil extracellular traps (nets) which can snare pathogens but also contribute to thrombi formation. this process, termed immuno-thrombosis (engelmann and massberg, 2013) , can also amplify the production of cytokines and is exemplified by links of thrombin with inflammasome activation and production of il-1. while these events are essentially host protective, systemic inflammation can lead to widespread thrombus formation associated with vascular occlusion, tissue damage, dic, and death of the host. if these events are sustained, one consequence is the depletion of clotting factors, which renders patients more susceptible to catastrophic bleeding into critical spaces like the brain or thorax. thus, thrombi formation has an important role in host protection but needs to be carefully controlled to prevent aberrant pathology.another evolutionary conserved line of defense against invading pathogens that intersects with cytokine biology and coagulation is the complement system. this arm of the innate response is composed of soluble proteins that can recognize and lyse pathogens but can also act to amplify cellular responses. the complex crosstalk between cytokines and the complement system is illustrated by the ability of cytokines to enhance production of components of the complement cascade, which in turn can enhance or inhibit cytokine produc-tion. although complement-mediated opsonization and formation of lytic complexes are critical processes necessary for pathogen elimination, each of these effector functions can be injurious to bystander host cells. given the importance of the endothelium in barrier function, vascular tone, and hemostasis, there are several safeguards, such as surface-bound and soluble complement regulatory proteins, to prevent excessive complement-mediated injury to the normally quiescent endothelium. failure of these safeguards or excessive complement activation result in endothelial injury that manifest as dysregulated coagulation and hemostasis, loss of barrier function, and vascular tone. the vascular endothelium of the lung and kidneys are recognized as particularly vulnerable sites to complement-mediated injury and the clinical implications of widespread endothelial dysfunction, as discussed above.calming the storm given the potential for cytokines to cause tissue damage, there is a need to mitigate the effects of high levels of cytokines and promote the transition into the resolution phase of an immune response. there are numerous natural receptor and cytokine antagonists, such as the il-1 receptor antagonist (il-1ra), that are a feature of cytokine signaling systems that buffer systemic offtarget effects and restrict immune activities to local sites of cytokine release. other cytokines and regulatory pathways can act more directly to limit the magnitude of the immune response. for example, il-10 is produced by many cell types (subsets of monocytes as well as natural killer [nk] , t and b cells) and inhibits the ability of macrophage and dendritic cell (dc) populations to produce tnf, il-1, il-6, and il-12 and decreases the ability of these cells to present antigen and provide costimulation. thus, il-10 is a key negative regulator of the accessory functions required for t cell mediated responses, and there are numerous examples where infection of mice that lack il-10 is characterized by elevated, sustained circulating levels of il-12, tnf, and ifng (i.e., a bona fide cytokine storm) (couper et al., 2008) . paradoxically, increased circulating levels of il-10 are an infectious or non-infectious stimulus in barrier sites such as the gut or lungs that leads to tissue damage initiates a complex series of events. in circumstances that leads to vascular damage, the coagulation system is critical for tissue repair, but this can progress to the development of dic. the early response to invasion/damage q9 is characterized by the innate production of cytokines and the induction of emergency granulopoiesis that leads to the mobilization of neutrophils and monocytes. these events will engage and amplify nk and t cell production of proinflammatory cytokines. these can promote capillary leak syndrome and thrombus formation that can progress to dic. high circulating levels of these cytokines can cause cell death and tissue damage, while their ability to activate macrophages can lead to erythrophagocytosis and anemia. the combination of anemia, alterations in vascular hemostasis, and cytokine-mediated damage can result in multiorgan failure. ll characteristic of the cytokine storms in humans, and the assumption is that these increased levels reflect the presence of a negative feedback loop to control the magnitude of the response and to help with the resolution and repair phase of the response.the existence of immune-regulatory networks to limit aberrant cytokine responses is critical to survive many infectious challenges, but these do have a cost. many of these pathways block the development of sterile immunity to infection and promote pathogen persistence. in addition, many patients who survive sepsis have long-term sequela that include profound immunosuppression and susceptibility to secondary infections. there is a poor understanding of how this is mediated, and one explanation is that the anti-inflammatory regulatory networks do not returns to pre-crisis levels of function and instead operate at a heightened state. alternatively, the systemic action of cytokines can result in remarkable changes in the cellular composition and organization of lymphoid structures, such as the bone marrow, thymus, and spleen. whether this disruption or loss of immunological infrastructure contributes to the long-term dysregulation is not understood.the reports of elevated serum cytokines (ifng, il-6, and gm-csf) associated with the coronaviruses severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus (sars-cov-1), and middle east respiratory syndrome coronavirus (mers-cov) combined with ards have led to relevant questions about whether the subset of patients that develop life-threatening complications are a result of a cytokine storm (min et al., 2016; zhang et al., 2004) . at the time of writing, a consensus has not yet emerged as to whether the pneumonia and ards associated with covid-19 caused by sars-cov-2 is a consequence of sustained virus replication, whether there is aberrant recruitment of macrophages and neutrophils into the lungs, or how the vascular compartment may be involved. the kinetics of the response to sars-cov-2 fits with models of the induction of conventional antiviral immunity, with a crisis that correlates with the likely peak phase of t cell responses. nevertheless, it is unclear if immune hyperactivity or a failure to resolve an inflammatory response because of ongoing viral replication or immune dysregulation underlies severe disease. nevertheless, the reports of increased levels of thrombi formation and endothelial cell death in covid-19 patients would indicate damage to the vascular endothelium and the involvement of cytokines and immunothrombosis (ackermann et al., 2020; fox et al., 2020) . multiple studies deposited on biorxiv and medrxiv report elevated cytokine levels in severely ill covid-19 patients and the successful use of cytokine antagonists, reviewed in depth here (manjili et al., 2020) . some have even been able to compare these samples with those from other forms of sepsis or ards. the presence of elevated cytokine levels in any patient with clinically diagnosed covid-19 should not be a surprise, but whether these cross the threshold from protective to pathological is unclear. since preexisting conditions that affect vascular health, such as diabetes, hypertension, and cardiovascular disease, appear to be the single largest factor that underlies covid-19 pathogenesis, it is possible that these comorbidities may decrease resilience and lower the ability to tolerate systemic cytokines. as this literature evolves, it is important that cytokine measurements are standardized to allow comparisons between cohorts to determine whether there is prognostic value to identify patients who develop a bona fide cytokine storm. the application of systems biology approaches that have already been developed to understand other forms of sepsis will help to guide the design of trials to test whether any of the approved antagonists of il-1, tnf, il-6, il-12, il-17, gm-csf, and ifng would prove useful to manage severe covid-19 patients. however, it is appropriate to note that anti-cytokine therapies based on the use of neutralizing antibodies or filters to remove circulating proteins have failed to improve mortality in sepsis, and at this stage, it's unclear why covid-19 would be the exception. there is also a significant population of patients with immune-mediated conditions who are currently treated with antagonists of tnf, il-1, il-12/il-23, and il-17 and knowing whether these interventions influence the outcome of sars-cov-2 may help to identify those cytokines that are pathological. there are also significant concerns that cytokine neutralization would interfere with antiviral responses or lead to increased complications associated with other respiratory pathogens. nevertheless, sophisticated approaches to identify disease endotypes may provide new opportunities to revisit when to deploy immunomodulatory therapies, as has been done retrospectively for the use of il-1ra in sepsis (shakoory et al., 2016) . it may be beneficial to develop strategies to target cytokine-induced injury in the vascular compartment while maintaining cytokine signaling in the tissues that are essential for host defense. it is also too early to understand whether patients who survived severe forms of covid-19 infection will have long-term sequelae that are similar to those associated with sepsis survivors. the reports of pediatric patients who develop a post-sars-cov-2 multi-system inflammatory syndrome that includes vascular inflammation highlights this issue.there is a natural arc to the induction and resolution of an immune response, and its magnitude and duration is coordinated by an array of regulatory checks and balances. disruption of this arc can lead to hyper responses, or a delay in the resolution phase and elevated or sustained cytokine production can be pathological. however, not all cytokine storms are the same, and there are many variables-the nature of the insult, host immune status, tissue affected, crosstalk with immune thrombosis, and complement activation-that influence the magnitude and kinetics of these responses and thus clinical manifestations. nevertheless, there are numerous mechanisms that allow a host to tolerate, survive, and even thrive in the face of immune stressors, and understanding these natural processes may be useful to design ways to manage distinct forms of crs. at the time of writing, we still do not know enough to state with confidence that a bona fide cytokine storm underlies covid-19 pathologies, but the rapid progress in immune phenotyping these patients will help our scientific community understand the complexities of this disease. perhaps research on covid-19 will provide impetus to understand the consequences of dysregulated immunity in the vascular compartment and the development of strategies that target cytokines, complement, and coagulation to improve management of other forms of sepsis.the elevated circulating levels of cytokines associated with a variety of infectious and immune-mediated conditions are frequently termed a cytokine storm. here, we explain the protective functions of cytokines in ''ideal'' responses; the multi-factorial origins that can drive these responses to become pathological; and how this ultimately leads to vascular damage, immunopathology, and worsening clinical outcomes.defining cytokine storm: basic concepts in the cytokine response recent reports of elevated serum cytokine levels associated with coronavirus disease 2019 (covid-19) have raised questions about the relationship between cytokine storms and the severe complications associated with this infection. the goal of this primer is to provide an introduction into the current concepts, largely through the lens of sepsis (hotchkiss et al., 2016) , that help understand the underlying causes of cytokine storms and how they interact with coagulation and vascular health and to briefly discuss how this may help understand the pathophysiology of covid-19. historically, the recognition of sepsis as a clinical condition was associated with the presence of bacterial infections in the blood. this definition has expanded to include all infections or suspected infections that result in immune dysregulation characterized by systemic inflammation and remote organ injury. we will discuss how elevated levels of inflammatory cytokines (most notably interleukin [il]-1, il-2, il-6, granulocytemacrophage colony-stimulating factor [gm-csf], interferon [ifn] g, and tumor necrosis factor [tnf] ) interact with the complement and coagulation systems to induce disseminated intravascular coagulation (dic), respiratory failure (acute respiratory distress syndrome [ards]), hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis (hlh; histiocyte is another term for macrophage), and multiorgan failure. finally, given the current covid-19 pandemic, the potential contribution of different cytokines to viral sepsis is a topic of interest that may provide an opportunity for interventions.one conceptual framework for how the immune system functions is the idea that the innate ability to recognize an invading organism provides signals that condition cells of the immune system to respond appropriately. this is associated with an amplification of the protective response that is proportionate to pathogen burden but is also influenced by regulatory mechanisms that limit immune hyperactivity. as infection is controlled, there is typically an inflection point associated with entry into a phase of resolution and repair that allows a return to homeostasis ( figure 1a ). cytokines have a direct role in the activation of anti-microbial effector functions but also provide the regulatory signals that specify, amplify, and resolve the immune response. a cardinal feature of these secreted proteins is that they have short half-lives, which will typically restrict communication to those cell types within lymphoid tissues and at sites of inflamma-tion. at high-enough levels, cytokines can also have systemic activities, and the colony stimulating factors produced at sites of microbial invasion can promote emergency granulopoiesis in the bone marrow associated with increased production and mobilization of neutrophils and monocytes. for those infections with systemic involvement, the presence of increased levels of cytokines will impact a wide range of physiological processes. consequently, under some circumstances, enhanced innate recognition, elevated t cell responses, or a failure to resolve can manifest as levels of cytokines in the circulation that exceed normal thresholds and that result in collateral damage. there are many experimental and clinical conditions that illustrate this state (figure 1 ), and the terms cytokine storm, cytokine release syndrome (crs), or hypercytokinaemia have been used to describe a variety of conditions that have diverse etiologies and outcomes.under ideal circumstances, the immune system will provide a proportionate and appropriate response that mediates resistance to invading microorganisms and allows the host to survive infection. for many infections, the coordinated production of sustained circulating levels of proinflammatory cytokines is a natural consequence of an appropriate innate and adaptive response critical for pathogen control.many of the cytokines associated with different forms of sepsis can cause fever, induce cell death, and impact vascular physiology and coagulation. as a result, they have the potential to cause significant and widespread collateral tissue damage. thus, the benefits of sustained levels of circulating cytokines that promote microbial control are balanced by the need to limit immune-mediated damage to the host. from an experimental and clinical perspective, perhaps the most easily recognized form of a cytokine storm is the presence of supra-normal levels of cytokines associated with tissue damage beyond what could be attributed to the pathogen ( figure 1a ). there are other forms of cytokines storms that vary in magnitude and kinetics and that do not necessarily have an underlying infectious cause (described below; see figures 1b and 1c) . nevertheless, in any of these circumstances, the ability to neutralize cytokines to mitigate tissue damage and allow disease resolution highlights that these high levels are not just markers of inflammation but also key contributors to disease. iii. the immune response is not unfettered one of the major themes in immunology over the last 30 years is the increased emphasis on the checks and balances that limit every facet of innate and adaptive cell-mediated and humoral immunity. these include specialized regulatory cell types imbued with anti-inflammatory properties as well as multiple mechanisms that mitigate the deleterious effects of cytokines. since the overproduction of cytokines represents a major challenge to host health, the presence of these regulatory pathways suggests that they may result from evolutionary pressure to balance pathogen control and tolerance of collateral damage in order to survive infection. for example, the receptor-ligand systems for cytokines are characterized by the presence of soluble receptors, receptor antagonists, and decoy receptors expressed at high levels in the tissues and serum. these antagonists can buffer surges in cytokine activity and limit immunopathology. in addition, il-10 exemplifies the ability of cytokines to antagonize inflammatory cell populations and prevent immune hyperactivity. nevertheless, these protective mechanisms have their limits, and excessive or sustained production of cytokines can override these regulatory mechanisms.the successful response to an infection is invariably accompanied by some level of inflammation, and this is apparent by the elevated production of cytokines and/or clinical symptoms. ideally, the magnitude of the response is related to pathogen burden and is restricted to the organ systems that are involved. microbial pathogenesis is a critical determinant of these events, whereby variables such as the replicative potential of the microorganism, cell and tissue tropism, production of toxins, and immune evasion strategies will influence the duration and magnitude of the immune response, whether there is local versus systemic involvement, and the potential for sequelae. these principles are of obvious relevance to many primary microbial challenges, but all of humanity is persistently infected with a range of potentially lethal pathogens, which are generally restrained in the immune competent host but can cause sepsis in the immunocompromised host. this reality illustrates the concept that hosts need to be able to tolerate the presence of in-fections that can be life threatening with the production of cytokines that can be damaging. the idea that resilience in the face of infection is a balance between protective and pathological responses is not new and is discussed here (ayres, 2020) .before describing the diverse events that can drive the innate and adaptive responses that are the basis of a cytokine storm, it is helpful to consider the clinical consequences of high levels of cytokines ( figure 2 ). these can converge on profound changes to the target tissues and the physiology of the host, where not a single organ is spared and host survival is threatened. a hallmark of a cytokine storm is persistent fever and non-specific constitutional symptoms (weight loss, joint and muscle pain, fatigue, headache). progressive widespread systemic inflammation leads to a loss of vascular tone that is manifested as a drop in blood pressure, vasodilatory shock, and progressive organ failure. in this context, respiratory failure is the most prominent but will also impact the heart, central nervous system, and kidneys. some of the clinical manifestations have been associated to specific cytokines: il-6 and tnf are linked with fever and with constitutional symptoms. capillary leak syndrome, which refers to an increase in capillary permeability to proteins and is manifested clinically by hypotension, edema, acute respiratory failure, and kidney injury is thought to be driven by il-2. in patients treated with il-2 or a monoclonal antibody (okt3) that targets the cd3 complex on t cells, thereby inducing il-2, this can be a significant clinical problem. abnormalities revealed by clinical laboratory assays are often driven by the underlying driver of crs. in patients with concomitant hlh, pancytopenia (reduced red blood cells [rbcs] , white blood cells [wbcs] , and platelets), elevated triglycerides and ferritin predominate with accompanying hepatosplenomegaly. patients with concurrent tumor lysis exhibit elevated uric acid, ldh, lactate, and acute kidney injury. hemostatic imbalance manifest by dic and thrombocytopenia (reduced platelet numbers) can be observed in almost all clinical syndromes associated with crs. the levels of these endogenous molecules are important prognostic indicators of secondary complications and organ damage: elevated triglycerides may cause pancreatitis, uric acid can induce kidney failure, and spontaneous intracranial cytokine storms have many different underlying causes that can manifest with different kinetics. (a) the solid line depicts the natural arc of an immune response to infection over a period of days to weeks that transitions to a resolution phase as a pathogen is controlled. for microorganisms with a high replicative potential, changes in the magnitude and duration of the immune response can result in systemic immune pathology. the two dotted lines illustrate different arcs associated with a cytokine storm through either an increased amplitude or a failure to enter the resolution phase. (b) the rapid and widespread engagement of adaptive responses by bacterially derived superantigens or therapeutic interventions can lead to a rapid surge in immune activity (hour-days) associated with supra-physiological levels of circulating cytokines. (c) certain cancers that have a systemic component can lead to sustained (weeks to months) responses associated with elevated cytokine production. likewise, chronic autoimmune diseases such as juvenile idiopathic arthritis (jia) and lupus can have flares associated with increased cytokine production. there are also genetic defects closely linked to aberrant cytokine production, enhanced signaling, or a failure to fully control certain viral infections, which can cause periodic spikes in immune hyperactivity. ll hemorrhages are observed with profound thrombocytopenia. thus, treating the underlying driver of crs is a cornerstone of management to avoid further organ injury.the increased production (myelopoiesis) and mobilization of monocyte and neutrophil populations from the bone marrow is a response to many acute infections and cytokines (figure 2 ). these populations are typically considered proinflammatory, are imbued with a range of antimicrobial activities, and are recruited to sites of inflammation where they can respond to pathogen-associated molecular patterns (pamps) and damage-associated molecular patterns (damps) by producing il-1, il-6, il-12, and tnf (table 1 ). in many experimental models, such as the injection of high doses of lipopolysaccharides (lps) to mimic gram-negative infections or cecal ligation and puncture to model bacterial peritonitis, these innate responses are dominated by neutrophils and monocytes and are sufficient to induce a cytokine storm that eschews the normal kinetics of an immune response ( figure 1 ). there are also examples where primary genetic defects associated with inappropriate activation of the inflammasome can lead to sustained production of il-1 by macrophages that results in a relapsing-remitting disease associated with periodic fevers ( figure 1c) . a major function of macrophages in the red pulp of the spleen is to remove senescent or damaged rbcs (erythrophagocytosis), and for some pathogens or erythrocytes, this process is critical for the clearance of infected cells. however, the sustained production of ifng and tnf can lead to macrophage activation syndrome associated with hlh, which contributes to the anemia that is characteristic of sepsis and almost all systemic infections (al-samkari and berliner, 2018).while the ability to engage innate responses can be sufficient for the development of cytokine storms, the activation of t cells and their ability to produce high amounts of effector cytokines (il-2, ifng, and tnf) are also important. two of the best examples that illustrate how the rapid engagement of t cells can result in cytokine storms come from the development of therapies to enhance t cell function for the treatment of cancer. the clinical trial of an agonistic antibody to the costimulatory molecule cd28 present on t cells provides a notable illustration of how the simultaneous activation of a large number of t cells results in the rapid induction of a cytokine storm (suntharalingam et al., 2006) . the authors description of these events is sobering: ''within 90 minutes after receiving a single intravenous dose of the drug, all six volunteers had a systemic inflammatory response characterized by a rapid induction of tnf-a followed by il-2, il-6, and il-10 and ifng accompanied by headache, myalgias, nausea, diarrhea, erythema, vasodilatation, and hypotension that progressed to pulmonary infiltrates and lung injury, renal failure, and dic. reduced lymphocytes and monocyte counts occurred that correlated with the peak cytokine levels.'' a frequent observation associated with experimental and clinical examples of cytokine storms is a transient reduction in peripheral blood t cell counts. this has been perceived as an indicator of immunosuppression and attributed to death of immune cells, but the sequestration of wbcs in affected tissues, which includes adherence to vascular endothelium, may account for this apparent loss of peripheral wbcs. another example occurred with patients with acute lymphoid leukemia, in which this b cell lymphoma expressed cd19. in these two patients, their t cells were genetically modified to express a chimeric antigen receptor (car) that recognized cd19 and that would allow these modified t cells to eliminate the tumor cells. after infusion of the car t cells, there was a rapid onset of a crs characterized by 100-to 1,000-fold increase in levels of ifng and il-6 that were temporally correlated with systemic inflammation and fever and evolved into the macrophage activation syndrome (grupp et al., 2013) . these examples, from therapeutic interventions, highlight that the rapid, widespread activation of t cells can bypass many of the natural negative cell-extrinsic checkpoints and have a systemic impact on patient physiology.there are other more natural examples where microbial context is important to understand the basis for t cell hyperactivation. this is illustrated by the ability of bacterial toxins, such as superantigens associated with streptococcus and staphylococcus aureus, to crosslink the major histocompatibility complex (mhc) and tcr, thus leading to polyclonal activation of t cells, high levels of cytokine secretion, and the development of toxic shock syndrome. another example is the mosquito-transmitted dengue virus, in which secondary challenge with a heterologous virus can result in dengue hemorrhagic fever characterized by high levels of cytokines, alterations in vascular permeability, and dic. surprisingly, analysis of postmortem tissues highlighted the presence of edema in the lungs but relative absence of tissue inflammation (srikiatkhachorn et al., 2017) . this lack of overt cellular infiltration can be disconcerting to cellular immunologists trying to understand how cytokines mediate tissue damage. the last major influenza pandemic in 2009 was caused by the h1n1 strain and in some patients was associated with the presence of coagulopathies and haemophagocytosis. analysis of a cohort of fatal h1n1 infections highlighted that while these patients did not have any overt preexisting immune deficiencies, many had gene mutations that had previously been associated with the development of hlh, indicating their possible role as risk factors for mortality (schulert et al., 2016) . similarly, in patients that lack perforin, the inability to clear the herpesviruses epstein-barr virus (ebv) and cytomegalovirus (cmv) results in sustained t cell production of ifng and tnf that results in macrophage activation and hlh. these types of more persistent situations where the underlying causes may not be resolved are not restricted to infectious settings but can manifest in other conditions. these include malignancies and autoimmune diseases as well as in the context of transplantation ( figure 1c) , and in these examples, an overt cytokine storm is not apparent, but flares in disease can result in crs. the vascular compartment, coagulation, and complement as discussed above, some of the prominent clinical features of cytokine storms are characterized by dic, capillary leak syndrome, and loss of blood pressure, which indicates the crosstalk between cytokines and hemostasis. in the absence of systemic inflammation, the vascular endothelium employs numerous mechanisms to maintain barrier function and prevent aberrant coagulation. a common feature of many systemic infections, however, is endothelial cell death (a consequence of cytolytic infection or immune-mediated pathways), which gives rise to vascular damage and the development of capillary leak syndrome. as endothelial cells would be exposed to circulating cytokines and other immune mediators, there are multiple systems to maintain their quiescence under inflammatory duress. an evolutionary conserved component of the hemostatic response to tissue damage and to systemic infections includes the development of coagulation to prevent blood loss. as part of this process, fibrin deposition and the recruitment of platelets can form clots to seal areas of trauma. in many settings, elevated systemic cytokine levels are associated with a transient drop in platelet numbers in the circulation, likely reflecting their consumption. although there is continuous basal production of neutrophils from the bone marrow, systemic cytokines can initiate emergency granulopoesis and increased recruitment of these cells into circulation. there, inflammatory mediators will promote neutrophil release of nuclear dna to form neutrophil extracellular traps (nets) which can snare pathogens but also contribute to thrombi formation. this process, termed immuno-thrombosis (engelmann and massberg, 2013) , can also amplify the production of cytokines and is exemplified by links of thrombin with inflammasome activation and production of il-1. while these events are essentially host protective, systemic inflammation can lead to widespread thrombus formation associated with vascular occlusion, tissue damage, dic, and death of the host. if these events are sustained, one consequence is the depletion of clotting factors, which renders patients more susceptible to catastrophic bleeding into critical spaces like the brain or thorax. thus, thrombi formation has an important role in host protection but needs to be carefully controlled to prevent aberrant pathology.another evolutionary conserved line of defense against invading pathogens that intersects with cytokine biology and coagulation is the complement system. this arm of the innate response is composed of soluble proteins that can recognize and lyse pathogens but can also act to amplify cellular responses. the complex crosstalk between cytokines and the complement system is illustrated by the ability of cytokines to enhance production of components of the complement cascade, which in turn can enhance or inhibit cytokine production. although complement-mediated opsonization and formation of lytic complexes are critical processes necessary for pathogen elimination, each of these effector functions can be injurious to bystander host cells. given the importance of the endothelium in barrier function, vascular tone, and hemostasis, there are several safeguards, such as surface-bound and soluble complement regulatory proteins, to prevent excessive complement-mediated injury to the normally quiescent endothelium. failure of these safeguards or excessive complement activation result in endothelial injury that manifest as dysregulated coagulation and hemostasis, loss of barrier function, and vascular tone. the vascular endothelium of the lung and kidneys are recognized as particularly vulnerable sites to complement-mediated injury and the clinical implications of widespread endothelial dysfunction, as discussed above.calming the storm given the potential for cytokines to cause tissue damage, there is a need to mitigate the effects of high levels of cytokines and promote the transition into the resolution phase of an immune response. there are numerous natural receptor and cytokine antagonists, such as the il-1 receptor antagonist (il-1ra), that are a feature of cytokine signaling systems that buffer systemic offtarget effects and restrict immune activities to local sites of cytokine release. other cytokines and regulatory pathways can act more directly to limit the magnitude of the immune response. for example, il-10 is produced by many cell types (subsets of monocytes as well as natural killer [nk] , t and b cells) and inhibits the ability of macrophage and dendritic cell (dc) populations to produce tnf, il-1, il-6, and il-12 and decreases the ability of these cells to present antigen and provide costimulation. thus, il-10 is a key negative regulator of the accessory functions required for t cell mediated responses, and there are numerous examples where infection of mice that lack il-10 is characterized by elevated, sustained circulating levels of il-12, tnf, and ifng (i.e., a bona fide cytokine storm) (couper et al., 2008) . paradoxically, increased circulating levels of il-10 are an infectious or non-infectious stimulus in barrier sites such as the gut or lungs that leads to tissue damage initiates a complex series of events. in circumstances that leads to vascular damage, the coagulation system is critical for tissue repair, but this can progress to the development of dic. the early response to microbial invasion or tissue damage is characterized by the innate production of cytokines and the induction of emergency granulopoiesis that leads to the mobilization of neutrophils and monocytes. these events will engage and amplify nk and t cell production of proinflammatory cytokines. these can promote capillary leak syndrome and thrombus formation that can progress to dic. high circulating levels of these cytokines can cause cell death and tissue damage, while their ability to activate macrophages can lead to erythro-phagocytosis and anemia. the combination of anemia, alterations in vascular hemostasis, and cytokine-mediated damage can result in multi-organ failure. ll characteristic of the cytokine storms in humans, and the assumption is that these increased levels reflect the presence of a negative feedback loop to control the magnitude of the response and to help with the resolution and repair phase of the response.the existence of immune-regulatory networks to limit aberrant cytokine responses is critical to survive many infectious challenges, but these do have a cost. many of these pathways block the development of sterile immunity to infection and promote pathogen persistence. in addition, many patients who survive sepsis have long-term sequela that include profound immunosuppression and susceptibility to secondary infections. there is a poor understanding of how this is mediated, and one explanation is that the anti-inflammatory regulatory networks do not returns to pre-crisis levels of function and instead operate at a heightened state. alternatively, the systemic action of cytokines can result in remarkable changes in the cellular composition and organization of lymphoid structures, such as the bone marrow, thymus, and spleen. whether this disruption or loss of immunological infrastructure contributes to the long-term dysregulation is not understood.the reports of elevated serum cytokines (ifng, il-6, and gm-csf) associated with the coronaviruses severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus (sars-cov-1), and middle east respiratory syndrome coronavirus (mers-cov) combined with ards have led to relevant questions about whether the subset of patients that develop life-threatening complications are a result of immunity 53, july 14, 2020 5 primer a cytokine storm (min et al., 2016; zhang et al., 2004) . at the time of writing, a consensus has not yet emerged as to whether the pneumonia and ards associated with covid-19 caused by sars-cov-2 is a consequence of sustained virus replication, whether there is aberrant recruitment of macrophages and neutrophils into the lungs, or how the vascular compartment may be involved. the kinetics of the response to sars-cov-2 fits with models of the induction of conventional antiviral immunity and with a crisis that correlates with the likely peak phase of t cell responses. nevertheless, it is unclear if immune hyperactivity or a failure to resolve an inflammatory response because of ongoing viral replication or immune dysregulation underlies severe disease. nevertheless, the reports of increased levels of thrombi formation and endothelial cell death in covid-19 patients would indicate damage to the vascular endothelium and the involvement of cytokines and immunothrombosis (ackermann et al., 2020; fox et al., 2020) . multiple studies deposited on biorxiv and medrxiv report elevated cytokine levels in severely ill covid-19 patients and the successful use of cytokine antagonists, reviewed in depth here (manjili et al., 2020) . some have even been able to compare these samples with those from other forms of sepsis or ards. the presence of elevated cytokine levels in any patient with clinically diagnosed covid-19 should not be a surprise, but whether these cross the threshold from protective to pathological is unclear. since preexisting conditions that affect vascular health, such as diabetes, hypertension, and cardiovascular disease, appear to be the single largest factor that underlies covid-19 pathogenesis, it is possible that these comorbidities may decrease resilience and lower the ability to tolerate systemic cytokines. as this literature evolves, it is important that cytokine measurements are standardized to allow comparisons between cohorts to determine whether there is prognostic value to identify patients who develop a bona fide cytokine storm. the application of systems biology approaches that have already been developed to understand other forms of sepsis will help to guide the design of trials to test whether any of the approved antagonists of il-1, tnf, il-6, il-12, il-17, gm-csf, and ifng would prove useful to manage severe covid-19 patients. however, it is appropriate to note that anti-cytokine therapies based on the use of neutralizing antibodies or filters to remove circulating proteins have failed to improve mortality in sepsis, and at this stage, it's unclear why covid-19 would be the exception. there is also a significant population of patients with immune-mediated conditions who are currently treated with antagonists of tnf, il-1, il-12/il-23, and il-17 and knowing whether these interventions influence the outcome of sars-cov-2 may help to identify those cytokines that are pathological. there are also significant concerns that cytokine neutralization would interfere with antiviral responses or lead to increased complications associated with other respiratory pathogens. nevertheless, sophisticated approaches to identify disease endotypes may provide new opportunities to revisit when to deploy immunomodulatory therapies, as has been done retrospectively for the use of il-1ra in sepsis (shakoory et al., 2016) . it may be beneficial to develop strategies to target cytokine-induced injury in the vascular compartment while maintaining cytokine signaling in the tissues that are essential for host defense. it is also too early to understand whether patients who survived severe forms of covid-19 infection will have long-term sequelae that are similar to those associated with sepsis survivors. the reports of pediatric patients who develop a post-sars-cov-2 multi-system inflammatory syndrome that includes vascular inflammation highlights this issue.there is a natural arc to the induction and resolution of an immune response, and its magnitude and duration is coordinated by an array of regulatory checks and balances. disruption of this arc can lead to hyper responses, or a delay in the resolution phase and elevated or sustained cytokine production can be pathological. however, not all cytokine storms are the same, and there are many variables-the nature of the insult, host immune status, tissue affected, crosstalk with immune thrombosis, and complement activation-that influence the magnitude and kinetics of these responses and thus clinical manifestations. nevertheless, there are numerous mechanisms that allow a host to tolerate, survive, and even thrive in the face of immune stressors, and understanding these natural processes may be useful to design ways to manage distinct forms of crs. at the time of writing, we still do not know enough to state with confidence that a bona fide cytokine storm underlies covid-19 pathologies, but the rapid progress in immune phenotyping these patients will help our scientific community understand the complexities of this disease. perhaps research on covid-19 will provide impetus to understand the consequences of dysregulated immunity in the vascular compartment and the development of strategies that target cytokines, complement, and coagulation to improve management of other forms of sepsis.corticosteroids could be used to suppress the cytokine storm and have been used in some patients (1) . however, based on the evidence from patients with mers and ards, the use of corticosteroids did not provide a survival benefit but rather delayed the clearance of the virus, therefore, the systemic use of corticosteroids is not recommended by the who guidance (1) . as a result, alternatives for dampening the overwhelming cytokine release are required.as we know, the cytokine storm also occurs in other settings. in patients with leukemia or lymphoma who receive chimeric antigen receptor (car) t cells therapy, cytokine release syndrome (crs) occurs during and after the infusion of car t cells (8) . in patients receiving car t cells therapy, those with crs had elevated concentrations of interferon γ, tumor necrosis factor α, interleukin (il)-1b, il-2, il-6, il-7, il-8, il-10, il-12, granulocyte macrophage colony stimulating factor (gm-csf), and macrophage inflammatory protein (mip)-1. the cytokine profile in crs related to car t cells infusion is similar to that in cases of sars-cov-2 infection. the anti-il-6 receptor antibody tocilizumab is effective in controlling car t cells infusion related crs (response rate: 53-69%) (9) . the above evidence provides us with a rationale for using tocilizumab to manage the cytokine storm in patients with sars-cov-2 infection. another rationale for using tocilizumab to treat covid-19 is that il-6 does not enhance the antiviral immunity but decreases the antiviral immunity in patients with covid-19. diao et al. found that serum il-6 was negatively correlated with t cell numbers (10). mazzoni et al. found that the elevation of il-6 serum levels was associated with the impairment of cytotoxic activity in patients with covid-19, and the use of tocilizumab restored the cytotoxic potential of nk cells (11) . some studies involving off-label use of tocilizumab have shown the potential efficacy of this drug in the treatment of covid-19 (12) (13) (14) (15) .another potential drug that could be considered to treat cytokine storm is etoposide, which is used to deplete monocytes and suppress cytokine release in hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis (hlh) (16) . it needs to be mentioned that, in sars-cov-infected mice, inflammatory monocytemacrophage responses were involved in causing lethal pneumonia, suggesting the importance of suppressing monocytemacrophage system in treating severe pneumonia related to sars-cov (17) . the hyperactivation of monocytes/macrophages has been described in patients with covid-19. single-cell analysis of bronchoalveolar fluid revealed significantly increased proportions of mononuclear phagocytes in patients with covid-19, especially those with severe disease. in patients with severe disease, these mononuclear phagocytes showed a predominance of inflammatory monocyte-derived macrophages (18) . these macrophages could not only contribute to acute inflammation but also promote fibrosis generation. additionally, a significant increase of cd14 + cd16 + monocytes was also detected in patients with severe covid-19 (19) . these cd14 + cd16 + monocytes expressed il-6 and caused the acceleration of the inflammation. therefore, etoposide could be used to inhibit the hyperactivation of monocytes/macrophages to suppress the overwhelming inflammation and ameliorate the pulmonary fibrosis. other potential drugs for treating cytokine storm include the jak1/2 inhibitor ruxolitinib, which is effective in inhibiting monocyte activation and cytokine release in patients with hlh (20) . a prospective randomized study has shown the promising efficacy of ruxolitinib in the treatment of severe covid-19 (21) . in this trial, the ruxolitinib group showed a significant decrease of levels of 7 cytokines compared to the control group, suggesting ruxolitinib suppress the cytokine storm in patients with severe covid-19. patients in the ruxolitinib group also had a faster chest ct improvement and a faster recovery from lymphopenia. ruxolitinib was also well-tolerated in patients with severe covid-19, indicating ruxolitinib could be safely used to treat patients with covid-19 (21) . additionally, therapeutic plasma exchange can reduce the plasma cytokine concentrations rapidly, and has been successfully used to treat hlh and crs related to car t cells infusion (22, 23) , suggesting plasma exchange may be a reasonable option for severe patients with cytokine storm. in a preliminary study, therapeutic plasma exchange reduced the plasma il-6 level and improved the oxygenation status in patients with severe covid-19 who had ards (24) .although we admit that supportive care and antiviral therapy remain the mainstay for treating patients with covid-19, we recommend that treatments for controlling cytokine storm including tocilizumab, etoposide, ruxolitinib, and plasma exchange should be considered in selected covid-19 patients with cytokine storm. some pilot studies have shown promising results. some other treatments may also be effective in controlling the cytokine storm. more randomized clinical trials are needed to evaluate if these treatments could reduce the mortality of patients with covid-19.ym, lf, and j-yl drafted the manuscript. all authors contributed to the article and approved the submitted version.individuals with down syndrome (ds) show widespread and chronic immune dysregulation. this population shows increased rates of diverse autoimmune conditions, including autoimmune thyroid disease, 1-3 celiac disease, 4-10 autoimmune skin conditions (e.g., alopecia areata, psoriasis, vitiligo, atopic dermatitis and/or eczema, hidradenitis suppurativa), [11] [12] [13] [14] and type 1 diabetes. [15] [16] [17] at the molecular and cellular levels, individuals with trisomy 21 show clear signs of inflammation in the absence of any detectable infections, such as elevated levels of potent inflammatory cytokines and chemokines, 18, 19 and changes in diverse immune cell types indicative of hyperactive, pro-inflammatory cellular states. [20] [21] [22] [23] [24] [25] [26] [27] [28] [29] in addition, individuals with trisomy 21 show more severe consequences during lung viral infections, such as increased rates of hospitalization during respiratory syncytial virus (rsv) and h1n1 influenza a infections, 30, 31 as well as increased rates of mortality from bacterial pneumonia and sepsis. 32, 33 despite this knowledge, in the context of the ongoing coronavirus disease of 2019 (covid-19) pandemic, it is unclear how individuals with ds may respond to severe acute respiratory syndrome cov 2 (sars-cov-2) infections, and it may take several months before enough epidemiological and clinical data are gathered to address this issue. despite the clear limitations imposed by the lack of available data, i provide evidence that individuals with trisomy 21 should be considered at high risk of developing more severe symptoms and increased rates of hospitalization, intensive care, secondary bacterial infections, and mortality from sars-cov-2 infections relative to the general population, thus justifying increased monitoring and specialized care for those with covid-19 and ds.mounting evidence supports the notion that morbidity and mortality during sars-cov-2 infections are driven by the exacer-bated immune response to the virus, leading to a cascade of events involving a cytokine storm, acute respiratory distress syndrome (ards), and eventual myocardial damage and multi-organ failure. 34, 35 this pathological cascade is similar to that observed in other lethal lung viral infections, in which the presence of the virus in the lungs triggers a first wave of cytokines, including type i and iii interferons (ifns); activation and recruitment of immune cells, leading to further production of cytokines and chemokines; exacerbated immune activation; and progressive shutdown of respiratory function. 36 cytokine storms, also known as cytokine release syndrome (crs) or hypercytokinemia, have been described as drivers of pathology in myriad infectious and non-infectious diseases. 36 among infectious diseases, cytokine storms have been postulated to drive mortality during severe viral infections, such as influenza, 37 including the 1918 spanish flu epidemic 38 and the h5n1 bird flu, 39 as well as the 2003 sars epidemic, 40 hantavirus, 41 ebola, 42 and smallpox. 43 in the specific case of covid-19, independent reports indicate that the magnitude of the cytokine storm correlates positively with the severity of pathology, likelihood of needing intensive care, and death. many inflammatory markers, cytokines, and chemokines have been found to be significantly associated with worse prognosis, including c-reactive protein (crp), interleukin-6 (il-6), il-2, il-7, il-10, granulocyte colony-stimulating factor (g-csf), interferon g-induced protein 10 (ip-10), monocyte chemoattractant protein-1 (mcp-1), macrophage inflammatory protein-1a (mip-1a), and tumor necrosis factor a (tnf-a). 34, 35 when integrated with the current understanding of the role of cytokine storms in other respiratory infections, these findings support the notion of combined antiviral treatments and targeted immunosuppression as a therapeutic strategy in covid-19. 44 there are now multiple clinical trials testing the impact of targeted immunosuppressants, such as inhibitors of il-6 signaling (e.g., tocilizumab, sarilumab), tnf-a signaling (e.g., humira), il-1b signaling (e.g., anakinra), and janus kinase (jak) inhibitors (e.g., ruxolitinib, baricitinib, tofacitinib) in the hope that attenuating the cytokine storm will improve prognosis.the exact mechanisms by which trisomy 21 causes the immune dysregulation observed in people with ds remains to be elucidated. however, several genes encoded on chromosome 21 have established roles in immune control, and their overexpression could contribute to the general immune phenotype of ds. most prominent among the immune regulators encoded on chromosome 21 are four of the six interferon receptors: the two type i ifn receptors ifnar1 and ifnar2, the type ii ifn receptor ifngr2, and il10rb, which serves as a receptor subunit for both type iii ifn ligands and the cytokines il-10, il-22, and il-26. 45 several lines of evidence demonstrate the hyperactivation of ifn signaling in ds. first, the ifn receptors (ifnrs) encoded on chromosome 21 are overexpressed in multiple cell types of individuals with trisomy 21. this overexpression is obvious not box and whisker plots displaying mrna expression for the type i ifnrs encoded on chromosome 21, ifnar1 and ifnar2. data are presented in reads per kilobase of transcripts per million (rpkm) mapped reads. data were generated via rna sequencing (rna-seq) transcriptome analysis as described by araya et al., 20 sullivan et al., 46 and powers et al. 47 only at the mrna level in multiple immune and non-immune cell types ( figure 1 ) 46 but also at the cell surface level, as demonstrated by a recent mass cytometry analysis of 100 different immune cell types. 21 second, immune and non-immune cell types of people with ds are hypersensitive to ifn stimulation, as demonstrated by the super-induction of downstream jak/stat signaling and ifn-stimulated genes (isgs). 20, 21, [47] [48] [49] [50] [51] [52] [53] third, transcriptome analyses have revealed gene expression signatures indicative of hyperactive ifn signaling in diverse immune and non-immune cell types of people with ds, 20,21,46 as well as brain tissue of diverse mouse models of ds carrying triplication of the ifnr cluster. 54 in addition, many independent studies have revealed changes indicative of chronic autoinflammation in people with ds, including the elevation of many cytokines and chemokines known to act downstream of ifn signaling. [18] [19] [20] 47 of critical importance to the topic of cytokine storms, people with ds show significantly elevated levels of key cytokines such as crp, il-6, il-2, tnfa, ip-10, il-10, and mcp-1. 19, 20, 47 to further strengthen this point, i include here data demonstrating that individuals with ds display signs of a mild cytokine storm even in the absence of any obvious infections ( figure 2 ) (http://explorer.trisome.org/ proteome/). lastly, metabolomics studies of both plasma and cerebrospinal fluid have revealed that individuals with ds display dysregulation of the ifn-inducible kynurenine pathway of tryptophan catabolism, leading to elevated levels of quinolinic acid, a neurotoxic tryptophan catabolite. 47 the reduction of the copy number of ifnrs reversed this metabolic dysregulation in vitro, pointing to ifnr triplication as the driving event.this body of evidence indicates that the ifn response, which is key for both mounting antiviral responses and initiating and amplifying the cytokine storm, is much more active in people with ds. given this knowledge, several questions then arise: what is the likely impact of sars-cov-2 infections on the immune response of individuals with ds? are individuals with trisomy 21 more or less likely to develop a severe cytokine storm and downstream pathology?at first glance, ifn hyperactivity may be considered beneficial, in the sense that it may enable cells with trisomy 21 to mount a stronger antiviral response during the first contact with sars-cov-2. as the first viral particles enter lung epithelial cells of an individual with trisomy 21, the consequent production of type i and type iii ifn ligands may elicit a stronger response in neighboring epithelial cells and resident immune cells overexpressing ifnrs. in theory, this stronger initial response could restrain viral spread. this potentially beneficial aspect would result in a lower rate of sars-cov-2 carriers among those with trisomy 21. however, covs have developed strategies to evade the antiviral effects of the ifn response. studies of the sars-cov-1 and the middle east respiratory syndrome cov (mers-cov) have revealed that their genomes encode an unusual number of proteins that dampen or neutralize the ifn signaling cascade (reviewed in kindler et al. 55 ), which enables viral disguise, immune evasion, and rapid viral replication and spread. since sars-cov-2 is a member of the betacoronavirus clade, which also includes sars-cov-1 and mers-cov, it is likely that sars-cov-2 uses a similar suite of anti-ifn strategies. 56 therefore, the ifn hyperactivity observed in people with ds may not be sufficient in providing additional protection against sars-cov-2 infection. in the event that sars-cov-2 evades the initial immune response of a person with trisomy 21 by dampening ifn signaling, the lifelong chronic ifn hyperactivity experienced by these individuals is likely to prime the immune system for super-induction of the cytokine storm. in support of this notion, type i ifn signaling was found to be detrimental in a mouse model of sars-cov-1 infection and pathology, 57 in which deletion of one of the type i ifnrs encoded on chromosome 21 (ifnar1) prevented the development of sars pathology. while there are no data on animal models of sars-cov-2 to address the role of ifnr copy number, and assuming the two related viruses provoke similar pathological cascades, it follows then that the exacerbated type i ifn signaling observed in ds would contribute to exacerbated covid-19 pathology (figure 3 ).there is evidence to support the notion that, upon confirmation of sars-cov-2 infection, individuals with ds are more likely to develop a stronger and more prolonged cytokine storm ( figure 3) .during respiratory viral infections, as viral particles enter the lung tissue, lung-resident respiratory dendritic cells (rdcs) acquire antigens from the epithelial cells or are infected themselves, thus being activated and draining to mediastinal and cervical lymph nodes, where they process viral antigens and present them to naive circulating t cells (reviewed in channappanavar et al. 58 ). upon t cell receptor (tcr) engagement by peptide-major histocompatibility complex (mhc) complexes on the surface of rdcs, t cells become activated, proliferate, and migrate to the infected lung tissue. once in the lung, virusspecific effector t cells contribute to the cytokine storm by producing several pro-inflammatory cytokines and chemokines (ifn-g, tnf-a, il-2, c-x-c motif chemokine ligand 9 [cxcl9], and ip-10), which in turn recruit more innate and adaptive immune cells. in a careful analysis of lymphocyte recruitment to the lungs of sars-cov-1-infected mice, three patterns of immune cell infiltrates were identified in lung tissue. 59 plasmacytoid dendritic cells (pdcs) infiltrated the lung early on (first wave). this was followed by a second wave of natural killer (nk) t cells, nk cells, macrophages, and cd4 + t cells. finally, a third wave involved neutrophils and cd8 + t cells. in this experimental model, sars-cov-1 infection induced an enhanced virus-specific t cell response in the lungs, which coincided with the development of pneumonitis and viral clearance. furthermore, the depletion of cd4 + t cells resulted in diminished virus-specific antibody responses and decreases in the production of th1 and th2 cytokines in the lung.within this framework, given the clear signs of pro-inflammatory changes in dcs, monocyte lineages, nk cells, and effector t cells isolated from individuals with ds, 20,21 it is then predicted that the cascade of events described above will be exacerbated and driven toward a stronger cytokine storm.first, when the whole blood of children with ds is exposed to live influenza a virus, the production of tnf-a, il-1b, il-6, il-8, ifn-a, and ifn-g is significantly elevated relative to their typical siblings. 60 however, in this in vitro experiment, viral clearance was equivalent in both groups. the authors concluded that ''the production of higher levels of pro-inflammatory cytokines may be responsible for a more severe clinical course of viral disease in these children.'' second, deep mapping of the immune system of adults with ds revealed many changes indicative of an enhanced pro-inflammatory state in the monocyte lineage and among dcs. 21 the monocyte lineage in ds is driven toward the intermediate and non-classical states associated with inflammatory conditions, and diverse dc subsets show alterations consistent with a heightened state of inflammation and cytotoxic potential. 21 thus, it is predicted that the pro-inflammatory state of these myeloid cell types in ds will contribute to enhanced cyto-kine production as sars-cov-2 particles cross the lung epithelium and encounter resident alveolar macrophages and dcs.third, within the t cell compartment, t cell lineages of adults with ds show clear signs of differentiation and hyperactivation, even in the absence of any obvious infections, which could be explained by chronic ifn hyperactivity. 20 when the cd4 and cd8 t cells of adults with ds are activated ex vivo via stimulation of the tcr, akin to what occurs during a viral infection, they overproduce many key cytokines and chemokines. 20 upon activation, cd4 t cells with trisomy 21 overproduce il-10, il-17a, il-22, and mip-3a, and cd8 t cells overproduce tnf-a, ifn-g, il-2, mip-1a, gm (granulocyte-macrophage)-csf, il-8, mip-1b, and eotaxin. 20 thus, the t cells of people with ds are likely to fuel a stronger cytokine storm as they infiltrate the infected lung epithelia.in addition, it has been shown that effector cd4 and cd8 t cells with trisomy 21 are resistant to suppression by regulatory t cells (tregs) 20 . tregs are key players during the resolution of an infection by dampening the action of effector cd4 and cd8 t cells once the virus has been cleared. however, effector t cells of people with ds were found to be refractory to dampening by tregs after activation, which results in more proliferation of effector t cells relative to euploid counterparts. 20 although tregs with trisomy 21 were found to be capable of suppressing effector t cells of typical people, they could not suppress effector t cells with trisomy 21, pointing again to a hyperactive, resilient state of effector t cells in ds. 20 as the immune system of a person with ds attacks sars-cov-2-infected cells, it is predicted that the t cell response, including cytokine overproduction, will be stronger and last longer. this may be further exacerbated by additional pro-inflammatory changes in the nk cells of adults with ds. 21 overall, this evidence supports the notion that covid-19 in ds will display a stronger cytokine storm and accelerated onset of cytokine-driven pathology (figure 3) . it is well documented that pandemics of respiratory viral infections are followed by a surge in cases of bacterial pneumonia, supporting the notion of a post-viral state of bacterial pneumonia susceptibility. 61, 62 in fact, most influenza-related deaths are due to secondary infections, with bacteria commonly found in the nasopharyngeal tract, such as streptococcus pneumoniae and staphylococcus aureus. 62, 63 during the spanish flu pandemic of 1918-1919, >90% of deaths were attributed to subsequent bacterial pneumonia. 64, 65 during later influenza pandemics in the 1950s and 1960s, the percentage of deaths due to bacterial lung infections was estimated at 50%-70%, with the decreases being explained by the broader use of antibiotics. 66, 67 in the covid-19 pandemic, the impact of secondary bacterial infections is likely to be further decreased by the widespread use of broadly acting antibiotics such as azithromycin. however, secondary bacterial infections remain a concern, particularly for individuals with ds.of importance to secondary infections in ds, the production of type i ifns during the antiviral response was shown to drive the increased risk of secondary bacterial infections in mouse models. knockout of one of the type i ifnrs encoded on chromosome 21 improved the survival and clearance of s. pneumoniae. 68 the harmful effects of type i ifn signaling seem to be driven by the impairment of macrophage and/or neutrophil function by ifn-induced cytokines, most prominently among them the anti-inflammatory cytokine il-10. 69, 70 il-10 is involved in the dampening and resolution of immune response and is consistently elevated at baseline in people with ds 19 (figure 3) . furthermore, one of the subunits of the il-10 receptor, il10rb, is encoded by one of the four genes in the ifnr cluster on chromosome 21. il10rb serves as a subunit not only for the il-10 receptor, but also for the type iii ifns, il-22, and the il-26 receptors. 71 these findings beg the question: what would be the impact of elevated il-10 signaling in ds? at this point, all of the evidence supports the notion that elevated il-10 signaling in ds does not suffice to bring balance to what is clearly a hyperactive, overresponsive immune system. in our analysis of the t cells of people with ds, we observed that cd8 + t cells with trisomy 21 overproduce il-10 upon stimulation, and they also overproduce many more pro-inflammatory cytokines such as tnf-a, ifn-g, mip-1a, il-2, il-8, mip-1b, and eotaxin. 20 however, the suppressive effects of il-10 on the antibacterial branch of the immune system could increase the risk of secondary bacterial infections. 62, 70 the role of il-10 in this phenomenon has been well investigated for pneumococcal pneumonia and tuberculosis. in a mouse model of influenza a, treatment with anti-il-10 neutralizing antibodies before inoculation with s. pneumoniae resulted in reduced bacterial outgrowth and reduced lethality during secondary bacterial pneumonia. 70 in the case of tuberculosis, type i ifn signaling was shown to actually promote mycobacterium tuberculosis bacterial expansion and pathogenesis, 72 which was explained by the ifn-dependent induction of il-10 and consequent impairment in bacterial killing. 73 these observations support the notion that type i ifn hyperactivity and increased downstream il-10 signaling could be drivers of the known susceptibility to bacterial pneumonia in people with ds. children with ds have a >60-fold higher rate of pneumonia than do typical children, 74 and bacterial pneumonia is a leading cause of mortality in adults with ds. 75 several reports have documented impaired neutrophil function in ds. [76] [77] [78] therefore, it is predicted that individuals with covid-19 and ds would be at a higher risk of secondary bacterial lung infections during the covid-19 pandemic.other potential risk factors for exacerbated covid-19 pathology in ds the evidence outlined above indicates that covid-19 in ds would present accelerated progression toward dyspnea, ards, and myocardial damage, with a potential increased risk of secondary bacterial infections. in addition, the impact of immune dysregulation in ds could be modulated by other potential risk factors.people with ds have a unique profile of cardiovascular and cardiopulmonary disease. 79 nearly 50% of newborns with ds are affected by some form of congenital heart disease (chd), which in many cases requires repair via heart surgery. 80 however, adults with ds seem to be protected from coronary heart disease. 81 this duality in the cardiac phenotype makes it hard at this point to assess the impacts of chd on the development of covid-19 in ds. while it is likely that mild, viable, unrepaired chd will be a risk factor for severe covid-19, the assessment is less clear for those individuals who have undergone effective repair via cardiac surgery and have otherwise normal cardiac function.in addition, diverse anatomic abnormalities of the upper airway are considered major risk factors for respiratory infections in ds. [82] [83] [84] dysphagia and aspiration, which are more common in ds, could also increase the predisposition to lung infection in this population. 85, 86 in addition to these structural factors, hypotonia can increase the likelihood of proximal airway obstruction and dysphagia in ds. 83, 86 obstructive sleep apnea (osa), which is very common in people with ds, 87, 88 can often cause chronic intermittent hypoxia and respiratory acidosis, which in turn can drive pulmonary hypertension, a condition that is also more common in ds. 89, 90 therefore, osa could indirectly create an additional risk factor for the severity of covid-19 by accelerating hypoxemia, predisposing to pulmonary hypertension, and decreasing cardiopulmonary capacity. while some studies support the notion that osa is a risk factor for ards in some settings, 91, 92 other studies suggest that obesity (which is associated with osa) may be a higher risk factor for ards than osa itself. 93 in the context of covid-19, chronic lung disease and obesity are recognized risk factors, but the autonomous impact of osa specifically remains to be fully elucidated.in summary, in addition to the risks imposed by the immune dysregulation caused by trisomy 21, other risk factors could contribute to a more severe form of covid-19 in ds.overall, the combination of immune dysregulation and other potential risk factors suggest that individuals with ds and confirmed sars-cov-2 infection should undergo closer monitoring, including rapid, real-time monitoring of inflammatory markers (e.g., crp, il-6, tnf-a), myocardial damage (e.g., braincell reports medicine 1, may 19, 2020 5 perspective ll open access natriuretic peptide, cardiac troponin, myoglobin), and secondary bacterial infections. as more clinical trials for targeted immunosuppressants are performed around the world, individuals with ds are prime candidates for this intervention and other approaches to tone down the cytokine storm.clearly, in the absence of clinical and epidemiological data to define the impact of covid-19 in the population with ds, this perspective and the hypotheses stated herein should be approached with skepticism. nevertheless, i hope that this analysis of the literature prompts physicians around the world to pay special attention to individuals with ds and adopt measures to counteract the effects of the cytokine storm and other potential risk factors in this population. j.m.e. wrote this perspective with guidance from numerous conversations with colleagues, students, and post-doctoral fellows.the author is listed as a co-inventor in provisional patents for strategies to attenuate the cytokine storm in covid-19.. viral entry into the host results in activation of innate immune mechanism together with the synthesis and secretion of inflammatory mediators. interaction of specific viral components with pattern recognition receptors of the host immune system activates cellular signalling pathways that culminate in the production of various cytokines. these cytokines elicit host response like extravasation of leukocytes and activation, proliferation and cell differentiation of adaptive and innate immune system (7, 8) . interleukin (il)-1α/β, il-18 and il-6, tumor necrosis factor (tnf)-α, interferon (ifn)-α/β, transforming growth factor(tgf)-β are the major cytokines while ccl-2/monocyte chemoattractant protein (mcp)-1, mcp-3, ccl-3/macrophage inflammatory protein (mip)-1α, ccl-5 (chemokine (c-c motif) ligand 5)/rantes (regulated on activation, normal t cell expressed and secreted) and ifn-γinducible protein-10 (ip-10)/cxcl10 (c-x-c motif chemokine 10) are the chemokines released during an influenza virus-induced infection (9, 10) . these cytokines exert host antiviral responses in different ways. ifn-α/β is a type 1 interferon that can inhibit viral replication thus inducing a potent antiviral state in the host (11) , while tnf-α triggers the immune cells localization at infection site and activation of caspases to promote apoptosis (12) . il-1 is a pleiotropic cytokine, which enhances inflammatory cell infiltration by increasing membrane permeability through activation of mast cells and subsequent release of histamine, a vasodilator (13) . il-6 mediates monocyte differentiation to macrophages and enhances mononuclear cell infiltration to the inflammation loci (14) . moreover, synergistically il-6 and tgf-β induces maturation of naive helper t cells (cd4+) to t helper 17 (th17) cells which are potential effectors against pathogens. interestingly, il-6 also hinders the treg expansion by tgf-β (15, 16) . enhancement of type 1 immunity, activation of natural killer t cells (nkt) cells thus forming an early line of defence against viral infection are some of the biological actions of il-18 during viral infection (17, 18) .although these cytokines are released either as host protection or response against viral entry, exacerbated cytokine release can adversely affect the host by overreacting to its own system/ organs named as 'cytokine storm 'and was observed in both sars and mers infection resulting in the associated severe complications and multiple organ failure (19) . studies have established that similar hypercytokinemia/cytokine storm is also taking part in sars-cov2/covid-19 infection. in this review we highlight the pathology and pathogenesis of j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f mers cov, sars cov and sars cov2, with main focus into the role of cytokines in pathology and its relation with co-morbidities of covid-19 infection (20) .epidemic outbreak in 2002-2003 by sars-cov had a case fatality ratio of 14% to 15%, which was higher in older age group (greater than 50%) and less than 1% in younger age group sars cov entry to the cells is mediated by ace2 (angiotensin converting enzyme 2) receptor which is extremely expressed in lung, kidney, heart, liver and tongue. viral spike protein binds to the receptor, followed by viral fusion with the cell membrane, which involves priming of s protein by proteases of the cell surface and finally ends up in entry and replication of the virus inside the cell (24) . it has been shown that ace2 has protective role in ali (25) . ace2 play a key role in renin-angiotensin system (ras) that maintains blood pressure and water electrolyte balance. decreased expression of ace2 negatively affects ras system followed by increased microvascular permeability and inflammation (26) . ace2 expression has also been found to be down regulated by sars cov infections, which further augments the intensity of lung injury (27) . moreover, increased viral load, excessive immune cell infiltration and increased innate immune response by pro-inflammatory mediators also lead to widespread lung injury in sars, suggesting both cytokine storm and direct cytopathogenic effect of the virus cause the physiological decompensation observed in sars cov infection (28) .profiling of systemic cytokine levels in individuals suffering from sars-cov disease showed elevated concentrations of t helper 1 (th1) cytokines like ifn-γ, il-2 and il-12.additionally, cytokines that promote inflammation like il-6, il-1, mcp-1, ip-10, cxcl9/mig (monokine induced by gamma interferon), il-18, tgf-β and il-8 were alsoincreased (29) (30) (31) (32) (33) . interestingly, sars patients showed no change in blood il-10 and il-4 j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f levels (33) . increased amount of mig, mcp-1, ip-10, il-6, il-8 and il-18 in blood correlated with disease severity in sars patients (30, 31 interstitial infiltrates were observed in chest radiography of mers-cov infected individuals.laboratory investigation showed increased concentration of ldh and aspartate aminotransferase (ast), low eosinophil and platelet count and decreased albumin level (38) . another major cytokine that mediate organ damage in cytokine storm is il-6. excessive secretion of il-6 results in activation of coagulation pathway conversion of naive t cells, increase in vascular permeability and reduced cardiac function contribute to the increased disease severity (62, 63) . sars patients also showed increased levels of il-6 which correlated with disease progression (30) . increased levels of th17 cd4 t cells seen in covid-19 patients can be explained by high levels of il-6, which is implicated in t helper 17 (th17) cells development (16, 64) . interestingly, spike protein of sars cov induced activation of nf-κb signalling resulting in il-6 and tnf-α secretion in murine macrophages (65) . later in another study reported that inhibiting nf-κb signalling was demonstrated with decreased il-6 levels and increased animal survival in sars (66) . these studies implicate il-6 to be a key contributor to the patho-physiology of the cytokine-storm seen in both the sars cov infections. one of the proposed mechanisms for decreased t cells in covid-19 infection could be mediated by increased levels of il-6 and increased interaction between fas and its ligand.moreover, an increased number of lymphocytes were observed in patients sars cov2 infection when treated with tocilizumab, the il-6 receptor antagonist (67, 68) . yet more studies are required for speculating the exact mechanism of sars cov2 induced lymphopenia, and although the occurrence of copd in covid-19 patients was reported as 3.2% (74), the rate of disease severity and the mortality rate was markedly high with 60% and 63% respectively the death rate of covid-19 patients with cvd was 10.5% (92) . the and observational studies, it has been shown that bcg vaccination could reduce the neonatal as well as childhood death rate (116, 117) . retrospective cross-sectional study conducted in sub-saharan african children of below 5 years demonstrated a positive association of bcg vaccination and lower threat of malaria (118) . additionally, epidemiological studies have also established the protective role of bcg against respiratory tract infections in children which are predominantly virus-mediated (119, 120) . vaccination with bcg enhanced ifn-γ and il-10 level, thus providing immunity against respiratory tract infection even in elderly age group (121) . this is because, bcg also provides some non-specific immune assistance like immunity against pathogens other than mycobacteria like virus and parasites and reduces the occurrence of allergy. this is attained through a mechanism termed as trained immunity which is the immunological recall of the innate immune system via epigenetic reprogramming (122) . innate immune cells like monocytes, nk cells and macrophages undergo epigenetic modifications of histones that include methylation and acetylation, enhances gene expression of il-6, tnf-α and il-1β upon bcg vaccination. thus, the trained phenotype of innate immune cells results an increase in secretion of pro-inflammatory cytokines on exposure to non-specific pathogen, enhancing host protection (123, 124) . it has been experimentally shown that healthy subjects immunized with bcg show increased production of tnf-α and il-1β in response to bacterial and non-bacterial stimulants. increased h3k4me3 (trimethylation of histone h3 at lysine 4) exposed promoter regions of these pro-inflammatory cytokines leading to their increased expression (125) . in another study bcg vaccination reduced viremia in experimental human yellow fever virus infection model by inducing trained immunity by epigenetic modification of monocytes, resulting in increased production of il-1β (126) . moreover, bcg could enhance heterologous th1/th17 responses by inducing the long-lasting release of il-22, ifn-γ, and il-17 thereby attaining non-specific immune response to infections (127) . in line with this, several in vivo studies in murine models were also reported. bcg immunized mice expressed antimicrobial peptides and bestowed protection against malarial parasitemia (128) .additionally, prior bcg vaccination in influenza virus challenged mice were found to have considerable protection via secretion of antibody or activation of cell-mediated immunity (129) . a study conducted in mice model, to understand the effect of bcg against various viral infections like herpes simplex type 1, influenza a2 and encephalomyocarditis viruses showed increased resistance of bcg immunised mice against these viruses compared to control mice j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f (130) . specifically, bcg vaccinated newborn mice were shown to be more resistant againstherpes simplex type 2 infection (131). based on these observations it has been proposed that bcg vaccine has the potential to act as a protective agent against sars cov2, as it provides antiviral immunity (132) . sars-cov2 virus enhances the generation of il-6, ifn-γ, tnf-α and il-1β in mild to severely infected patients (48) . as discussed earlier, the trained immunity of bcg vaccine involves the release of these cytokines, thus providing an antiviral state and earlier protection against sars-cov2 (figure 3 ). ozdemir malini laloraya: conceptualization, writing-reviewing and editing, supervision.none.the authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. severe coronavirus disease (covid-19) caused by the sars-cov-2 virus is frequently characterized by pulmonary inflammation [1] . life-threatening "cytokine storms" involving the release of pro-inflammatory cytokines (e.g., tnf-α, il-6, il-1, il-8, and mcp-1) may contribute to the rapid systemic organ failure observed in select critically ill covid-19 patients [1] . however, this storm is not a selflimiting, singular event. sars-cov-2 causes massive cell death and cellular debris that activates inflammasomes [2] , which in turn trigger a macrophage-derived "eicosanoid storm", a surge of pro-inflammatory bioactive lipid mediators, such as prostaglandins and leukotrienes, that fuels local inflammation [3] [4] [5] . a paradigm shift in the inflammation field is that the resolution of inflammation is an active biochemical process [5] , implying that hyper-inflammation may result from a deficit in resolution.in contrast to classic anti-inflammatory agents, endogenous pro-resolution lipids can terminate the inflammatory response by promoting the clearance of cellular debris. specialized proresolving mediators (spms), including resolvins, lipoxins, and protectins, are bioactive lipid autacoids that mediate endogenous resolution by stimulating macrophage phagocytosis of cellular debris and countering the release of proinflammatory cytokines/chemokines [5] . importantly, loss of inflammation resolution mechanisms plays a role in sustaining pathologic inflammation [5] . endogenous resolution processes have been identified in the termination of infectious diseases [5] , including influenza [6] [7] [8] , and could thus be harnessed for averting dysregulated inflammation and associated mortality in covid-19. spms promote anti-viral b lymphocytic activity in influenza [7] , suggesting they may be a promising therapy for covid-19. spm precursors including 17-hydroxydocosahexaenoic acid (17-hdha) have also been identified as potentially promising vaccine adjuvants as they protect against primary influenza infection and promote adaptive immunity [7, 8] . thus, the use of spms or their precursors in combination with covid-19 vaccines may be a novel and effective therapeutic approach.the resolution of inflammation is also stimulated by another pathway involving arachidonic acid-derived epoxyeicosatrienoic acids (eets). these mediators promote clearance of cellular debris and activate anti-inflammatory programs to inhibit several (1) viral-induced alveolar cell death and the accumulation of apoptotic and necrotic cellular debris. this debris elicits a proinflammatory response from macrophages (2) , which in turn produce high quantities of eicosanoids generating an "eicosanoid storm". these eicosanoids subsequently stimulate the production of pro-inflammatory cytokines (3) by immune cells such as macrophages, generating a robust "cytokine storm" that in turn promotes further leukocytosis and immune cell infiltrates (4) . this robust inflammatory response to viral infection promotes hyaline membrane formation (5) and subsequent acute respiratory distress syndrome. tissue levels of spms and eets are decreased in this robust inflammatory setting. the right alveolus demonstrates covid-19 infection in the setting of active inflammation resolution mechanisms, as is the case in mild infection or potentially following treatment with spms or seh inhibition to increase eets. eets promote the generation of spms from arachidonic acid and omega-3 fatty acids. spms (1) stimulate macrophage phagocytosis and efferocytosis, (2) decrease pro-inflammatory cytokine production, (3) inhibit leukocytosis and thereby decrease the inflammatory infiltrate, and (4) may stimulate the adaptive immune response and the production of anti-sars-cov-2 antibodies key pro-inflammatory cytokines [9, 10] . eets and other epoxy fatty acids specifically promote production of spms, such as lipoxins, by shifting arachidonic acid metabolism to favor inflammation resolution [11] . as eets are rapidly metabolized by soluble epoxide hydrolase (seh), administration of seh inhibitors (sehis) can stabilize eet levels, prevent lung inflammation, and improve lung function in animal models, making them an attractive potential therapeutic strategy for covid-19. both spms and sehis downregulate the transcription regulator nf-κb [5, 11] , the center of eicosanoid-induced cytokine storms, which promotes the induction of pro-inflammatory cytokines and prostaglandin synthesis via cyclooxygenase (cox). combined pharmacological abrogation of cox-2 and seh activity also prevents cytokine and eicosanoid storms via debris clearance mechanisms [4] , offering another promising therapeutic intervention.targeting individual pro-inflammatory cytokines may not be sufficient to prevent covid-19 progression. importantly, spms terminate self-sustaining inflammatory processes, such as those induced by covid-19, by broadly inhibiting proinflammatory cytokine production and promoting a return to tissue homeostasis [5, 7, 8] . in contrast to some antiinflammatory agents, which may be contraindicated in covid-19 patients, spms and sehis act at significantly lower doses and are not immunosuppressive [5, 11] . moreover, conventional anti-inflammatory agents such as nsaids and cox-2 inhibitors, while limiting the eicosanoid storm, may be "resolution toxic" as they indiscriminately inhibit eicosanoid pathways that produce resolution mediators and thereby prevent active resolution [5] . inhibiting resolution mediator production may potentially facilitate covid-19-induced tissue injury and progression of infection. as demonstrated in many inflammatory disease models, selectively promoting endogenous inflammation resolution mechanisms clears inflammatory exudates more effectively and promotes a return to tissue homeostasis compared with classic anti-inflammatory agents [5] [6] [7] [8] [9] [10] [11] .most covid-19 clinical trials focus on "anti-viral" and "anti-inflammatory" strategies. in contrast, stimulation of inflammation resolution is a novel host-focused alternative to complement current therapies. the loss of active resolution mechanisms [5] and dysregulation of spms and eets in sustained pathological inflammation and lung diseases present a new opportunity for the management of covid-19. pro-resolving mediators, as well as seh blockade, may resolve the potentially fatal cytokine storm and severe pulmonary inflammation in covid-19 patients (see fig. 1 ). importantly, both spms and eets have also been shown to attenuate pathologic thrombosis and promote clot removal, which is now recognized as a key pathology of covid-19 infection [12] [13] [14] . spms including resolvins, lipoxins, and protectins, as well as sehis, are currently in clinical trials for other inflammatory diseases and could be rapidly translated for the management of covid-19 by complementing current anti-viral strategies via debris clearance and inflammatory cytokine suppression. thus, activating endogenous resolution pathways may be a novel therapeutic approach to limit severe organ damage and improve outcomes in covid-19 patients.the ongoing pandemic of coronavirus disease 2019 (covid-19), caused by the severe acute respirat -ory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2), has caused over 9.2 million confirmed cases and 478,0 00 deaths (as of june 24th, 2020). the high intensive care unit (icu) admission rate and mortality of covid-19 is continuously posing a serious strain on the global health-care system. while most patients present with mild to moderate symptoms, some patients may develop life-threatening sepsis, respiratory failure, acute respiratory distress syndrome (ards) and multiple organ failure. however, current antiviral and supportive therapies are not sufficient to prevent or treat the above complications especially in severely ill covid-19 patients [1] . thus, it is urgent to find the underlying mechanism dominating such life-threatening complications. it is well recognized that lung damage and multi-organ failure in this subgroup of patients arise due to overwhelming systemic hyper-inflammation. therefore, promising anti-inflammatory candidate agents targeting diverse mechanisms related to cytokine storm will be therapeutically relevant.mounting evidence has demonstrated that severely ill covid-19 patients presented with elevated levels of cytokines and inflammatory indices, such as serum il-1β, il-6, il-10 and d-dimer than those with moderate symptoms, suggesting the involvement of a cytokine storm [2] . cytokine storm represents an exaggerated immune response characterized by overproduction of pro-inflammatory cytokines and chemokines such as ifn-γ, tnf-α, il-6, il-1β, il-18, cxcl8 and cxcl10. it has also been observed in other viral diseases such as influenza, severe acute respiratory syndrome (sars) and middle east respiratory syndrome (mers) [3] . while an adequate release of cytokines is critical for the body's defense against viral infection, uncontrolled and aberrant immune system activation can lead to organ injury. current clinical evidence also confirmed the correlation of cytokine storm syndrome and disease severity as well as unfavorable outcomes in hospitalized covid-19 patients [3] . the association of unfavorable prognosis with the presence of over-inflammation and cytokine storm highlights the necessity of early identification of cytokine storm and implementation of anti-inflammatory treatment. timely control of hyper-inflammatory response is crucial to prevent the development and progression of irreversible ards and multi-organ dysfunction accompanying covid-19.in covid-19 patients, the most widely used anti-inflammatory and immune-modulatory agents include corticosteroids and intravenous immunoglobulin (ivig). corticosteroids, such as methylprednisolone and dexamethasone, were considered as one of the options for covid-19 patients with cytokine storm [4] based on their inhibition on many inflammatory genes and previous clinical use in other viral diseases. on 17 th june, preliminary results from a randomized, controlled clinical trial were released by the recovery (randomised evaluation of covid-19 therapy) study group in the united kingdom. this study showed that low-dose dexamethasone could reduce mortality by one-third in critically ill patients in need of mechanical ventilation [5] . however, previous studies associate the use of corticosteroid in sars, mers and influenza with a higher risk of a delayed viral clearance and long-term complications in survivors [6] . yet much remains unknown regarding the impact of corticosteroids on other clinical outcomes of covid-19, combination effect with other drugs, time window and dosage of administration, safety profile as well as possible adverse effects. currently, there are dozens of ongoing clinical trials addressing the unsolved questions (supplemental table) . ivig is also used as an adjunctive drug in the treatment of severe covid-19 patients. as a purified blood product from healthy donors, it exerts immunomodulatory effect mainly through neutralizing virus by antibodies/polyclonal immunoglobulin g (igg). it could also block fcγ receptors which are involved in natural and adaptive immunity. currently, a limited number of clinical studies have shown that ivig treatment within 48h of admission reduced the use of mechanical ventilation, duration of icu stay and hospitalization, as well as 28-day mortality[7]. however, more clinical evidence for its effectiveness in managing clinical covid-19 infection is warranted. ongoing clinical trials of ivig including those from convalescent patients are listed in supplemental table.nod-like receptor protein 3 (nlrp3) inflammasome protein complex, is crucial in host's antiviral defense. during viral replication, the invading virus plus a variety of derived pathogen-associated molecular patterns (pamps) and danger-associated molecular patterns (damps) can active nlrp3 inflammasome. upon activation, nlrp3 inflammasome induces pyroptosis as well as the secretion of il-1β and il-18 which are responsible for recruitment of neutrophils to the inflammatory sites to assist in the virus eradication and induction of the adaptive immune system. however, a persistent activation of nlrp3 inflammasome, excessive production of inflammatory cells and cytokine, as well as pyroptosis-mediated cell damage jointly lead to organ injury [8] . activation of inflammasome pathway is indicated by the elevation of il-1βin severe covid-19 patients. therefore, drugs targeting at nlrp3 inflammasome and il-1β are promising in mitigating nlrp3-inflammasome driven hyper-inflammation, pyroptosis, and cytokine storm syndrome in severely ill covid-19 patients. colchicine, a bioactive alkaloid compound isolated from plant colchicum, has been commonly used for inflammatory diseases such as gout. it acts as an inhibitor of nlrp3 inflammasome and interferes with polymerization by binding to free tubulin dimers, leading to the deregulation of inflammatory cell activities and release of cytokines especially il-6[9]. in addition, colchicine also suppresses the production of numerous cytokines, pyrogens and superoxides mediated by white blood cells. with regard to safety profile of colchicine, 5-10% patients administered with therapeutic dose may exhibit gastrointestinal symptoms (nausea, vomit or diarrhea) as side effects [10] . overall, colchicine may be exploited as a potential candidate for alleviating the immune hyperactivity during sars-cov-2 infection. recombinant il-1 receptor blocker (such as anakinra) and il-1βmonoclonal antibodies (canakinumab) are also of interest. a prospective study showed that with a prospective cohort design showed that the treatment with anakinra contributes to a substantial reduction in mortality and use of invasive mechanical ventilation without bringing about serious side effects in critically ill covid-19 patients [11] . due to the anti-inflammatory effects of the above drugs, their possible efficacy in covid-19 is gaining more and more attention. currently, there are a number of registered studies on clinicaltrials. gov to test the effectiveness and safety of colchicine, anakinra and canakinumab on covid-19 (supplemental table) .the level of il-6 was significantly increased in covid-19 patients and was closely related to ards severity and outcome. sars-cov-2 infection and subsequent release of virus particles recruits monocytes and macrophages, leading to the release of cytokine and initiation of adaptive immune responses. in this process, il-6 played an essential role. in most cases, the immune response eliminates lung infection and the patients recovered. however, in others, abnormal immune response triggered a cytokine storm, which was characterized by persistent hypercytokinemia (elevated il-6, tnf-α, il-1β), eventually aggravated the lung injury and even had ripple effects through the entire body. the immune dysregulation in severe covid-19 individuals was driven by il-6[12] and the il-6 deficiency was shown to reduce the severity in acute lung injury in mouse model [13] . therefore, il-6 may be a potential target cytokine to treat covid-19 related ards. il-6 inhibitors, such as tocilizumab, a recombinant humanized monoclonal il-6 blocking antibody, could curb il-6 mediated pro-inflammatory pathway through binding to the soluble and membrane fraction il-6 receptor (il-6r) (probably via the nuclear factor kappa-b and stat3 signaling pathway). tocilizumab seemed to be effective in covid-19 patients, which decreased the use of mechanical ventilation, improved hypoxemia and ct opacity changes in some severe cases and clinical trials [14] . tocilizumab has been prescribed for treatment in severe patients with elevated il-6 level in china since march 2020 according to the diagnosis and treatment program for covid-19 (national health commission of china, 7th version). most notably, il-6 could either inhibit or accelerate viral replication and function in the lung suffering from infection or chemical insults, thus the optimal timing for anti-il-6 administration will be essential. therefore, il-6 blockers could be an efficient therapeutic strategy for the treatment of covid-19. at present, there are several registered studies under way to assess the safety and efficacy of il-6 blockers (supplemental table) . further researches are required to evaluate the short-term and long-term outcomes of anti-il6 administration and determine the optimal time for drug administration.j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f bromodomain containing protein 4 (brd4), an epigenetic reader of acetylated lysines, is a member of the bromodomain and extra terminal domain (bet) family. brd4 regulates cell growth and cell cycle-related gene transcription through combining with acetylated histones. when suffering from virus infection, brd4 plays a role in epithelial-driven and nf-κb dependent innate inflammation. nf-κb recruits brd4 and facilitates the interaction between nf-κb and brd4, activates nf-κb mediated pro-inflammatory signaling pathway. moreover, brd4 inhibitors was shown to d decrease the recruitment of macrophages and the infiltration of t cells [15] . previous researches have indicated the potential role of brd4 inhibition in both antiviral response through dna damage manner to block the attachment of dna and rna [16] , as well as in alleviating the lung fibrosis, one of the common sequelae of covid-19 in animal models and ex vivo experiments [17] . furthermore, recent reports demonstrated the transmembrane e protein of sars-cov-2, resident on ergic and golgi membranes, could bound to brd4 [18] . bet inhibitors like apabetalone (rvx-208) and jq-1 inhibit vascular inflammation-related gene expression through suppressing bet-mediated transcription triggered by multiple pro-inflammatory stimuli. by doing so, bet inhibitors have many reported effects in inflammation, airway remodeling, cardiovascular disease, and cancers [19] . though there is no reported cases of covid-19 who have been treated with brd4 inhibitors to date, brd4 inhibitors could be considered as a potential candidate to ameliorate hyperinflammation and cytokine storm accompanying covid-19.the pathophysiology of severe covid-19[20] is related to aggressive inflammatory responses and damage to the lung and even ripple effects across the body. thus, the severity depends on the balance between the viral virulence and the host immune response. when the infection occurs, the release and recognition of pathogen-associated molecular patterns (pamps) then trigger the production of pro-inflammatory cytokines and chemokines involving il-1β, il-6, il-18, tnf-α and macrophage inflammatory proteins. normally, a healthy immune response will clear the infection, while an inadequate immune response will result in further accumulation of activated immune cells in the lungs, leading to a cytokine storm and eventually damaging the lung, or causing multiple organ failure through circulation. therefore, one strategy for the treatment against covid-19 is to block the overwhelming inflammation. emerging evidence has suggested the potential effects of inflammation inhibitors on the treatment for covid-19, especially in severe cases. further immunomodulatory and immunosuppressive therapies aimed at curbing immune mediated damage in covid-19 are ongoing (supplemental table) . it is necessary to confirm the therapeutic effects, investigate the administration timing and clarify the mechanism, all of which may render it possible for immunoregulation interventions to arrest or reverse the devastating disease.conflict of interest none declared disclosure: none declared(gf) and chemokines. cytokines participate in immune responses through the activation of multiple signaling pathways, such as jak-stat, traf-nf-κb, traf-ap-1, and irak-nf-κb [32] . the term "cytokine storm" appeared for the first time in an article relating to graft-versus-host disease in 1993 [52] as an interpretation for mechanisms of immune diseases or chronic inflammation.gradually, scientists found that viruses, including cytomegalovirus, streptococci, influenza virus, and sars-cov, can also evoke cytokine storms [53] [54] [55] [56] . during viral infection, prrs activate irf and nf-κb pathways by recognizing pamp, then promote the release of pro-inflammatory cytokines and chemokines from infected local epithelial cells or macrophages. these cytokineactivated macrophages and virus-infected dendritic cells (dc) lead to a broader immune response, attracting more inflammatory cells to inflammatory sites, releasing a large number of cytokines, which eventually, results in a cytokine storm. excessive cytokines may spill into the circulatory system and cause systemic cytokine storms, resulting in multiple organ dysfunction [7, 57] .previously, it has been found that the serum levels of pro-inflammatory cytokines [ifn-γ, il-1, il-6, il-12, and transforming growth factor-β (tgf-β)], and chemokines (ccl2, cxcl9, cxcl10, and il-8) in sars-cov infected patients were higher than those in healthy individuals.while the level of anti-inflammatory cytokine il-10 in severe patients was significantly lower than that in healthy controls [58] [59] [60] . at the beginning of the epidemic, huang et al reported that the plasma levels of il2, il7, gscf, cxcl10, mcp1, mip1a, and tnf-α were higher in covid-19 patients in the intensive care unit (icu) than those of covid-19 patients outside the icu [61] . furthermore, the relatively higher level of serum ferritin was also seen in deceased patients comparing with discharged patients, and in severe patients comparing with mild patients [62, 63] .thus, the pattern of cytokine storm in covid-19 patients was thought to be similar to secondary hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis (shlh) [64] [65] [66] . unlike the cytokines profile of sars patients, covid-19 patients have a remarkable increase of anti-inflammatory cytokines il-10 (table 1) , which has been often seen in hlh patients in previous studies [61, 67, 68] . compared with other increased cytokines, increased il-10 was frequently associated with il-6 in patients with severe disease (table 1) , and subsets of activated t cells, as well as by non-immune cells like fibroblasts, epithelial cells, and keratinocytes [74] [75] [76] [77] . it can activate jak/stat, ras/erk/c/ebp, and pⅰ3k/akt pathways through il-6r and signal-transducing coreceptor gp130 [78, 79] . il-6 also regulates b cell proliferation and differentiation and induces t cell differentiation [80] [81] [82] . although il-6 has been proposed to be involved in the repair of lung injury in the mouse model of influenza a h1n1 virus [83] , it contributes to the pathogenesis of inflammatory or autoimmunity diseases [84, 85] , and excessive production of il-6 leads to serious disease progression in viral infection [86, 87] .il-10 is also a pleiotropic cytokine that limits and terminates inflammatory responses through inhibiting antigen-presenting cells (apc), pro-inflammatory cytokines production, and t cell response [88] . various subpopulations of cd4 + helper t (th) cells, including th1, th2, and th17, produce il-10, as an important self-regulatory function of th cells during infections [89] [90] [91] [92] .although reducing il-10 levels could improve the resistance to infection in some animal models, the weakening control of inflammatory responses may cause significant damage to the hosts at the same time [93] . thus, il-10 plays a central role in maintaining a balance between damage and protection.and th17 cells produce il-10 that regulates the immune response [94] [95] [96] [97] [98] . (figure 1 ). the similarity in the signaling network between il-10 receptors and il-6r suggests the common biological process among il-10 and il-6 [99] . it has been reported that il-6 cooperated with il-10 to eliminate pathogens and modulate the cellular immune response in the patient infected with the h1n1 influenza virus, but the produced immunosuppressive environment delayed virus clearance or increase secondary infection [86, 100] . pathological findings of a deceased covid-19 patient showed elevated il-6 and il-10 with increased highly proinflammatory ccr4 + ccr6 + th17 in peripheral cd4 + t cells [101] . rapid accumulation of proinflammatory cytokines stimulates the over-reaction of anti-inflammatory response, resulting in severe immune injury in patients. chinesesuggests the increase of il-6 as an indicator for critical patients [16] . we recommend measuring both il-10 and il-6 as the signs of the cytokine storm intensification in covid-19 patients.great attention has been paid to the cytokine storm in covid-19 infection to address the j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f immediate need for reducing the rising mortality. anti-inflammatory medications are commonly used for the management of cytokine storm, which includes gcs, intravenous immune globulin (ivig), and inflammatory cytokines antagonists (such as il-1r antagonists, il-6r antagonists, and jak inhibitors). however, gcs may slow down the clearance of the coronavirus [102] . high-dose ivig at the early stage of clinical deterioration was reported to be successful in three cases [103] , and an ongoing randomized controlled trial (rct) of ivig in severe covid-19 patients (nct04261426) may provide more authoritative evidence of this treatment.since il-1β and il-6 are the major cytokines involved in the pathogenesis of shlh [65] , the il-6r antagonist (tocilizumab and sarilumab) and il-1r antagonists (anakinra) may be effective choices. a retrospective study of continuous intravenous infusion of anakinra in five patients established a rapid serologic and subsequent clinical improvement in adult patients with shlh [104] and a randomized, placebo-controlled phase iii trial indicated that anakinra reduced mortality in sepsis patients with features of shlh [105] . tocilizumab, which attracts more attention compared with anakinra, was found to improve fever, hypoxemia, lung lesions, and crp levels in most of the severe covid-19 patients with no obvious adverse reactions in retrospective studies, but several patients still aggravated [106, 107] . serum level of il-6 after tocilizumab therapy tended to further spike initially, and then decrease, while the patients who failed treatment exhibited a persistent and dramatic increase of il-6 [107, 108] . nevertheless, we cannot draw any firm conclusions on the efficacy and safety of anakinra or tocilizumab due to the limited sample size and retrospective method of the present evidence. further studies are required to determine the probability of potential secondary infection, and to find an appropriate biochemical indicator for monitoring the therapeutic effect. clinical trials evaluating anakinra (nct04341584, nct04324021, nct04339712, and nct04330638) and tocilizumab (chictr2000029765, chictr2000030796, chictr2000030894, nct04317092, nct04335071, and nct04320615 et al) in the treatment of covid-19 are ongoing across the world.secondary bacterial infection has been found to further exacerbate viral pneumonia, which is also related to the imbalance of t cells and plasma cytokines [109] . bacterial coinfection is known to be associated with approximately 40% of viral respiratory tract infections requiring j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f hospitalization [110] . early detection of bacterial infection and timely intervention will help to alleviate the deterioration of covid-19. procalcitonin (pct), released by bacterial infectious tissues under the irritation of pro-inflammatory cytokines, is a more specific marker of serious bacterial infection compared to c-reactive protein (crp) and il-6 [111] pct-based strategy has been applied to guide antibiotic use in icu or emergency wards, since the serum pct levels in patients with severe bacterial infections are much higher than those with simple viral infections or non-specific inflammatory diseases [111] [112] [113] . antimicrobial interventions are encouraged in patients with lower respiratory tract infection who has the value of pct > 0.25ng/ml or > 0.5ng/ml, for they are likely or highly-likely respectively, to undergo a bacterial infection [113, 114] .multiple studies have shown that pct levels increased in critical or deceased covid-19patients. ( table 2 ) li et al [115] reported that 90.5% of deceased patients had elevated pct levels (0.11-75ng/ml), including pct > 0.25 ng/ml in 12 patients and pct > 0.5ng/ml in 9 patients, and the pct value increased from the admission to death. in another retrospective study of 1,099 covid-19 patients, higher proportions of pct > 0.5ng/ml were found in severe cases than mild cases (13.7% vs 3.7%) [8] . patients who reached primary composite endpoint (including admission to an icu, the use of mechanical ventilation, or death) had a higher proportion of pct > 0.5ng/ml than patients without end-point events (24.0% vs 3.9%) [8] . the correlation between increased pct and severe covid-19 was also observed in pediatric patients [116] . these findings, although might be a better option. previous studies have shown that in addition to antibacterial effects, these drugs can also alleviate inflammatory reactions by reducing the accumulation of pro-inflammatory cytokines and regulating neutrophil function and apoptosis [117] [118] [119] [120] . including mean ± sd, median (iqr), and median (mix-max). c pct value≥0.05. d p-value of the comparison between the pct value of two groups. e p-value of the comparison between the proportion of the patients with increased pct value in two groups. the tests with a p-value of <0.05 are considered statistically significant.cytokine release syndrome (crs) or hypercytokinemia, often referred to as a 'cytokine storm', has been postulated to drive mortality during severe respiratory viral infections, such as influenza (1) -including the 1918 spanish flu epidemic (2) and the h5n1 bird flu (3) , as well as during the severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus epidemic of 2003 (sars-cov-1) (4).increasing evidence supports the notion that mortality during infections with sars-cov-2, which causes coronavirus disease of 2019 , is driven by the exacerbated immune response to the virus, leading to a cascade of events involving a cytokine storm and acute respiratory distress syndrome (ards), often accompanied by myocardial damage and multiple organ failure (5, 6) . this pathological cascade resembles what is observed in other lethal viral lung infections, where the immune response to the virus triggers a primary wave of cytokines, including type i and type iii interferons (ifns), followed by infiltration and activation of diverse immune cells and production of secondary cytokines and chemokines, including type ii ifn (ifn-g), accelerated immune activation, and progressive decline of respiratory function (7) . importantly, many of the cytokines and chemokines involved in the cytokine storm employ janus protein kinases (jaks) for signal transduction.cytokine analysis of covid-19 patients indicate an important role for the magnitude of the cytokine storm in prognosis and clinical outcome. levels of c-reactive protein (crp) and il-6 at the time of hospitalization were reported to be significantly higher in patients who eventually died versus those that survived (5) . in a different study, patients admitted to intensive care units (icus) showed significantly higher levels of il-2, il-10, il-7, ip-10, mcp-1, mip-1α, g-csf, and tnf-α relative to non-icu patients (6) . using artificial intelligence methods, high levels of circulating alanine aminotransferase (alt), a marker of liver inflammation, was associated with progression toward ards (8) . altogether, these findings support the rationale for combining antiviral treatment and targeted immunosuppression as a therapeutic approach in covid-19 (9) . accordingly, several clinical trials are currently testing the safety and efficacy of inhibitors of il-6 signaling and jak/stat signaling. furthermore, hydroxychloroquine, a molecule shown to attenuate toll-like receptor signaling and cytokine production that is approved for the treatment of rheumatoid arthritis and systemic lupus erythematosus (10, 11) , is also being testing in many clinical trials for covid-19.within this context, we report here relevant results obtained during studies of the hyperactive immune response in a mouse model of down syndrome (ds). we recently discovered that trisomy 21 (t21), the genetic cause of ds, causes consistent activation of the ifn transcriptional response in multiple cell types (12) (13) (14) (15) , which is explained by the fact that four of the six ifn receptors are encoded on chromosome 21 (ifnar1, ifnar2, ifngr2, il10rb). additional investigations of the proteome (16), metabolome (14) , and immune cell lineages (13, 15) of people with ds demonstrated that t21 causes: 1) changes in the circulating proteome indicative of chronic autoinflammation with clear dysregulation of ifn-inducible cytokines (16) , 2) activation of the ifn-inducible kynurenine pathway, leading to elevated production of neurotoxic tryptophan catabolites (14) , and 3) widespread hypersensitivity to ifn stimulation across the human immune system (13, 15) . altogether, these results support the notion that ds can be understood in good measure as an interferonopathy, whereby increased ifn signaling could account for many of the developmental and clinical impacts of t21. now, we report results generated during our investigation of immune responses in the dp16(1)/yey mouse strain (referred hereto as dp16) (17) , a widely used mouse model of ds. the dp16 strain carries a segmental duplication of murine chromosome 16 that is syntenic to human chromosome 21, encoding ~119 genes, including the four ifnrs. we found that dp16 mice overexpress ifnrs in all   immune cell types tested, display hypersensitivity to type i and type ii ifn stimulation, overproduce key cytokines, and display increased liver inflammation. remarkably, dp16 mice display lethal immune responses upon challenge with viral mimetic molecules, such as the tlr3 agonist poly-i:c [p(i:c)] or the tlr7/8 agonist imiquimod, a phenotype that is not observed in their wild type (wt) littermates or mouse strains carrying triplications of other genomic regions syntenic to chromosome 21. strikingly, both the lethal immune phenotype and associated cytokine storm are blocked by treatment with a small molecule inhibitor of the jak1 kinase, which also decreases liver pathology.overall, these results have potential far-reaching significance for the treatment of covid-19, justifying a deeper study of jak inhibitors as a therapeutic strategy to attenuate the cytokine storm and downstream organ failure in this condition, while also indicating that individuals with ds should be considered a high-risk population during the covid-19 pandemic.in order to model the impact of t21 on chronic innate immune responses in mice, we employed the dp16 mouse strain, which harbors triplication of a region syntenic to human chromosome 21 including four ifnrs ( figure 1a ) (17) . to define the relationship between gene copy number and ifnr protein expression, we evaluated surface expression of ifnar1 in peripheral immune cells from dp16 mice by flow cytometry. dp(10)1yey/+ and dp(17)yey/+ mice (hereafter referred to as dp10 and dp17), which have three copies of genes that are syntenic to chromosome 21, but are disomic for ifnrs (18) , were included as controls ( figure 1a) .expression of ifnar1 on the surface of cd45+ white blood cells was significantly higher in dp16 mice, but not dp10 or dp17 animals, relative to wt littermates ( figure 1b) . when different immune cell types were analyzed by flow cytometry, ifnar1 expression was significantly higher in all cell types tested ( figure 1c) . these results are consistent with previous reports of mrna overexpression for all ifnrs in this gene cluster in various tissues of dp16 mice (12, 19) .to test whether upregulation of ifnrs conferred stronger responses to ifn ligands, we stimulated wt and dp16 blood samples with ifn-a and evaluated downstream phosphorylation of stat1 (pstat1) by flow cytometry. dp16 cells responded more strongly to ifn-a as defined by significantly higher levels of pstat1 relative to wt cells, in all immune lineages examined ( figure 1d ). this widespread heightened response to ifn-a was not observed in dp10 and dp17 cells; however, t cell subsets from the dp17 strain exhibited more robust pstat1 ( figure 1e-f) . although dp17 mice have only two copies of the ifnr genes, this result suggests that some aspect of triplication of the region of chromosome 17 syntenic to human chromosome 21 leads to differential regulation of type i ifn signaling in t cells.given that one of the type ii ifn receptor subunits (ifngr2) is also encoded on murine chromosome 16 and triplicated in dp16 mice, we next investigated the response to ifn-g stimulation. indeed, dp16 cells responded more strongly to ifn-g stimulation in most cell types examined ( figure 1g) .overall, these results suggest that elevated expression of the ifnrs in the dp16 mouse strain confers increased sensitivity to type i and type ii ifns. since dp16 cells mount enhanced responses to ifn ligands, we next investigated the response of dp16 mice to innate immune stimuli known to trigger an ifn response. chronic systemic induction of ifn signaling was elicited by repeated administration of the tlr3 agonist polyinosinic:polycytidylic acid [p(i:c)], which is known to produce an acute spike of type i ifn production (1-3 days), followed by low but persistent expression of type i ifn ligands and a robust cytokine response in the chronic phase (5-30 days) (20) . wt and dp16 mice were given intraperitoneal injections of 10 mg/kg of p(i:c) or an equivalent volume of vehicle (sham) every other day, for up to 16 days, with the experiment completed at day 17. remarkably, dp16 mice were profoundly sensitive to the treatment, which was largely tolerated by wt mice (figure   2a ). body weight measurements during the course of the experiment revealed rapid weight loss in dp16 mice upon treatment ( figure 2b) . eventually, all but one of the twelve dp16 mice had to be removed from the study for excessive weight loss (>15%). in contrast, wt animals did not lose as much weight, and all but three out of nine survived to the end of the experiment (figure   2a ,b). dp10 and dp17 mice also tolerated chronic immune stimulation with p(i:c) (figure 2c-f). although p(i:c) treatment caused some weight loss in both dp10 and dp17 mice, the percentage lost was comparable to wt levels. this p(i:c)-induced weight loss was clearly dosedependent, as mice receiving half the lethal dose (5 mg/kg) displayed only minor weight loss, with no observable differences between dp16 and wt mice ( figure s1 ).in order to determine whether hypersensitivity was restricted to tlr3 agonists or more broadly observed across activation of other pattern recognition receptors, we treated the mice with the tlr7 agonist imiquimod. topical administration of imiquimod causes ifn production, acute skin inflammation, systemic inflammation, and dehydration, and is commonly employed as a model of psoriasis (21) . imiquimod treatment caused significant weight loss in dp16 mice despite daily administration of supportive fluids, which led to rapid termination of the study in observation of the humane endpoint ( figure 2g,h) . in contrast, wt animals receiving identical treatment maintained their weight (figure 2g,h) .altogether, these results indicate that the hypersensitivity to ifn stimulation observed at the cellular level in dp16 mice associates with increased sensitivity and lethality to ifn-inducing viral mimetic agents at the organismal level. we next compared the immune response in dp16 mice relative to their wild type littermates during the acute and chronic responses to p(i:c). first, we measured levels of circulating ifn-a 6 hours after the first injection of p(i:c) (or sham). ifn-a levels were induced by p(i:c), with a stronger response in dp16 mice ( figure 3a) . elevated ifn ligand production in dp16 mice is consistent with a predicted fast-forward loop driven by increased ifnr expression in ds (22) .we then measured mrna expression for several ifn-stimulated genes (isgs) in the spleen of wt and dp16 mice at 24 hours after a single injection of p(i:c) (or sham). this experiment revealed strong induction of isg expression upon p(i:c) treatment, with several isgs being more significantly elevated in the dp16 mice than in wt animals ( figure 3b ).next, we measured the levels of several cytokines and chemokines in the bloodstream 24 hours after a single p(i:c) injection. expectedly, p(i:c)-treated animals showed increased levels of many pro-inflammatory factors, regardless of genotype ( figure 3c and figure s2a ). in this acute phase, the most significantly elevated inflammatory markers were ip-10 (cxcl10), mcp-1, rantes (ccl5), and kc/gro (cxcl5) (figure 3c ). on average, dp16 mice did not show significant differences in expression of cytokines relative to their wt littermates. then, we measured circulating cytokines and chemokines during the chronic response. we compared serum levels between dp16 mice taken at the time of harvest due to reaching the humane endpoint of 15% weight loss to the levels in the wt littermates that survived to the end of the 17-day experiment. at these later stages of chronic inflammation, several of these inflammatory markers were significantly elevated in the dp16 animals, such as mcp-1 and mip-1a, but not in the wt littermates ( figure 3d) .altogether, these results indicate that activation of tlr signaling leads to strong induction of key cytokine and chemokines in our experimental paradigm, with several inflammatory markers being more elevated in the dp16 mice. although not a single cytokine or chemokine stands out as the sole driver of phenotypes in the dp16 mice, the mild over-production of several cytokines could potentially contribute to their exacerbated immune sensitivity. next, we investigated markers of liver inflammation and injury. the serum levels of the enzymes alanine transaminase (alt) and aspartate transaminase (ast), two commonly used markers of hepatocyte injury, were significantly elevated upon p(i:c) treatment in the dp16 mice, reaching concentrations nearly an order of magnitude higher than those observed in their wt littermates ( figure 4a) . prompted by these results, we investigated liver pathology. liver tissue sections were stained with hematoxylin and eosin (h&e) and evaluated by a trained histologist, blinded against treatment group and genotype. scoring of liver pathology was done with procedures adapted for mice (23) using a validated histological scoring system (24) , that included parameters such as cell injury, inflammation, and reactive changes, leading to an overall liver pathology score. this analysis revealed that dp16 mice have increased liver pathology even before p(i:c) treatment, as demonstrated by significantly higher levels of cell injury, inflammation, and reactive changes relative to their wt littermates (figure 4b,c) . this basal level of liver pathology was not observed in the dp10 and dp17 mice (figure 4d,e) .importantly, upon treatment with p(i:c), the livers of wt animals developed pathology scores comparable or greater than those observed at baseline in dp16 mice, including signs of strong recruitment and/or expansion of inflammatory cells. when p(i:c) was administered to dp16 mice, all metrics of liver pathology increased, leading to significantly higher overall pathology scores relative to both dp16 sham treatment and wt upon p(i:c) treatment (figure 4b-c) .livers from dp10 and dp17 mice that received p(i:c) also experienced increases in liver pathology, but these changes did not differ from wt mice (figure 4d,e) .overall, these results indicate that dp16 mice display increased liver inflammation and pathology, both at baseline and upon immune activation, which could potentially contribute to their heightened sensitivity to ifn-inducing agents. all three types of ifn signaling employ the jak1 kinase for signal transduction, in combination with either jak2 or tyk2 (figure 1a) . therefore, we sought to determine whether inhibiting jak1 specifically would block the lethality and pathology caused by p(i:c) treatment in dp16 mice. to this end, we used the jak1-specific inhibitor incb54707. animals received a dose of 60 mg/kg of incb54707 (or an equivalent volume of methylcellulose used as the vehicle) twice daily via oral gavage, beginning 24 hours prior to the first p(i:c) injection, and every day during the course of the experiment. remarkably, dp16 mice that received the jak1 inhibitor all survived the p(i:c) treatment, while dp16 animals that received the vehicle and p(i:c) experienced weight loss and had to be euthanized ( figure 5a) . we then analyzed the impact of jak1 inhibition on cytokine production by comparing the dp16 mice treated with p(i:c) with and without co-treatment with the jak1 inhibitor. importantly, cytokine production was strongly abrogated by jak1 inhibition (figure 5b and figure s3) . lastly, we evaluated the impact of jak1 inhibition on markers of liver inflammation and injury. indeed, the jak1 inhibitor led to a reduction of circulating levels of alt and ast, as well as a decrease in overall liver pathology scores ( figure 5c) .altogether, these results indicate that blocking the catalytic activity of the jak1 kinase prevents the lethality associated with a rampant innate immune response in the dp16 mouse model. the efficacy of this treatment likely relies on a combination of inter-related effects, such as reduced cytokine production and improved liver function. as the covid-19 pandemic rapidly progresses worldwide, there is a dire need to identify new prophylactic and therapeutic strategies. based on recent data from analyses of inflammatory markers in covid-19 (5, 6) and prior knowledge about inflammatory responses in other lethal viral lung infections, targeted immune-suppression is now appreciated as a potential strategy to prevent ards, fulminant myocarditis, organ failure, and mortality at advanced stages of the condition (9). accordingly, clinical trials for diverse immune-suppressants have been started around the world, including inhibitors of il-6 and jak/stat signaling.here, we demonstrate a key role for the jak1 kinase in driving cytokine storms and accompanying mortality in a mouse model of lethal anti-viral immune responses. jak1 is one of several jak kinases required for mediating inflammatory signaling downstream of a large number of cytokines, including all three types of ifn signaling and il-6 (25). we show that eliciting the innate anti-viral immune response with tlr agonists is lethal in a sensitized mouse model carrying triplication of four of the six ifn receptors. within days, the dp16 mice rapidly lose weight and die if unattended, concurrent with induction of many prominent cytokines linked to the severity of covid-19-driven pathology, such as il-6, tnf-α, il-10, ip-10, mcp-1, and mip-1α (6) . furthermore, dp16 mice display exacerbated liver inflammation and pathology, which, together with stronger production of some cytokines, may converge into a pathological cascade leading to wasting and death. importantly, these phenotypes are blocked by jak1 inhibition.based on these results, we propose here that jak inhibitors are a valid therapeutic approach for attenuating the cytokine storm in covid-19. four jak inhibitors are currently fda-approved for the treatment of diverse medical conditions: jakafi/ruxolitinib, a jak1/2 inhibitor approved for myelofibrosis, polycythemia vera, and graft-versus-host-disease; xeljanz/tofacitinib, a jak1/3 inhibitor approved for rheumatoid arthritis, psoriatic arthritis and ulcerative colitis;olumiant/baricitinib, a jak1/2 inhibitor approved for rheumatoid arthritis; and rinvoq/upadacitinib, a jak1 inhibitor also approved for rheumatoid arthritis. many jak1specific inhibitors are currently being developed and tested in clinical trials for diverse inflammatory and autoimmune conditions, including the molecule used in this study,we hypothesize that jak inhibitors could be superior agents in terms of attenuating the cytokine storm caused by covid-19 relative to existing anti-il6 agents, which consist of injectable monoclonal antibodies that inhibit the interaction between il-6 and its receptor il-6r (26) . in contrast, jak inhibitors are available as drugs administered orally, with very well characterized pharmacodynamics and pharmacokinetics, and may provide a more appropriate strategy to transiently tone down the cytokine storm to prevent ards and fulminant myocarditis.furthermore, jak1 inhibitors not only block il-6 signaling, but also other inflammatory pathways involved in the cytokine storm (25) . depending on the degree of inhibition of various jak kinases, it is predicted that available jak inhibitors will block various aspects of the cytokine storm, with potential for varying degrees of therapeutic benefit.with regards to its relevance to therapeutic strategies for covid-19 and other conditions associated with cytokine storms, this study has several limitations. first, our mouse model does not fully reproduce the human conditions associated with cytokine storms. although pandemic. our studies of the dp16 mice were originally driven by our interest in studying immune dysregulation and ifn hyperactivity in ds. of note, our results are consistent with studies of sars-cov-1 demonstrating that type i ifn signaling contributes to sars-driven pathology and mortality in mice (29) . we predict that, as has been observed during rsv (30) and h1n1 (31) infections, people with ds will develop more severe complications upon sars-cov-2 infection, including higher rates of hospitalization and mortality. we hope these results will encourage special attention to individuals with ds, including closer monitoring of hyperinflammation during covid-19, and inclusion in clinical trials for targeted immunesuppressants. table s1 .q-rt-pcr. q-rt-pcr was performed using the applied biosystems viia7™ 384-well block real time pcr system. q-rt-pcr master mix was prepared with applied biosystems sybr select master mix for cfx. standard curves were run for every primer pair in each q-rt-pcr experiment to ensure efficient amplification of target transcripts within all experimental tissues.all samples were run in triplicate, averaged and normalized to 18s rrna. primer sequences at provided in table s2 .cytokine measurements. blood cytokine levels were measured using mesoscale discovery assays and/or biolegend legend plex assays per manufacturer's instructions. all samples were analyzed in duplicate and the average used for statistical analysis. missing values were set to the lower limit of detection.liver histopathology. formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded pieces of liver were sectioned at 5 microns and stained with hematoxylin and eosin (h&e). scoring of liver pathology used procedures adapted for mice as described (23) table s1 . primers for q-rt-pcr. primers used for q-rt-pcr analysis of interferonstimulated genes and 18s rrna, including gene, refseq id, forward primer sequence, reverse primer sequence.coronaviruses (covs) are enveloped, single positive-strand rna viruses belonging to the large subfamily coronavirinae, which can infect mammals and several other animals. 1 seven covs are known to cause human disease and can be divided into low and high pathogenic covs. 2 aggressively spread across the globe infecting more than 3 million confirmed cases. 5 three central variants of the current virus that differ in their amino acid sequence have been identified, namely a, b, and c. the ancestral type a and the mutated type c are found in significant proportions outside east asia, mainly in europe and in the united states. the b type which has mutated and spread is the most common type in east asia. 6 this article is protected by copyright. all rights reserved covid-19showsa complex profile with many different clinical presentations. similar to many other viral infections, the characteristics of currently infected patients and their clinical outcomes may represent the tip of the iceberg (figure 2 ). patients may be asymptomatic, experience mild, moderateor severe symptoms, presented with or without pneumonia. 8, 9 asymptomatic cases are common but to date there arescarceepidemiological surveys that provide a clear percentage of asymptomatic cases. 8, 10 approximately 20% of patients are severe cases that require hospitalization. 11 as of april 2020, the mortality rate is approximately 6% of confirmed cases worldwide,but can vary significantly depending on the quality of healthcare services and hospital capacity.the case fatality ratio of covid-19 was estimated substantially higher than recent influenza pandemics (h1n1 influenza in 2009). the mean time from onset to death was 18.8 days in china and 24.7 days out of china. case fatality ratio was determined as 3.6% (1·9-7·2). 12 although it is clear that asymptomatic cases exist, 8 the real percentage and how long they carry the virus is not known. this information can be obtained byscreening the population for virus-specific igm, igg and iga antibodies, which is expected soon in many centers and willbe an informative and decisive factor in controlling the pandemic as it is the main indicator of the development of population immunity.non-sars-covs account for 10-30% of upper respiratory tract infections in adults and present as a mild common cold disease in humans. 13 patients with common allergic diseases do not develop additional distinct symptoms or severe outcomes. allergic children show a mild course similar tonon-allergic children. 8 in a study of 1099 cases, 3 .8% presented with diarrhea and 5.0% with nausea and vomiting, and these patients were positive for sars-cov-2 rna in stool samples. 14 cases with a previously existing condition of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease or complicated with secondary bacterial pneumonia are more severe and may represent a complex immune pathogenesis. 8 patients with hypertension, diabetes, obesity, chronic lung disease, active smoking, and old age are more prone to severe disease. 15 the cytokine storm that takes place in severe cases is a major factor for high mortality, multiorgan failure, acute respiratory distress syndrome (ards), and disseminated intravascular coagulation.this article is protected by copyright. all rights reservedas it is now a worldwide spread zoonosis, it might be practically impossible to fully eradicate the sars-cov-2 virus. the containment of the pandemic is challenging as it is very difficult to identify virus carriers due to the nature of this disease.there can be presumably high number of asymptomatic virus carriers. in addition, recently infected individuals before the onset of symptoms, clinically recovered individuals who still carry the virus, and many potentially susceptible domestic and wild animals in regular contact with humans ( figure 3 ). the main question will be to learn how to live together with this virus as humans. there is a pressing need for an improved understanding of its immunopathology, much more than any previous pathogen, as covid-19has become the number one reason of morbidity and mortality in many countries. even though this pandemic will likely be brought under control in the coming months, unexpected outbreaks and the development of viral resistance to treatments or vaccines are highly possible due to mutations of the virus. coronavirusesare namedfortheir large spikes projecting from the envelope giving the virusa crown-like shapeof approximately 100 nm. the envelope consists of a lipid bilayer derived from the cell membrane of the host and four structural proteins, spike (s), envelope (e), membrane (m), and nucleoprotein (n), as well as a variable number of nonstructural proteins. sars-cov-2 recognizesangiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ace2) to attach to cells, particularly respiratory epithelial cellsof the host ( figure 1 ). 16, 17 . thisthis article is protected by copyright. all rights reserved process is dependent on the host serine proteasetmprss2, which cleaves viral spike protein at the s1/s2. s2 subunit allows for fusion of viral and cellular membranes. 18 interferons and impaired antiviral response, while increasing nf-kb activation, proinflammatory cytokine production and necroptosis. 22 all of these signaling events may lead to increased cellular death, hyperinflammation and cytokine storm.immunological memory in innate immune system is called "trained immunity" and may affect the spread and intensity of certain infections. during the covid-19 pandemics, it was hypothesized that general bcg vaccination policies adopted by different countries might have impacted the transmission patterns and/or covid-19 associated morbidity and mortality. 23 this article is protected by copyright. all rights reserved inflammation. 27 there is limited knowledge on the innate immune response, other than elevated levels of acute phase reactants andcytokine storm. most of the reports to date have focused on severe outcomes and adaptive immune responses.several innate immune signaling proteins are targeted by sars-cov-2 viral proteins.the interferon (ifn) pathway is targeted by nsp13, nsp15 and orf9b, and the nf-κb pathway is targeted by nsp13, orf9c. sars-cov-2 orf6 impede nup98-rae1, an interferon-inducible mrna nuclear export complex. orf3b and orf9c of sars-cov-2 are canonical for replication. as above mentioned, these data will shed light for the development of antiviral against to sars-cov-2. one of the antiviral drug is remdesivir,a nucleoside analog rna-dependent rna polymerase (rdrp) inhibitor for treatment of covid-19. 28, 29 human sars-cov-2 infection has a classical respiratory virus-like clinical course in more than 80% of patients with a mild to moderate and self-limiting course. it involves all of the so far known aspects of innate immune response and t and b cell immunity and anti-viral neutralizing antibody response (table 1, figure 4 ). interestingly, sars-cov-2 infects human t cell lines via a novel route through cd147 spike protein, present on the surface of t lymphocytes. 30 cd147 (also known as basigin or emmprin) is expressed in many tissues and cells and plays a role of cell proliferation, apoptosis, and tumor cell migration, metastasis and differentiation, especially under hypoxic conditions. a second isoform of cd147, called cd147 ig0-ig1-ig2, has also been characterized.dysregulation of cd147 has been associated with nearly every type of cancer and regulates matrix metalloproteinase (mmp) and vascular endothelial growth factor production or signals for tumor cell invasion and metastasis. 31 to block cd147 protein by meplazumab, preventing sars-cov-2 spike binding and subsequent infection may also have beneficial effects on covid-19 treatment. 32this article is protected by copyright. all rights reserved t and b cell epitopes.upon entry into the host, a virus attaches to and invades cells expressing its specific receptor in order to replicate. once the virus is inside the tissue cells, such as respiratory epithelial cells in the case of sars-cov-2, viral peptides are presented through class i major histocompatibility complex (mhc) proteins to cd8 + cytotoxic t cells. 33 this article is protected by copyright. all rights reserved m proteins, but lacked cross-reactivity to mers. 37 structural proteins of sars-cov-2 are genetically similar to sars-cov, but not to mers-cov. only 23% and 16% of known sars-cov t and b cell epitopes map identically to sars-cov-2, respectively. 38 clearly recognizable t and b cell epitopes represent a potential for eliciting a robust t cell or antibody response in sars-cov-2 or in response to its mutual vaccine. the observation that many b and t cell epitopes are highly conserved between sars-cov and sars-cov-2 is important. vaccination strategies designed to target the immune response toward these conserved epitope regions could generate immunity that is not only crossprotective across multiple coronaviruses, but also relatively resistant to ongoing virus evolution to protect against mutated future virus strains. 36lymphopenia associated with covid-19 is an important pathological finding and severity criteria, which serves as like a biomarker and a possible target for intervention to minimize the risk of severe disease. some infectious agents, such as human immunodeficiency virus (hiv) can cause lymphopenia in humans. although it is not a part of the natural course and expected type of immune response, it can be observed in influenza, tuberculosis, malaria, and sepsis. 39 the changes in peripheral lymphocyte counts and the transition of lymphocyte subgroups may suggest possiblemechanisms in the pathogenesis of sars-cov-2 infection. limited numbers of studies have focused on severe covid-19 cases, which have a relatively distinct profile of decreased memory t cells and cytotoxic cd8 + t cells. flow cytometric analyses showed that the percentage of cd4 + naïve t cells (cd3 + cd4 + cd45ra + ) increased and memory helper t cells (cd3 + cd4 + cd45ro + ) decreased in peripheral blood. 40 the percentage of cd3 + cd8 + cd28 + cytotoxic t cells also decreased in severe cases. however, there was no significant difference in activated total t cells (cd3 + hladr + ) and activated cytotoxic t cells (cd3 + cd8 + hla -dr + ). these severe patients also presented with lower levels of regulatory t (treg) cells (cd3 + cd4 + cd25 + cd127 low+ ). 40 in addition, the overactivation of t cells, manifested by an increase in t-helper (th)17 and the high cytotoxicity of cd8+ t cells, partially accounts for the severe immune injury. 41 in a similar study, the levels of peripheral lymphocyte subsets were evaluated in 60 patients with covid-19 by flowthis article is protected by copyright. all rights reserved cytometry during the course of disease. decrease in total lymphocytes, cd4 + t cell, cd8 + t cell, b cell, and natural killer (nk) cell counts were observed. the authors suggested that lymphopenia in cd8 + t cells could be an independent predictor for covid-19 severity and treatment efficacy. 42 in another earlier study analysing laboratory indexes, twelve patients with covid-19 showed a decreased percentage of lymphocytes and cd8 cell count. 43 in 286 patients with covid-19, severe cases had higher leukocyte, neutrophil and lower lymphocytes counts,with a high neutrophil-to-lymphocyte ratio, as well as lower percentages of monocytes, eosinophils and basophils.the mean t and nk cells counts were below normal levels, whilst b cells values were at the low end of the normal range. t cells were shown to be more affected by sars-cov-2 as the t cell count was nearly half the lower reference limit and tend to be more reduced in severe cases. 40 lymphocyte subset analysis revealed a decreased percentage of cd16 + cd56 + lymphocytes (4 out of 8 patients) and increased percentage of cd3 + (2 out of 8 patients),cd4 + (4 out of 8 patients) and cd8 + (1 out of 8 patients) lymphocytes. 44 in a study analyzing critically ill patients with sars-cov-2 pneumonia, 85% of the patients showed lymphopenia. 45 intensive care unit (icu) patients suffering with this infection had a median lymphocyte count of 800 cells/microl (normal values 1000-4000 cells per 1 microl). 45, 46 it was observed that lymphocytes in patients with covid-19 gradually decrease as the disease progresses. the older patients with lower counts of lymphocytes and platelets were at higher risk of severe disease and increased length of hospitalization. 47 a significant reduction in lymphocyte counts and theirrapid depletion may play a role in the pathogenesis and contribute to the progression to severe covid-19. accordingly, drugs targeting lymphocyte proliferation or preventing apoptosis, such as interleukin il-2, il-7 orprogrammed cell death protein 1 (pd1/pd-l1) inhibitors could help to prevent lymphopenia or restore lymphocyte counts in severe patients. 47 the mean values of the three main subsets of lymphocytes generally decreased in severe patients with covid-19, with t and nk cells were below normal values, while b cells were at the lower end of the normal range. 40 in view of the above results, lymphocyte percentage was suggested as a predictive biomarker for severity or recovery ( this article is protected by copyright. all rights reserved immunity, subsequently the cytokine storm and destructive tissue inflammation ( figure   7 ). cytotoxic t lymphocytes and nk cells in patients infected with sars-cov-2 are essential for mounting an appropriate anti-viral response. 67 the classical convention is that the t cell receptor of the cd8 cytotoxic t cells recognizes the viral peptides this article is protected by copyright. all rights reserved of nk and cd8+ t cells was restored in parallel to reduced expression of nkg2a in patients convalescing after therapy. 67 these data suggest that a breakdown of antiviral immunity may play a role in the pathogenesis and severity in covid-19. in cd8 + t cells, the frequency of the non-exhausted (pd-1 − ctla-4 − tigit − ) subset in the severe group was significantly lower. 70 it was suggested that the virus promotes an initial excessive activation in the beginning of the disease and is followed by subsequent exhaustion of cd8 + t cells.similar to many other viral diseases, an increase in virus-specific igm in the acute phase followed by an increase in virus-specific igg at later phases has been observed in the course of covid-19 ( figure 6 ). 8 this area is fully open to future research, however it is anticipated that infusion of the convalescent serum obtained fromalready recovered patients may prevent or limit sars-cov-2 infection. 71 it was reported that 10 seriously ill patients receiving convalescent serum therapy demonstrated improved lung function, oxygenation, reduced inflammation, and viral load. 72 there are more than one million recovered patients as of today, whose convalescent serum can be used for passive immunization for treatment or prevention. and complement proteins (c3 and c4) in patients with covid-19 were within normal range. 40 an increase was noted in igg or igm antibody levels against sars-cov-2 nucleoprotein (np) or receptor-binding domain (rbd) in most of the patients 10 days or later after onset of symptoms. an early increase in igm later followed by development of igg is a normal expected antibody response ( figure 6 ). however, specific igg levels can be found at already high levels in serum at the same time or earlier than igm against sars-cov-2. 34 in another study, sars-cov-2 virus-specific igg and igm reached tothis article is protected by copyright. all rights reserved peak levels 17-19 days and 20-22 days after symptom onset respectively. another interesting observation was that igg and igm titers in the covid-19 severe group is higher than the non-severe group. different types of seroconversion was reported, such as synchronous seroconversion of igg and igm, igm seroconversion earlier than that of igg and igm seroconversion later than that of igg. 3474 in a study analyzing specific igm and igg byenzyme immunoassay, more patients were found seropositive for igg than igm at day 0 and day 5 of hospital admission. a higher proportion of patients in that study also had earlier igg than igm seroconversion. 75 specific t-cell responses, which are able to protect against sars-cov infection in animal models. 83 the sensitivity and specificity of current commercial specific antibody kits should be evaluated in independent laboratories and who-confirmed tests should be made available. the iga-based enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (elisa) kit wasthis article is protected by copyright. all rights reserved more sensitive but less specific than the igg-based elisa kit. 84 however, new kits are continuously coming to market and it is possible to develop in-house kits depending on the quality of the coated sars-cov-2 antigen to plates. the evaluation of igm and igg isotype virus-specific antibody levels together with rt-pcr are shown in table 3 . homemade indirect elisa for detecting igm, iga and igg antibodies against sars-cov-2 using purified recombinant nucleocapsid (np) proteins as coating antigens have been studied. the development time for specific antibodies have significantly varied from method to method and in this studyit was 5 days(range 3 to 6 days) for specific igm and iga, whereas 14 days (range 10 to 18 days) for specific igg after the onset of symptoms ( figure 6 ). 85acute phase reactants are potential diagnostic markers and predictors of disease outcome in human and animals. 86 the overall evaluation of acute phase reactants in covid-19 correlates high levels to increased disease severity and death (table 4 ). in 140 hospitalized covid-19 patients, significantly higher levels of d-dimer, crp and procalcitonin (pct) were associated with severe disease compared to non-severe disease. non-survivors had higher levels of neutrophils, d-dimer, blood urea nitrogen, and creatinine compared to recovered patients. 15 anticoagulation therapy is recommended for covid-19 patients, when the d-this article is protected by copyright. all rights reserved dimer value is 4 times higher than the normal upper limit, except for patients with anticoagulant contraindications. 45 (table 4 ). further research, consensus and standard approach is needed to identify which acute phase reactants are essential for early diagnosis, prediction and follow up of patients. 95although most of the covid-19 patients recover with mild and moderate disease in one week,some develop to severe pneumonia in the second week followed by cytokine storm, ards, multiorgan failure and disseminated intravascular coagulation (dic) within the 3rd week of the disease (figure 8 ).the cytokine storm is a complex network of severe molecular events unified by a clinical phenotype of systemic inflammation, multi-organ failure, hyper-ferritinemia.it is consistently linked with severity and fatal disease outcome.this article is protected by copyright. all rights reserved including b cells, t cells, nk cells, macrophages, dendritic cells, neutrophils, monocytes, and resident tissue cells, such as epithelial and endothelial cells, which release high amounts of pro-inflammatory cytokines. 96 any cells that blood stream or the virus itself and degraded viral products can reach in the body can contribute to cytokine storm.cytokine storm can also occur in a number of infectious and non-infectious diseases, such as bacterial sepsis, ebola and other hemorrhagic fevers, influenza, blunt trauma and as a side effect of immune stimulatory drugs. [97] [98] [99] [100] [101] [102] although many cells are involved as mentioned above, multiple proinflammatory cytokines and inflammasome activation appear to play a major role in its pathogenesis. il-10 appears to control tissue damage in experimental models. 103 a proinflammatory eicosanoid storm may also accompany the cytokine storm. 104 the balance of the pro-anti-inflammatory and proresolving lipid mediator response during viral infection is often decisive over the clinical outcome. 105 among the numerous molecules that increase in serum in cytokine storm, complements, ifn-, il-1β, il-6, il-12, and il-17, and tumor necrosis factor-α (tnf-α) are of crucial importance. 106 this article is protected by copyright. all rights reservedit has been previously reported that the ebola virus tim-1 protein can induce a cytokine storm 100 . sars-cov activates a considerable level of pro-inflammatory cytokines in vitro, such as tnf-α, il-6 and il-12 release via the tlr7 and tlr8, almost 2-fold higher than a strong tlr7/8 stimulating ssrna40. 108 upon influenza infection, high levels of complement c3 and c5, including fragments c3a and c5a, are produced. h5n1replicates in the lower respiratory tract leading to complement activation and c5a is responsible for the acute lung injury. 109 similar to sars and mers, cytokine storm is a common feature of severe covid-19cases and a major reason for ards and multiorgan failure. several levels of evidence suggest that mortality in covid-19 is due to thevirus-activated "cytokine storm syndrome". 110 ards is an acute inflammatory lung injury leading to severe sars manifesting as acute hypoxemic respiratory failure with bilateral alveolar opacities on chest radiographythis article is protected by copyright. all rights reserved and decreased lung compliance (figure 9 ). 112 fifteen out of 75 patients (20%) have developed ards in 3 weeks following sars infection 113 . in most cases, the course of covid-19 is mild, but life-threatening ards develops in some critically ill patients within 8-9 days after onset of the disease. 45, 46 the reported incidence of ards and critical illness requiring icu admissionsvaries widely across multiple studies. 9, 45, 46, [114] [115] [116] [117] ards is more common in older people, those with comorbidities, including hypertension, diabetes, coronary artery disease, bronchitis, ischemic disease of the central nervous system, andparkinson's disease. 118 the most common complications frequently observed in patients who died of covid-19 were sepsis (100%) followed by respiratory failure (98%), ards (93%), septic shock (70%), acute cardiac injury (59%), heart failure (52%), coagulopathy (50%), secondary infection (50%), and acute kidney injury (50%). 91 autopsy features of covid-19 are very similar to sars and mers findings. 126, 127 the macroscopic features of covid-19 are likely to be observed in the chest and may include pleurisy, pericarditis, lung consolidation, and pulmonary oedema. a secondary bacterial infection may be superimposed on the viral infection that can lead to purulent inflammation. 128 early histopathological features were reported in two patients who underwent surgicalthis article is protected by copyright. all rights reserved resections for lung adenocarcinoma but were later found to be sars-cov-2 positive at the time of the operation. these patients were asymptomatic with respect to covid-19 at the time of the operation. non-specific findings included oedema, pneumocyte hyperplasia, focal inflammation, and multinucleated giant cell formation, while no hyaline membranes were seen. these findings may reflect early changes of acute lung injury in the infection. 129 histopathological findings were noted in a 50-year-old man who died from severe covid-19 infection. the microscopic findings included diffuse alveolar damage with exudates. 41 this article is protected by copyright. all rights reserved sars-cov-2 and its disease covid-19 are associated with significant morbidity and mortality globally, probably becomingone of the biggest health and economic burden of the last 100 years. covid-19 became a major fights of humansin modern times, emphasizing the importance and need of a global strategy and solidarity among nations.as a zoonotic disease that has already spread globally to several millions of humans and probably animals, it will be practically impossible to eradicate covid- 19 we have to learn how to live together with the virus and disease.the this article is protected by copyright. all rights reserved cd8 + t cells severe lymphopenia (< 5%) is observed in cd8 + t cells and can be a predictor of severe disease.normal anti-viral immunity requires a cd4 and cd8th1 response. severe disease shows a systemic severe inflammatory response with a cytokine storm.cytokine storm response is mainly th1 and inflammatory. it can also have a major role in inflammasome activation.decreased circulating eosinophil numbers in 50 to 80% of the hospitalized patients.in the acute phase, virus-specific igm increases followed by virus specific igg during convalescence.innate and adaptive cytokines are released in high amounts linked to severe disease.high in severe cases. initially high values are predictive of severe disease. this article is protected by copyright. all rights reserved accepted article table 4 .changes in acute phase reactants and serum biochemistry in covid-19this article is protected by copyright. all rights reserved this article is protected by copyright. all rights reserved remain sars-cov-2 positive, susceptible domestic and wild animals. all of these have specific immunological mechanisms that are discussed in this review. this article is protected by copyright. all rights reserved antibodies and rapid viral clearance, high dose exposure may cause severe disease and delayed viral clearance. this may be due to lymphopenia leading to inefficient t and b cell immunity, subsequently the cytokine storm and destructive tissue inflammation. novel coronavirus disease, now known as covid-19, originated as viral pneumonia of unknown origin in the small province of wuhan, china during december 2019. the causative agent was named as severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2) by the international virus classification commission. there have been two coronavirus mediated epidemic outbreak in the past two decades: severe acute respiratory syndrome (sars) in 2002 and middle east respiratory syndrome (mers) in 2012. within three months, the spread of covid-19 to various countries of the world causing rapid rise in morbidity and mortality compelled the world health organisation (who) to declare it a pandemic on march 11, 2020. as of may 27, 2020, around 54,88,825 diagnosed cases of covid-19 with 3,49,095 deaths have been reported (source: who covid-19 situation report 128) [1] . in india, the total number of confirmed cases are 151,767 with 4337 deaths till date [2] .during the last 4 months, several studies on covid-19 have reported the clinical features, laboratory findings and diagnostic evaluation of individuals suffering from this disease. the mortality rate varies among various countries and depends on the patient clinical profile and presence of other comorbidities. most of the patients with covid-19 suffer a mild course of disease manifesting clinical features of a viral pneumonia and gradually recover with supportive treatment. but a proportion of them deteriorate to the severe form characterised by loss of respiratory function progressing to adult respiratory distress syndrome with occasional multiorgan failure [3] . a vaccine to treat this disease is still under development and till then the only way to slow down the disease spread is by restricting the infectivity, which is being tried by initiating social distancing and lockdown measures. thus, in the absence of any absolute cure, it becomes essential to delineate the molecular mechanisms of this virus. it is now known, like sars and mers, there is a considerable amount of immune dysregulation which may aid in the understanding of the pathophysiology of this disease. the aim of this review is to summarize the inflammatory changes and immune dysregulation to outline the possible underlying immunological mechanisms of what is sars-cov-2international virus classification commission has replaced the earlier name of novel coronavirus 2019 (ncov-19) by sars like coronavirus 2 or simply sars-cov-2. it is a member of the coronaviridae family. these viruses are enveloped positive sense single strand rna viruses (genome size 36-42 kb, diameter: 60-140 nm) having surface projections like a crown under the electron microscope. this crown like appearance is the basis behind the name, coronavirus. so far, four different genera of coronaviruses have been identified (a, b, c, d), among which two members of the a-genera (229e and nl63) and two of the b-genera (hku1 and oc43) are known to cause mild respiratory illnesses in humans. in the past 20 years, two members of the b-genera (sars-cov and mers-cov) have been responsible for the epidemic outbreaks of sars and mers respectively. when people started being admitted in hospitals of wuhan, china with features of fever, fatigue and ards resembling pneumonia of unknown origin during december 2019, the viral genome sequencing of five such patients revealed the identity of a previously unknown bgenera cov. this novel coronavirus had 88% sequence similarity with two bat-derived sars-cov like coronaviruses, bat-sl-covzc45 and bat-sl-covzxc21, and approximately 50% similarity with mers-cov [4] .like typical covs, there are at least ten open reading frames (orfs) in the genome of sars-cov-2. orf1a/b, the first orf is about 75% of total viral rna and is translated into two large polyproteins. these polyproteins are processed into a host of non-structural proteins (nsp's) that constitutes the viral replicase transcriptase complex. these nsp's help in viral replication and transcription by rearranging the membranes originating from the rough endoplasmic reticulum into membranous vesicles. the remaining orfs present in the other 25% genome encodes for spike (s), envelope (e), nucleocapsid (n) and membrane (m) proteins; the four main structural proteins of the virus [5, 6] . they also encode for various accessory proteins that do not play a role in viral replication. their functions have not been identified so far.it has been established that the sars-cov-2 needs the angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ace2) receptor, primarily located in lung and gastrointestinal epithelia, to gain entry inside cells. the strength of binding by the receptor binding motif or the s protein is a significant predictor of the pathogenesis of infection [7] . earlier, the sars-cov, which most likely originated in bats, had a similar requirement of ace2 receptors, and gradually adapted to ace2 receptors of other species and eventually infected humans. the changes in the s protein in sars-cov-2 in comparison to sars-cov and other marine and bat forms of coronaviruses clearly indicate several synonymous mutations and non-synonymous substitutions in the related gene [8] . all these genomic changes have rendered the sars-cov-2 capable for the attachment to human cells. the other member, mers-cov can bind to a functional receptor dipeptidyl peptidase 4 (dpp4) of multiple species including humans.a lot of studies on the clinical and laboratory characteristics of covid-19 have been published in the last four months mostly on chinese population. recently, studies based on populations from other countries like singapore, united states, european countries are also being reported. the major clinical manifestations of patients with covid-19 includes fever, dry cough, sore throat, muscle pain and fatigue which in some cases may progress to severe symptoms like acute respiratory distress syndrome requiring critical care in the form of intensive care unit (icu) admission and mechanical ventilation.from the meta-analysis of 19 different studies, the most common clinical manifestations among the 656 covid-19 patients were fever, cough, and dyspnoea. among all the patients, around 32.8% developed ards, 20.3% patients required critical care, and 6.2% developed shock. fatal outcomes were observed in 13.9% patients. old age ([ 60 years) was significantly associated with the severity of the disease [9] . these findings were supported by another meta-analysis which included eight studies comprising of 46,248 infected patients. further, hypertension, diseases of respiratory and cardiovascular system were significant risk factors for severity of covid-19 [10] .smoking history and diabetes were also added to the list of comorbidities following the meta-analysis of emami et al., in which the data of 76,993 patients were systematically analysed [11] . among the routine laboratory parameters, alanine transaminase (alt), lactate dehydrogenase (ldh), d-dimer, c-reactive protein, ferritin were significantly elevated in severe cases of covid-19 in comparison to non-severe cases. a significantly lower absolute number of lymphocytes, cd4 ? t and cd8 ? t cells along with downregulation of ifn-c expression in severe cases was also observed [12] . in another pre-print, xiang et al. reported serum urea, creatinine and cystatin c may be potential biomarkers in severity of covid-19 [13] . huang et al. reported higher plasma levels of interleukins (il-2, il-7, il-10) and other inflammatory markers (gscf, ip10, mcp1, mip1a and tnf-a) in covid-19 patients requiring icu care versus non-icu patients [14] .it is now known that an underlying cytokine storm syndrome and alteration of expression of immune cells may be responsible for the disease progression from mild to severe form. similar findings were observed in sars-cov and mers-cov infection. thus, in the present state, when the pathogenic mechanisms of sars-cov-2 is yet to be elucidated, the knowledge regarding the changes in cytokines and other immune dysregulation reported in various population studies can help in identifying key molecular predictors that can be further explored for a deeper understanding of the molecular pathogenesis of covid-19.cytokines and chemokines are critical mediators of the immune system and play a pivotal role in anti-viral immunity. studies have demonstrated that the primary cause of ards and multi-organ failure in covid-19 to be associated with cytokine storm [15] . the inflammatory response plays a major role in covid-19 pathogenesis, while cytokine storm increases the severity of the disease. cytokine storm (cs) is a phenomenon of excessive inflammatory reaction mediated by the rapid production of large amounts of cytokines in response to infection [16] . in covid-19, there is an initial delay in cytokine and chemokine secretion by innate immune cells with subsequent surge in pro-inflammatory cytokines and chemokines (il-6, tnf-a, il-8, mcp-1, il-1 b, ccl2, ccl5, and ifns) by the activated macrophages and other recruited lymphocytes. these cytokines induce the recruitment and activation of adaptive immune cells like t cells, neutrophils and nk cells along with further production of proinflammatory cytokines, thereby causing a cytokine storm and tissue damage.most studies have drawn a parallel between the immune dysregulation due to covid-19 and the phenomena seen in sars-cov and mers-cov [17] . at the early stage of sars-cov and mers cov disease, there is a delayed release of ifn-1 and ifn-a/b, primarily by dendritic cells, macrophages, and respiratory epithelial cells which is followed by increasing levels of pro-inflammatory cytokines as the disease progresses [18] . the rapid surge in pro-inflammatory cytokines leads to inflammatory infiltration of lung tissue by neutrophils and monocytes and cause lung injury. moreover, increased levels of pro-inflammatory cytokines stimulate t cell apoptosis and delay viral clearance [19] . enhanced viral replication and heightened proinflammatory response injure the lung epithelial lining, causing deterioration of the alveolar cellular barriers. the endothelial cells are also damaged, leading to changes in the microvasculature. both of these injuries result in tissue hypoxia and acute respiratory distress syndrome (ards) [20, 21] . since the genome of the sars-cov-2 virus is related to sars-cov and mers-cov, similar assumptions can be expected about the role of the host immune system towards this virus. uncontrolled viral replication results in delayed anti-viral ifn response, which in turn mounts an influx of neutrophils and macrophages at the site of injury with a concomitant surge of pro-inflammatory cytokines, i.e., cytokine storm and thus leading to inflammatory injury to the respiratory system [22] .the cytokines elevated in the serum of covid-19 patients are il-1b, il-2, il-7, il-8, il-9, il-10, il-17, g-csf, gm-csf, ifn-c, tnf-a, ip10, mcp1, mip1a, and mip1b. in particular, il-6, il-1, and tnf-a, i.e., cytokines secreted by macrophages, were found to be significantly higher in severe cases when compared to nonsevere cases [23] (table 1) .il-6 is a potent pro-inflammatory cytokine that plays a primary role in cytokine storm and, therefore, needs special attention in covid-19. it is a multifunctional cytokine involved in the formation of follicular helper t cells, differentiation of th17 cell subsets, and generation of plasma cells. it is also known to inhibit ifn-c and thereby suppress cd8 ? cytotoxic t cells [24] . il-6 induces t cell exhaustion as indicated by markers such as pd-1 and tim-3. thus, t cell-mediated immune response might be suppressed during cytokine storm by il-6 [25] . increased il-6 levels and its positive correlation with disease severity is suggestive of its role in disease progression [25] [26] [27] [28] [29] [30] [31] [32] . recently, a study from germany reported a 22-fold increased risk of respiratory failure with median time to mechanical ventilation of 1.5 days in cases with il-6 levels [ 80 pg/ml [33] . higher circulating levels of il-6 were also reported even 24-h before death [34, 35] . therefore, il-6, either as a single parameter or in association with other parameters, could be used for early identification of patients at risk for respiratory failure.tnf-a, a pro-inflammatory cytokine acting via its receptor tnfr1, may lead to apoptosis of aged t cells that express high tnfr1 [36] . therefore, it is also known as a cd8 ? t cells tend to be an independent predictor for covid-19 severity and treatment efficiency ind j clin biochem ind j clin biochem pro-apoptotic cytokine. few studies on covid-19 patients reported a negative correlation of tnf-a with t cell count [12, 23, 37] . tnf-a levels were significantly higher in elderly patients ([ 60 years) along with reduced t cell counts and increased levels of t cell exhaustion markers (pd1 and tim-3). this finding speculates the role of tnfa as a negative regulator of t cell survival or proliferation [25] . however, a few studies reported no significant difference in tnf-a levels in covid-19 patients [38, 39] . il-1b and its family (il-18, il-33) are significant players in ards and are known to increase the recruitment of immune cells and subsequent cytokine production [40] . il-1 receptor signalling is involved in inflammatory damage to the respiratory epithelium. in a study, the daily transcriptomic profiling of three covid-19 patients revealed il-1 to show significant expression changes prior to deterioration of respiratory function. all the other proinflammatory cytokines were induced only after appearance of symptoms of respiratory dysfunction. this brief report hints at the plausible role of the il-1 pathway in the initial progression of covid-19 related lung immunopathology [41] . il-1ß and tnf-a are cytokines that are required for the development of th17 cells and help in th17 mediated immune response and increased vascular permeability [40] . the cytokines of the th17 pathway like il-17 and gm-csf increase in covid-19 patients [42] . also, increased expression of th17 cells in peripheral blood of covid-19 patients suggests a role for th17 cells in the cytokine storm in covid-19, as also reported in the patients of sars and mers [43] .significantly elevated levels of il-2, il-7, il-17, il-10, mcp-1, mip-1a, and tnf-a were reported in severely ill patients in comparison to non-severely ill patients, suggestive of diverse cytokine profile in the two groups and involvement of cytokine storm in disease progression and severity [23] . an increased concentration of il-1ß, ip-10, ifn-c, and mcp-1 leads to the activation of th1 cell response, which further aggravates the cytokine storm. a similar rise in pro-inflammatory cytokines occurred in sars-cov and mers-cov infection [44, 45] . contrary to sars, an increase in anti-inflammatory cytokines of th2 cells (il-4 and il-10) were also seen in sars-cov-2 patients [46] . the implications of this finding are still yet to be clarified.high serum cytokine levels in sars-cov-2 patients correlated with decreased t cell count in the peripheral blood suggesting a plausible role in disease progression. diao et al. reviewed total t cell count, and il-2, il-4, il-6, il-10, tnf-a, and ifn-c in 522 covid-19 patients admitted to two different hospitals in china and 40 healthy individuals and reported significantly higher levels of il-6, il-10, and tnf-a. correlation analysis revealed a negative correlation between total cell count, cd4 ? , and cd8 ? cells and these interleukins. further, in the ten follow up patients, il-6, il-10, tnf-a, and ifn-c levels were significantly decreased in the recovery period than during the illness. at the same time, the t cell counts recovered to normal levels, thereby suggesting that the decline in t cell is again associated with the surge of inflammatory cytokines in covid-19 patients [25] . a similar negative correlation between t cell counts and interleukins was also reported in other studies [27, 37] . on the contrary wan et al., who observed the associations of lymphocyte subsets, cytokines with disease evolution in 123 chinese covid-19 patients (102 mild and 21 severe), reported significantly different cd4 ? t, cd8 ? t, il-6, il-10 and pii between the two groups. in the mild group, significant positive correlations were observed between cd4 ? t and cd8 ? t, and between il-6 and il-10. patients of mild group and with il-6 within reference range had higher survival rates. but there was no correlation between cell count and interleukins [26] .a recent study attempted to immunophenotype the antiviral response in covid-19 patients by single-cell transcriptome sequencing, using pbmcs of 4 patients (male young, male elderly, female young, female elderly), collected pre-icu, during icu and post icu. there was a significant increase in monocytes and plasmacytoid dendritic cell populations in the icu samples when compared to pre and post icu samples [47] . therefore, there is evidence of delayed or dampened type 1 interferon response in the initial stages of the infection with subsequent increase with active viral replication, a phenomenon also to be a part of sars-cov pathogenesis [19, 22] a reported gene signature in the icu samples showed elevated expression of interferon-stimulated genes (isgs) like ifitm1 when compared to pre and post icu samples, suggestive of a critical viral load regulated type 1 interferon response (type-1 ifn response) in the disease progression and onset of ards [47] .covid-19 induced ards and mortality may be mediated by many factors. alteration of both innate and adaptive components of the immune system in terms of dampened t cell response, neutrophilia, and delayed type-1 ifn response plays a significant role. additionally, increased expression of granulysin and perforin, increase in macrophage activated cytokines like il-1ß, il-6, and tnfa leading to cytokine storm and increased t cell exhaustion might further contribute to the molecular pathogenesis. approximately 15% of patients suffering from covid-19 progress to critically ill severe cases with the clinical symptoms of respiratory failure requiring ventilator support. a cytokine storm accompanies the transition from mild to severe form of the disease in covid-19 patients.an efficient synergy between innate and adaptive lineages of immune system is a preliminary requirement for effective disposal of invading pathogens. cells of innate immunity (monocyte, macrophage, granulocytes, and dendritic cells) are the first to act whenever there is an invasion by foreign molecules. the main function of innate immunity includes opsonization and direct clearance by complement activation in addition to elimination via phagocytosis. however, another important function is also to process and appropriately present the invading pathogen in order to activate the cells of adaptive immune system. responses from adaptive immune cells not only aim to eradicate the pathogen but also reserves a memory of it for future protection. in addition, adaptive immunity also plays a crucial role in regulating the extent of immune response to prevent overstimulation and host injury. our understanding of sars and mers, though still limited, have shown us that disease pathogenesis included host immune dysregulation along with direct damage caused by the viruses [22] understanding the dysregulation of innate and adaptive immunity cell subsets may thus provide substantial insight into the immunopathogenesis of sars-cov-2.while the major mode of transmission of sars-cov-2 is primarily aerosolized droplets, there is a possibility that a faeco-oral route also exists [48] . initial symptoms of the disease include fever, dry cough and rarely dyspnoea, body ache, headache and diarrhoea. viral load is said to reach its peak 10 days post onset of symptom [49] . studies assessing the clinical features of covid-19 patients have reported that the mean time for admission after onset of symptoms was 7 days (iqr 4-8) while ards typically set in on 9 th day (iqr 8-14) (27%). admission in intensive care unit and/or requirement of mechanical ventilation was seen in 16% cases with a mean time of 10.5 days (iqr 8-17) [3] . sars-cov-2 is known to infect cells via the surface receptors ace2 and tmprss2 [50] . the cells are then known to undergo viral replication induced pyroptosis leading to release of il-1b and damage associated molecular patterns (damps) and pathogen associated molecular patterns (pamps) such as atp, viral nucleic acid and asc oligomers. these molecules induce the generation of pro-inflammatory cytokines and chemokines such as il-6, il-10, macrophage chemoattractant protein-1 (mcp-1), macrophage inflammatory protein-1a (mip-1a), macrophage inflammatory protein-1b (mip-1b), from the adjacent epithelial cells and alveolar macrophages. the resultant microenvironment therefore attracts cells of both innate and adaptive immunity and pro-inflammatory cascade sets in [23, 45] . in the case of mild form of the disease the infected cells and viral particles are rapidly cleared away by macrophages or neutralized by antibodies without any resulting damage to the airways from the host response. however, in some cases the disease progression has been seen to take a turn for the worse and is characterized by excessive cellular infiltration and a systemic cytokine storm [23, 51] . clinically, this can be diagnosed as ards which is known to be the major cause of fatality in severe covid-19 cases [35] . while age and co-morbidities have been identified to be associated with covid-19 induced severe respiratory distress syndrome, underlying mechanisms responsible for the cytokine storm and immune dysregulation in uncontrolled disease are yet to be identified. il-2, il-7, il-10, g-csf, ip10, mcp1, mip1a, and tnfa were also higher in patients requiring icu that non-icu patients, suggesting a possible different cytokine profile in severe and mild cases [23] .lung macrophages are therefore among the primary players in both effective host immunity against sars-cov-2 and in uncontrolled immunopathology of covid-19. studies which investigated the monocyte, macrophage lineage in covid-19 patients have concluded that these cell lineages contribute to the cytokine storm by secretion of mcp-1, ip-10 and mip-1a [49] . single cell rna-sequencing based characterization of broncho alveolar lavage fluid (balf) from three severely ill, three mild covid-19 patients and eight healthy controls have revealed that a monocyte derived fcn-1 ? macrophages were the predominant macrophage in the balf [52] . these macrophages are known to be highly inflammatory and capable of producing large amounts of inflammatory cytokines and are also known to be involved in cytokine storm [52] . analysis of peripheral blood mononuclear cell (pbmc) subsets in covid-19 patients have also shown an elevated level of cd14 ? and cd16 ? monocyte subset when compared to healthy controls. the level of this highly inflammatory monocyte subset was also seen to be higher in covid-19 cases requiring intensive care [51] . these monocytes also showed higher expression of il-6 and gm-csf, thus suggesting a pivotal role in the advent of cytokine storm [51] . hla-dr expression on cd14 ? monocytes of covid-19 patients were found to be significantly low among severe cases when compared to mild cases, the levels of which improved on treatment with il-6 inhibitor (toclizumab) [53] . higher levels of ccl-2 (monocyte chemotactic factor) was also seen in blood of covid-19 patients along with increased transcription of its receptor ccr-2 [54] .early studies from wuhan, china reported normal total leukocyte count with an imbalance between neutrophil and lymphocyte proportions in covid-19 cases [26, 29, 55] . wu et al. studied the immune profile of 201 covid-19 cases and reported significantly high neutrophil counts. there was also a significant reduction in total lymphocyte count resulting in skewed neutrophil to lymphocyte ratio (nlr) [29] . neutrophilia and lymphocytopenia were common findings presented by several authors and these findings were more significant among severe cases when compared to mild cases or healthy controls [23, 27, 28, 34, 56] . pro-inflammatory cytokines and chemokines (il-6, tnf, mcp-1) released in response to local inflammation of infected lung epithelial cells and macrophages attract leukocytes and macrophages but not neutrophils to the site of inflammation. this could explain the observed peripheral lymphopenia and neutrophilia. proportion of other granulocytes such as monocytes, basophils and eosinophils were observed to be low or within normal limits [55, 57, 58] .cells of the adaptive immune system are activated in response to antigen presentation and cytokine released by macrophages and dendritic cells on viral invasion. a moderate decrease in b and nk cells with a significant decrease in total t cell count have been observed in covid-19 cases [26, 28, 37, 51, 55, [59] [60] [61] (table 2) . a retrospective study involving 452 covid-19 patients reported significantly lower levels of t cells, b cells, nk cells and cd4 ? t helper cell subset showed the most significant reduction in severe cases when compared mild cases. immuno-suppressive treg cells were also reported to be significantly lower among the cases showing severe disease progression. the authors have thus reported that the t lymphocyte subset might be especially vulnerable to dysregulation in covid-19 [55] . higher viral load was also reported to be associated with severe disease spectrum [62] . another study on 16 covid-19 patients attempted to differentiate between severe and mild cases with respect to activation, function and exhaustion of cd4 ? and cd8 ? t cells along with other lymphocyte populations in peripheral blood of 10 mild and 6 severe cases. the authors reported significant decrease in function of cd4 ? t, increased activation of cd8 ? t cells which subsequently might lead to exhaustion of cd8 ? and reduced cellular immune response to covid-19 [63] . existing t cells were found to be in hyperactivated state as indicated by cd69, cd38 and cd44 expression in addition to ox40 and 41bb expression by cd4 ? and cd8 ? t cells, respectively [51] . ox40 and 41bb are tumor necrosis factor receptors (tnfr) implicated in t cell mediated cytokine production and stimulation of other t cells. in addition to functional t cell markers, exhaustion markers i.e. tim-3 and pd-1 co-expression were also found to be significantly expressed in severe cases [25, 63, 64] . in contrary to adult cases, a study on 8 paediatric patients showed an increase in cd4 ? and cd8 ? cells with a decrease in nk cells [65] . in general, paediatric patients showed better prognosis than adult patients, which could be due to lower concentration of memory t cells to mount a cytotoxic response potent enough to cause tissue damage.th follicular cells (tfh) are required for activation differentiation of b cells and are thus important for antibody mediated viral clearance. tfh count was reported to be elevated in mild and recovering covid-19 patients when compared to healthy controls [66, 67] . a case study on a patient with non-severe covid-19 revealed an increase in circulating tfh at the same time of viral load decreasing to below lower limit of detection (ct value = 45). recruitment to peripheral circulation of immune cells including tfh seemed to herald the resolution of symptoms in this case [66] . interestingly, authors of another article which is in pre-print stage, have reported increased cd8 ? t cell exhaustion (assessed by expression of pd-1) and increased tfh cells in the peripheral blood of 38 non-severe covid-19 patients compared to healthy controls [67] .among the cytokines seen to be elevated in covid-19, some are th17 pathway specific such as il-17, il-1b, tnfa and gm-csf [42] . these findings have prompted various authors to investigate the role of th17 in sars-cov-2 induced severe covid-19 cases. a case study on a patient with severe covid-19 reported an elevated count of th17 cells, activated cd8 ? and cd4 ? t cells [68] . another study reported a decrease in th17 subset, as indicated by low il-17 secretion [53] . thus, further studies are required to delineate the role of th17 specific response in covid-19.a recent review suggested that major host immune dysregulations include dampened type-1 ifn response, viral load induced hyperinflammation and recruitment of proinflammatory cells like neutrophils and monocytes [22] . type-1 ifn response is crucial for induction of effective adaptive response and controlling viral replication. a study, conducted for immunophenotyping the antiviral response in covid-19 patients, used pbmcs of 4 patients (male young, male elderly, female young, female elderly), collected pre-icu, during icu and post icu. as per the finding by single cell transcriptome sequencing, the authors have reported a significant increase in monocytes and plasmacytoid dendritic cell (pdc) populations in the icu samples [53] . the authors have also reported a gene signature in the icu samples which showed elevated expression of ddx58, irf8, tlr7 and interferon stimulated genes (isgs) like ifitm1, when compared to per and post icu samples. there is therefore evidence of delayed or dampened type-1 ifn response in the initial stages of the infection with subsequent increase with active viral replication, a phenomenon also reported to be part of the pathogenesis of sars-cov [22, 43] . in a subsequent study involving profiling of immune cells, whole blood transcriptome and cytokine levels in 50 covid-19 patients of varying severity authors reported a significant impaired type-1 ifn response in the critical patients. this impaired type-1 ifn response characterized by reduced levels of ifn-a and ifn-ß along with high il-6 and tnf-a levels. the study also revealed a significant downregulation of 6 isgs which specify type-1 ifn response in the severe covid-19 cases. pdc population was also reduced in patients in comparison to healthy controls [54] .in the present scenario where every other day newer and broader clinical aspects of covid-19 are being searched, focus also needs to be diverted towards one important issue i.e. why there is so much diversity in the response elicited towards the same disease by different individuals. sars cov-2 is a novel corona virus, despite this fact some patients developed a wide range of symptoms with severe abnormalities, on the other hand some are completely asymptomatic.morbidity and mortality from diseases have a direct link with an individuals' response to the disease [69] . host genetic variation plays an important role in the varied immune response which in turn results in different disease outcome between individuals. polymeric genes of host and their regulatory network influence immune responses to foreign compounds. there is correlation between underlying genetic traits and phenotypes displayed [70] . the host genetic variation impacts virus induced immune responses by individuals [71] .variability across human genes involved in antigen presentation to t lymphocytes is the major factor determining susceptibility or resistance to a wide range of infections. human leukocyte antigen (hla), major histocompatibility complex (mhc) are molecules shown to regulate varied level of viral susceptibility and differential response. the mhc gene family is comprised of 3 main subfamilies class i, ii and iii genes located in proximity on chromosome 6. hla-a,b,c belonging to mhc class-i and hla-dp, dm, do, dq, and dr belonging to mhc class ii mediate antigen presentation to t cells. hla of class i and ii reside on cell membranes of all nucleated cells and antigen presenting cells, respectively. mhc-i and ii both have extracellular domains that form the peptide binding groove where antigenic peptide derived from different sources bind. the bound antigens based on their source intracellular (endogenous) or extracellular (exogenous) are presented either to cd8 ? or to cd4 ? cells by mhc-i or mhc-ii, respectively [72] .hla has already been studied as a major component of immune system responsible for varied immune response to pathogens. hla genotype plays an important role in differential regulation and activation of t cells as well as disease transmission and duration [73] . studies reported an increased severity towards the closely related sars-cov diseases in individuals with hla-b*46:01 genotype.similarly, response to disease caused by other unrelated viruses such as human immunodeficiency virus 1 (hiv-1), dengue virus is also linked with respective hla genotype of the host. in case of hiv, hla-a*02:05 reduces the risk of seroconversion [74] , while in dengue hla alleles: hla-a*0207, hla-b*51 were associated with susceptibility towards severe secondary disease among native thais [75] .studies have also investigated human genotype to determine putative hla alleles and their affinity towards novel coronavirus sars-cov-2. nguyen et al. performed an in-silico analysis to check the binding affinity of viral peptide-mhc class i across 145 different hla types. of the total alleles studied hla-a*02:02, b*15:03, c*12:03 were the most efficient conserved peptide presenters while hla-a*25:01, b*46:01, c*01:02 were shown to have very fewer binding peptides for sars-cov-2. in addition, there were 56 other different hla alleles in humans which did not show any appreciable binding affinity. all the three major class i genes exhibit similarity in peptide presentation across entire virus (sars-cov-2) proteome and are independent of stage (early or late) of peptide and its production time [73] . hla-b*46:01 allele was found to have the least predicted binding sites for sars-cov-2 and therefore individuals with this allele have less active immune response and thus more vulnerable to infection, similar findings were reported in case of sars-cov infections.a difference in hla haplotype may influence the individuals' response to sars-cov-2 infection and certain haplotypes may be associated with increased disease severity, thus, hla genotyping may assist in identifying individuals at risk. therefore, hla testing is highly recommended along with covid-19 testing to enhance the sensitivity and to predict susceptibility to disease severity. it is a rapid and reliable method that will assist in planning future vaccination strategy.human infections with coronavirus such as sars and mers have occurred in the past, however, the present infection with sars-cov-2 has evolved to become a pandemic, in contrast to the rest. sars-cov-2 has shown to have similarities with its predecessors i.e. sars-cov and mers-cov in terms of genome sequence, receptor affinity, pathogenesis and disease presentation. however, our knowledge of mers or sars has not been enough to curb current covid-19 pandemic, hence mandating the need to expand our knowledge on sars-cov-2. only a small proportion of the infected patients progress to severe stage needing critical care. thus, in absence of proper cure, it becomes essential to delineate the factors that may aid in the severity assessment of the disease. if individuals at risk of developing severe symptoms can be identified early, management of the disease may improve to a significant extent.in this review, we have attempted to brief the virology and associated pathogenesis, particularly in aspects of immunopathology. invasion of lung epithelial cells and probably certain immune cells directly, by sars-cov-2 via infectious aerosolized droplets, heralds the infection. peripheral neutrophilia and lymphocytopenia associated with delayed but exaggerated immune response mediate the fatal ards, multi-organ dysfunction resulting in death of covid-19 patients. while male gender, increasing age and co-morbidities have shown to be risk factors for severe disease, il-6 and tnf-a were found to be potential markers of disease severity. il-1ß mediated pyroptosis and tissue injury can be hypothesised to be a major molecular mechanism underlying pathogenesis of covid-19 [23] . cytokine storm, a phenomenon long studied in sepsis associated conditions, has no successful effective management so far [76] . future studies in different population groups should be designed with an aim to identify molecular targets that may help in early diagnosis and predicting severity of patients with covid-19. moreover, alternative treatment modalities like drug repurposing using interleukin inhibitors, plasma therapy is also another area that needs exploration [77] . thus, until a vaccine is available, the main stay of treatment in covid-19 cases will continue to be supportive care. while, use of monoclonal antibodies, mesenchymal stem cells and plasma of recovered patients are still in experimental stage, being precautious and restricting movement is the only successful solution for reducing further spread.funding none.conflict of interest the authors declare that they have no conflict of interest.as of may 14, 2020, the world health organization has reported 4,248,386 cases of covid-19 with 294,046 reported deaths secondary to complications related to the novel coronavirus. 1 in the united states, the center for disease control (cdc) reported 1,364,061 total cases and transplants are included in a special population of patients who may face increased risks of covid-19 related complications given their use of chronic immunosuppressants.immunosuppression in this population can further reduce cell-mediated immunity, which may prolong viral shedding and increase the risk of covid related complications. 3 as reported bymcgonagle et al., interleukin-6 (il-6) plays an important role in lung repair following viral insults and the administration of il-6 inhibitor drugs may be time-sensitive. 3 we report a case of covid-19 in a patient with kidney and liver transplant and discuss the use of il-6 inhibitor to prevent a cytokine storm in this setting.the patient is a 63-year-old male kidney and liver transplant recipient who presented to the emergency department (ed) after developing symptoms of mild fever, shortness of breath, and cough. his vitals and physical exam in the emergency department were within normal limits, except for a temperature of 38 degrees celsius. his initial chest x-ray on the day of admission (day 1) was unremarkable. he tested negative for influenza and covid-19 via polymerase chain reaction (pcr) and was admitted to the hospital. at the time of admission, he had a normal white blood cell count (6.94 x 10 9 /liter), decreased absolute lymphocyte count (2.9%), and normal liver function tests. cytomegalovirus and bordetella pcr serology were also negative.his home immunosuppressant regimen consisted of mycophenolic acid 500 milligrams daily, prednisone 5 milligrams daily, tacrolimus 2 milligrams twice a day.on day 2 of the admission, the patient was switched from oral prednisone to methylprednisolone 40 milligrams administered every eight hours intravenously. on day 3, he received cefepime 1 j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f gram over six hours. he also received five doses of hydroxychloroquine 400 milligrams on days 3-7.on day 4, the fever subsided and vitals remained within normal limits. however, he developed increasing shortness of breath with new diffuse expiratory wheezes on physical exam. repeat chest x-ray showed right lower lobe infiltrates and ct thorax without contrast showed right upper, middle, and lower lobe infiltrates with ground glass appearance consistent with a viral pneumonitis. this later progressed to bilateral ground glass opacities as pictured in his chest x-ray also showed improvement, as shown in figure 4 . overall, he began to show clinical signs of improvement. mycophenolic acid and tacrolimus were discontinued on day 5. table 1 shows the lab results for the patient through the first seven days of his hospital stay.however, on day 7, he decompensated requiring intubation and mechanical ventilation. the critical care team also placed him on a rotator bed. on day 8, his oxygen requirements substantially increased requiring an increase of oxygen to 1 l. at this time, he received a second dose of tocilizumab.the patient remained critically ill following intubation. seven days after intubation he developed a right sided pneumothorax and required a chest tube. the liver function tests, blood urea nitrogen (bun), and creatinine remained stable. during his icu stay, he was fully therapeutically heparinized as well. he developed no evidence of secondary bacterial infection.we obtained consent and administered 200 milliliters of convalescent plasma. he remained stable without significant change in his condition over the next several days.on day 14, the pneumothorax resolved and he began weaning off the ventilator.severe acute respiratory disease 2 (sars-cov-2) is a highly infectious, novel coronavirus that patients. 6 there is insufficient data on the clinical presentation and management of immunosuppressant regimens in sot recipients. 4 these patients may differ from the immunocompetent population in regards to presentation, diagnosis, and clinical course of covid-19. 4 notably, transplant patients may present with mild or atypical symptoms and without fever.thus, physicians must maintain broad differential diagnoses and high clinical suspicions. 7 one case series of five patients reported the most common symptoms on admission were fever, cough, myalgia/fatigue, and sputum production. 5 other case reports have identified patients as having vague abdominal discomfort. 4 table 2 8 subsequently, the body activates a second defense mechanism, known as the "second wave," which results in a cytokine storm and severe tissue damage. 3 increases in many inflammatory markers, such as erythrocyte sedimentation rate (esr), creactive protein (crp), serum ferritin, interleukins 6, 8, and 10, procalcitonin, and interleukinreceptor have been found in covid-19 patients. 9 interleukin-6 (il-6) is a marker of recent interest because of its role in the "second wave" and resulting cytokine storm. 10 il-6 signal transduction occurs via three main pathways: classical signal transduction, trans signal transduction, and trans presentation. 11 the classical signal transduction involves il-6 binding to the il-6r and forming a complex; the il6-il6r complex then binds to membrane gp130 and subsequently initiates intracellular transduction. 11 the trans signal transduction pathway occurs with il-6 binding to sil-6r and forming a complex; the il6-sil6r complex then binds to membrane gp130, which then initiates intracellular signal transduction. 11 the trans presentation signal involves sgp130 forming a complex with sil-6r to prevent sil-6r from binding to membrane-bound gp130; the jak-stata, ras-raf, and atk-pi3k pathways are then activated. 11 chen et al. found in a sample of 48 patients that increased levels of il-6 significantly correlated to disease severity. 12 another study reported a significant association between lymphopenia and increased il-6 levels in covid-19 non-survivors compared with survivors. 12, 13 these findings suggest monitoring il-6 levels to evaluate cytokine storm as a prognostic tool. 12 however, it is likely that physicians do not routinely follow il-6 levels in covid-19 patients with solid organ transplants, as it was not a commonly reported lab value in the studies we evaluated (table 2) .treatment with tocilizumab, a monoclonal antibody that binds to the il-6 receptor, has been recently published. 11 by binding to the il-6r, tocilizumab can inhibit both the classical and trans signaling pathways leading to a reduction in the "second wave" response and preventing cytokine storm. 11 the standard treatment dosing according to the diagnosis and treatment protocol for covid-19 (7 th edition) is a first dose of 4-8 mg/kg/day, with 400mg diluted to 100ml with 0.9% normal saline, infused over a 1 hour period. 14 the maximal dose is 800 mg, and the maximal number of administrations is two. 14 this dosing is based on a small trial of 21 patients that received tocilizumab, in addition to the standard care recommended by the diagnosis and treatment protocol for covid-19 (6 th edition) including lopinavir, methylprednisolone, other symptom relievers, and oxygen therapy. 15 given the small sample size, we need more research on appropriate dosing. at this time, there is a multicenter randomized controlled trial currently ongoing in china. 16 another potential medication that decreases il-6 levels is metronidazole. 13 in vitro and in vivo studies have shown that metronidazole decreases serum il-6 levels. 13 close monitoring of immunosuppressive therapy in sot recipients infected with covid-19 is necessary. there is a balance of allowing adequate immune response to suppress viral load and preventing transplant rejection. previous case reports have hypothesized that immunosuppressive therapy protects sot recipients by dampening the cytokine storm. 17 other case reports have noted that viral rna levels remain positive for a longer period than in immunocompetent patients. 4 this is notable because previous studies have demonstrated that ards occurs in sars patients despite a decreased viral load. 18 this is important because it indicates antiviral therapy alone is inadequate treatment and supports the hypothesis that the ards results from the cytokine storm. 18 one case report of a liver transplant recipient that tested positive for covid-j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f based on lymphocyte subtests. 4 this suggests that early il-6 intervention to prevent the cytokine storm could improve outcomes in covid-19 positive, sot recipients.one of the main concerns with il-6 blockade in the treatment of covid-19, however, is the appropriate timing of when to start treatment. it is possible that blocking il-6 signal transduction can lead to a reduction in viral clearance. 3 in patients that are already immunosuppressed, this could lead to a much higher viral load as compared with immunocompetent patients.additionally, we do not know whether il-6 alters the levels of circulating tacrolimus. this may suggest cessation of immunosuppressive therapy until the initial cytokine storm as resolved.temporary removal of immunosuppressive regiment is likely beneficial for transplant recipients because clinical outcomes of covid-19 seems to mostly dependent on the virus-host interaction.another interesting finding in many patients with covid-19 is the potential for a second cytokine storm. a second cytokine storm may have happened to the patient in this case report as he clinically improved and then developed a recurrence of respiratory distress that required the intubation. the il-6 levels were also markedly elevated at this time suggesting an ongoing cytokine response. this may be the reason why several of these patients become severely hypoxic after a few days of stabilization. this may also suggest that we administer the tocilizumab in an interval fashion, approximately 4-6 days after the first administration.in conclusion, there is limited data on the clinical presentation, management, and appropriate treatment of covid-19 patients who are recipients of solid organ transplants. the use of il-6 inhibitor in our patient resulted in clinical improvement initially, but it is difficult to determine if the tocilizumab played a role in the management of this patient, specifically in preventing j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f respiratory failure. the cytokine storm appears to play a major role in these patients, and it is possible that several of them experience a second storm that results in severe respiratory distress and intubation. thromboembolic phenomena also appear to play a role in respiratory failure. a single case does not represent the complex strategy needed when considering the treatment of covid-19 patients with solid organ transplants. further studies are necessary to investigate treatment modalities for covid-19 in special populations.j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus-2 (sars-cov-2) has infected over 4 million people worldwide, resulting in a pandemic responsible for over 278,000 deaths as of may 11, 2020 [1, 2] . the severity of coronavirus disease of 2019 (covid-19) ranges from asymptomatic infection to critical illness, with up to one third of hospitalized patients requiring mechanical ventilation in an intensive care unit (icu) [3] [4] [5] [6] . fatality rates vary between demographic groups, with old age and certain comorbidities (hypertension, obesity, diabetes) associated with higher risk.in a subset of patients with severe covid-19, rapid progression of pulmonary infiltrates and multi-organ failure coincides with dramatic increases in inflammatory cytokines and other biochemical markers of inflammation, consistent with a covid-19 associated cytokine storm syndrome (covid-css) [7] [8] [9] [10] [11] . the high mortality rate associated with covid-css has led to the off-label use of targeted anti-cytokine therapies aimed at blocking the inflammatory cascade and improving patient outcomes. clinical trials are being conducted to assess the safety and efficacy of cytokine blockade in covid- 19 . currently there are no standard therapies for covid-19 or covid-css, and recent national institutes of health (nih) guidelines have recommended against use of investigational agents outside of clinical trials [12] . on may 1, 2020 the united states food and drug administration (fda) have granted emergency use authorization for the anti-viral drug remdesivir based on the as-yet unpublished results of a national institute of allergy and infectious diseases (niaid) sponsored randomized control trial that demonstrated reduced recovery time compared to placebo [13] . how this drug my influence cytokine storm and how the niaid trial compares to a prior study that found no benefit of the drug are currently not known [14] .covid-css has brought renewed attention to cytokine storm syndrome as a general concept [15] . in 1993, (perhaps influenced by the military operation "desert storm") the term "cytokine storm" was coined to describe the hypercytokinemia seen in graft-versus-host disease (gvhd) [16, 17] . css has since been associated with viral infections (eg. influenza, severe acute respiratory syndrome/sars), autoimmune diseases (eg. systemic lupus erythematosus/sle, systemic juvenile idiopathic arthritis/jia), hematologic conditions (hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis/hlh) and medications [18] [19] [20] . examples of the latter include the phase i clinical trial of tgn1412, an anti-cd28 monoclonal antibody that caused severe cytokine storm in healthy volunteers, and the cytokine release syndrome (crs) following chimeric antigen receptor (car)-t cell therapy [21, 22] . the wide heterogeneity of conditions that have been placed under this umbrella term underscore the need to better understand the pathophysiology and treatment of diseases characterized by hypercytokinemia. recently, css has been defined as a condition of dysregulation and perpetuated activation of lymphocytes and macrophages resulting in secretion of large quantities of cytokines leading to overwhelming systemic inflammation and multi-organ failure with high mortality [20] .understanding the hypercytokinemia and immune dysregulation associated with covid-19 is urgent. some have proposed that covid-19 is actually a hypo-inflammatory vasculopathy rather than a cytokine storm. this hypothesis is based on one study reporting relatively low interleukin-6 (il-6) levels (mean 25 pg/ml, normal range < 7) measured on admission to hospital in one chinese study [23] . however, cytokine storm is generally thought to develop later in the course of this disease, and emerging data from our center and others indicates that patients with covid-css have a degree of hypercytokinemia (i.e. il-6 levels 100 to 5000 pg/ml) comparable to conditions such as car-t cell crs. the overlap in clinical and biochemical features between covid-css and cytokine storm syndromes associated with other conditions may allow for insight into the underlying pathologic immune dysregulation in covid-css and inform strategies for therapeutic intervention. in this review, we summarize the clinical features, pathologic mechanisms, standard and investigational therapies for css in three well-defined hematological cytokine storm syndromes: secondary hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis (shlh), idiopathic multicentic castleman disease (imcd), car-t cell crs, in order to compare and contrast them with covid-css.hlh is a hyperinflammatory syndrome of fever, cytopenias, and multi-organ dysfunction caused by uncontrolled immune activation and excessive cytokine production [24] . primary hlh is typically a pediatric condition driven by germline mutations impairing granule-mediated cytotoxicity in natural killer and cytotoxic t cells [25] . the secondary hlh syndromes observed in adults are most often driven by infection (commonly viral such as epstein-barr virus [ebv], cytomegalovirus [cmv], or human immunodeficiency virus [hiv]); malignancy (lymphomas), primary rheumatologic conditions (termed macrophage activation syndrome-hlh subtype, mas-hlh), or medications (immune checkpoint inhibitors, lamotrigine) [24] . the hlh-2004 diagnostic criteria (table 1 ) developed for the pediatric population are recommended to guide diagnosis in adults, and include soluble interleukin-2 receptor, a marker of t cell activation, as a cytokine-related diagnostic criterion [24, 26, 27] . the hlh-2004 criteria may be restrictive in identifying all patients that may benefit from immunomodulation. the hscore was developed specifically for secondary, and especially malignancy associated, hlh in adults, but unfortunately does not include any cytokine-related criteria [28] . initially named for the hemophagocytosis seen on tissue biopsy; hemophagocytosis in bone marrow aspirate is a common but non-specific feature in adults [29, 30] . clinical and laboratory features include fevers (often described as "hectic" in that they may exceed 40°c), organomegaly, cytopenias, coagulopathy, and profound hyperferritinemia often > 10,000 μg/l; which often rapidly worsen despite initial empiric anti-microbial therapy resulting in eventual multisystem organ failure [24, 31] . mortality remains high in adults, around 70% despite therapy; though patients with mas-hlh driven by rheumatologic diseases have better prognosis with less aggressive immunosuppression than other secondary hlh syndromes [24, 29] .castleman disease (cd) describes a group of syndromes with shared clinical hyperinflammation and histopathological features [32] . diagnosis requires lymph node biopsy with characteristic histopathology, as defined by consensus guidelines, residing on a spectrum of histologic patterns from regressed germinal centers and prominent vascularization to hyperplastic germinal centers with prominent plasmacytosis [32, 33] . idiopathic mcd is characterized by dysregulation of il-6 mediated inflammation. typically occurring in the 5th and 6th decade of life, patients present with lymphadenopathy in more than one lymph node station, constitutional symptoms, fluid accumulation, and cytopenias [32, 33] . liver or kidney dysfunction as well as the presence of secondary autoimmune phenomenon are also common [32, 34] . the profound inflammation of the disease is reflected by a frequently observed polyclonal hypergammaglobulinemia in the imcd-not otherwise specified (imcd-nos) subgroup [35] . a subset of patients demonstrate a more aggressive clinical course with thrombocytopenia, ascites, reticulin fibrosis, renal dysfunction, and organomegaly (tafro) and do not exhibit the same hypergammaglobulinemia seen with imcd-nos [32, 35] .the engineering of car t-cells to bind tumour-specific epitopes and elicit cell-mediated death of malignant cells has been a major leap forward in cancer therapy. first implemented in relapsed and refractory b-cell lymphoid malignancies, cd19 car-t cell therapy has demonstrated response rates of 50-90% in cd19+ b-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia and non-hodgkin lymphoma [36] . the activation of car-t cells after an encounter with target cells leads to release of granzyme and perforin, proliferation of the car-t cell population, and a supraphysiologic increase in cytokines such as il-6 and interferon-γ. this cytokine release syndrome (crs) may occur in up to 70% of patients depending on conditioning therapy and cell construct, with icu admission rates up to 13% [36] [37] [38] . crs is grade 1-2 in the majority of patients but may be severe in 12-47% of patients [37] . crs typically presents within the first 6 days following car-t cell infusion with fever as the defining feature followed by hypotension, tachycardia, hypoalbuminemia with capillary leak and weight gain, and consumptive coagulopathy [36, 38] . immune effector cell associated neurotoxicity syndrome (icans) with a varied symptom profile (table 1 ) may also be observed with later onset: during an episode of crs or shortly after its resolution [36, [38] [39] [40] . icans can also occur in patients who did not develop crs and this observation in addition to the separate timeline of development has resulted in the separation of icans from crs in the consensus grading system as a distinct toxicity [39, 41, 42] . crs may be observed after other tumour-directed immune therapies, including the bi-specific t-cell engager drug, blinatumumab [37] .for most people who contract covid-19, the clinical course is mild (and often asymptomatic) with the majority of those able to be recover from the disease at home. individuals who require hospitalization most commonly present with fever, cough, fatigue, and dyspnea [7] [8] [9] 43] . routine laboratory investigations on admission demonstrate lymphopenia, elevated d-dimer, and elevated crp. chest imaging demonstrates bilateral patchy shadows or ground glass opacities [7] [8] [9] 43 ]. twelve to 31% of patients admitted to hospital will eventually develop severe hypoxemic respiratory failure and require critical care support [5, 6, 9, 43] . severe covid-19 disease, as per who-china working group definition, includes the following: respiratory frequency ≥ 30/min, blood oxygen saturation ≤ 93%, pao2/fio2 ratio < 300, and/or lung infiltrates > 50% of the lung field within 24-48 h [44] . critical disease is defined as severe covid-19 with any of the following: respiratory failure, septic shock, and/or multiple organ dysfunction/failure [44] . while multi-organ failure is frequently reported in this population, marked organomegaly has not been reported. one of the emerging facets of severe covid-19 is the association with a hypercoagulable state. d-dimer elevation was recognized early on in the pandemic to be an important prognostic marker for predicting severe disease and mortality [43] . klok et al. have reported a 31% incidence of thrombotic complications in covid patients admitted to the icu including demonstration of venous thromboembolism (vte) in 27% of patients [45] . increased thrombotic risk is seen with many inflammatory states and reflects overlap in the regulation inflammation and thrombosis [46] . the profound activation of thrombotic pathways may be a unique feature to covid-19 compared to other css, but remains to be confirmed in further studies.in the pediatric population affected with covid-19 there have been emerging reports of a hyperinflammatory shock syndrome, sharing features with an atypical kawasaki disease. initial symptoms of fever, conjunctivitis, rash, and gastrointestinal symptoms progress to shock requiring vasopressor support, fluid accumulation, and cardiac injury [47] . the delayed-onset and profound rise in inflammatory markers suggest a secondary pathologic immune response that may share features with adult covid-css but further study is needed to confirm these observations.there is no consensus definition of covid-css, and it is prudent to recognize that not all patients with severe or critical covid-19 infection develop dysregulated immune response and toxic cytokine secretion [11] . the working definition of covid-css at our institution used for consideration of adjunct immunomodulatory therapy is: critical covid-19 with evidence of derangement of multiple inflammatory markers including ferritin > 1000 μg/l and crp > 100 mg/l although we are presently analyzing other clinical and laboratory parameters and immune biomarkers such as il-1 and il-6 to produce a more nuanced definition.the recent consensus recommendations for the management of adult hlh state that: "primary and secondary hlh, including mas-hlh, are hyperferritinemic hyperinflammatory syndromes with a common terminal pathway but with different pathogenetic roots" [24] . this concept of a common terminal pathway resulting from diverse pathophysiological mechanisms can reasonably be extended to other cytokine storm syndromes including covid-css. marked elevation in inflammatory cytokines such as il-1 and il-6, and chemokines associated with a th1 response, such as ip-10 and mcp-3, were reported in a subset of covid patients, affirming the notion of a cytokine storm in this disease [48] . the marked elevation in il-6 bears some resemblance to hyper-il-6 syndromes such as car-t cell crs and castleman disease, and the hyperferritinemia and coagulopathy parallels shlh [49] . similarities and differences between the pathophysiology of covid-css and these hematological cytokine storm syndromes are outlined below.as the adult secondary hlh disorders result from many different etiologies and triggers, an in-depth understanding of pathophysiology is lacking. inferring from studies of the genetic defects in primary hlh patients, the hlh syndrome results from the dysregulation and unrestrained activation of macrophages, cytotoxic t-cells and nk cells leading to the observed end-organ damage [24, 25, 31, 50] . the inability to resolve certain infections and subsequent uncontrolled immune activation may explain the amplified inflammatory response in shlh from viral, bacterial, and fungal infections. aberrant, autonomous cytokine production from malignant cells of the immune system may develop into the hlh observed in lymphomas [24, 25, 31] . secondary hlh can complicate auto-inflammatory conditions (sle, stills disease, etc) with the inappropriate response to self-antigen driving continuous activation of t-cells and macrophages [24, 51] . the observed responses to ifn-γ antibody therapy suggests this may be a key factor perpetuating the pathologic feedback loop of inflammation; but murine models of primary hlh have implicated both ifn-γ dependant and independent pathways [52] [53] [54] .the pathogenesis of imcd is less well understood than when the syndrome is driven by human herpesvirus 8 (hhv-8) or poems. increased il-6 is seen in the majority of patients and the response to il-6 targeted therapy has implicated dysregulation of this pathway as the main driver of disease [32] . elevated vascular endothelial growth factor (vegf) levels and dysregulated mammalian target of rapamycin table 1 comparison of clinical characteristics.hlh [24, 29, 31, 114] post car-t cell therapy [36, 38, [40] [41] [42] imcd [33, 34, 115] covid-css [116] crs icans hlh -hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis; car-t cellchimeric antigen receptor t cell; crscytokine release syndrome; icans -immune effector cell-associated neurotoxicity syndrome; imcdidiopathic multicentric castleman disease; covid-csscoronavirus disease of 2019 associated cytokine storm syndrome; ebv -epstein-barr virus; cmvcytomegalovirus; ardsacute respiratory distress syndrome.(mtor) signaling are also observed in some patients [32, 55] . the cause of the elevated il-6 levels and inappropriate inflammatory activation is not known. associations of imcd and autoimmune and malignant conditions may point to shared pathophysiology, while as-yet-undiscovered infectious triggers have also been hypothesized.the development and severity of crs correlates with car-t cell expansion, but preclinical mouse studies have also shown monocyte and macrophage production of il-1 and il-6 to be the major drivers of the inflammatory response [38, [56] [57] [58] . subsequent endothelial activation results in microvascular permeability and the clinical features of capillary leak, hypotension, and reduced serum albumin levels [38] . autopsy evidence also suggests activated endothelial cells produce additional il-6 reinforcing the pathologic inflammatory feedback loop [59] . eventual blood-brain barrier disruption as a result of increased il-6 levels and endothelial activation is thought to contribute to severe icans [37] .our understanding of covid-css is rapidly evolving, with early clinical, biochemical, and autopsy observations supplemented by more thorough preclinical studies of the closely related sars-cov, responsible for the 2003 sars outbreak. mouse models of sars-cov suggest that delayed type i interferon signaling promotes accumulation of pathogenic inflammatory macrophages leading to hypercytokinemia, vascular leakage, and impaired t cell responses [60] . deleting the ifngamma receptor or depleting macrophages protected mice from lethal infection without affecting viral load, supporting that the inflammatory response may contribute more to severe disease pathology than direct viral effects [60] . in a subset of patients with covid-19, disease severity seems to correlate with inflammatory markers commonly implicated in other cytokine storm disorders including il-2r, il-6, il-10, and tnf cytokines [7, 8, 10] . in patients with covid-css, development of sepsis, need for intubation, and ards, are accompanied by worsening inflammatory markers and are observed between 7 and 14 days after illness onset consistent with clinical deterioration due to inflammatory sequelae [43] . an autopsy series from 6 patients who died from covid-19 demonstrated il-6 production by virus-infected macrophages present in lymph nodes and spleen tissue, suggesting that viral-infection leading to macrophage production of il-6 was the initial trigger for inflammatory dysregulation [61] .established and investigational therapies for shlh, imcd, car-t crs are summarized by condition in tables 2-4 . potential therapies and ongoing clinical trials for covid-css are summarized in table 5 .corticosteroids have been the cornerstone in managing hyper-inflammatory disorders due to their broad effects leading to reduced inflammatory mediators and immune cell activity. used alone or in combination with cytotoxic therapies, responses are frequent but often short-lived and associated with significant long-term toxicity. the hlh-94 protocol combines upfront dexamethasone with etoposide for its specific reduction of t cell activity and cytokine production [62, 63] . cyclosporine may be introduced after 8 weeks, or after 1 week as per the hlh-2004 protocol, though it is often poorly tolerated in adult patients [24, 26] . despite the demonstrated efficacy in pediatric hlh syndromes, adults treated with the hlh-94 protocol and its variations demonstrate poor long-term survival around 30% [24] . relapses in secondary hlh occur frequently either despite standard therapy or as table 2 summary of therapies for secondary hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis. [91, 93, 117] cohort of pediatric mas [92] a cyclosporine initiated at week 9 in hlh-94 protocol and at week 1 in hlh-2004 protocol.j.t. england, et al. blood reviews xxx (xxxx) xxxx therapy intensity is tapered; mortality related to infectious or other complications of prolonged immunosuppression is also common. in imcd, corticosteroids are frequently used as adjunct therapy for disease flares, though only half of patients will demonstrate improvement with corticosteroids [32] . as high dose corticosteroid therapy is poorly tolerated in the long term, a number of lymphoma-like chemotherapy options have be used to treat patients with imcd [32] . steroid-containing immunomodulatory regimens with thalidomide, cyclophosphamide and prednisone has also shown promising efficacy and safety [64] .the use of corticosteroids in the management of crs following car-t cells is limited by the concern of unwanted cytotoxic effects on the car-t product reducing overall efficacy. however, given its effectiveness for rapidly reducing the systemic inflammatory burden in this population, corticosteroids are still used second-line after directed anticytokine therapy [36, 37] . steroids are particularly useful as first line therapy in the treatment of icans, with cns penetrating steroids such as dexamethasone preferred.corticosteroids were used frequently in the management of covid-19 in the early days of the pandemic in china, with reported use in 30-79% of patients [4, [7] [8] [9] 43, 65] . the indication for therapy is not widely reported and may be due to comorbid conditions (copd, asthma) or as adjunct therapy for sepsis. analysis has suggested improved outcomes in patients with ards treated with steroids though this has not been conclusive and ideal timing and patient selection are not known [9, 43, 66] . animal models and some human data of the closely related sars-cov infection have demonstrated early corticosteroid use may reduce initial inflammatory response, but raise the concern of increased viral replication and shedding that could worsen clinical outcomes and increase viral transmission [67, 68] .improved mechanistic understanding of hyperinflammatory syndromes has led to therapies targeting specific cytokines implicated in disease pathogenesis. emapalumab is a monoclonal antibody targeting interferon-γ that has demonstrated efficacy with overall response rates over 60% in a study of pediatric hlh [69] . based on this trial the us food and drug administration (fda) approved emapalumab for use in refractory, recurrent, or progressive primary hlh in both children and adults [22] . though there is a concern of secondary infections, particularly from organisms responsive to ifn-gamma driven immune reactions, the medication has been well tolerated in the majority of patients including those with infectious complications prior to therapy [54, 69, 70] . data are limited in the use of emapalumab for secondary hlh in adults.in imcd the disease process is thought to be dependent on elevated il-6 levels perpetuating the hyperinflammatory state in most patients; therefore, use of il-6 targeted therapy is now the front-line management for patients with imcd with or without adjunctive steroids. siltuximab, a monoclonal antibody directed against il-6, in a placebo controlled trial has shown reduction in tumour burden and symptomatic response in a third (34%) of patients with responders having sustained disease control up to 6 years of follow-up [71] . tocilizumab, a monoclonal antibody directed against the il-6 receptor, has demonstrated similar improvement in symptoms and biochemical markers of disease activity in a single arm study [72] . anti-il-6 therapy is well tolerated for many years in patients with disease response, though relapses may be common following cessation of therapy [32, 72] .the early observation of a substantial increase in il-6 during crs prompted the introduction of anti-il-6 agents for management of those receiving car-t therapy, with good effect [73] . tocilizumab is now fda approved for use in crs with response rates of 70% following 1-2 table 3 summary of therapies for car-t cell cytokine release syndrome. [22, 37] . doses can be repeated every 6 to 24 h until crs symptoms begin to improve. as tocilizumab is only used in short courses for a limited period, there is less concern of serious adverse events that may be seen in patients taking the drug long-term for rheumatologic indications. tocilizumab administration has been demonstrated to not affect car-t cell efficacy, and is thus the preferred first line agent over corticosteroids. tocilizumab appears to be not as effective for icans, likely because it does not cross the blood-brain barrier and targets the il-6 receptor with no direct il-6 lowering effect, leading to elevated systemic il-6 levels after therapy without cns protection [38, 40, 72] . direct targeting of il-6 by siltuximab may have better cns response, though this has not been studied in clinical trials. as il-6 levels correlate with disease severity in hospitalized covid-19 patients, anti-il-6 therapy has been one of the first treatment strategies explored during the pandemic [7] [8] [9] [10] . there have been several published case reports, as a well as two larger case series from china, using tocilizumab as a treatment for severe covid-19 demonstrating biochemical efficacy with decrease markers of inflammation, but the impact of clinical outcomes such as time in intensive care and mortality compared to supportive care, remains unknown [74] [75] [76] [77] [78] [79] . a recent large series of 100 consecutive patients with severe covid-19 demonstrated clinical stability or improvement in 77% of patients following administration of tocilizumab [80] . a press release for corimuno-toci (nct04331808), a multi-centre, open-label randomized controlled trial of tocilizumab in moderate and severe covid19 has suggested positive results and with the study currently under peer-review [81] . optimal timing of tocilizumab initiation is unknown, but there is sound rationale that earlier treatment in patients demonstrating a pathologic inflammatory response may ameliorate immune-mediated lung injury. repeated doses of tocilizumab, similar in strategy to its use in car-t cell related crs, may be reasonable for patients with refractory covid-css. serious risks of tocilizumab in the short term include a small risk of bowel perforation, acute hepatic failure, and osteonecrosis of the jaw [82, 83] . case reports of hypertriglyceridemia and candidemia following tocilizumab infusion for covid-19 have been reported [84, 85] .there is a concern that the use of tocilizumab in covid-19 could increase the risk of secondary infections and delay viral clearance, as was postulated in the report of 2 cases of viral myocarditis following tociluzumab for covid-19 [86] . these safety concerns should be thoroughly evaluated in future studies. clinical trials of tocilizumab, siltuximab, and sarilumab (an il-6 receptor blocker) are currently being conducted in patients with moderate and severe covid-19 though trials specifically evaluating these agents in the covid-css population are not yet planned.in addition to their well-known anticoagulant properties, heparins are known to have anti-inflammatory effects with lowering of il-6 levels specifically described [87] [88] [89] . in patients with covid-19, a retrospective study has observed reduction of il-6 levels in patients treated with low-molecular weight heparin (lmwh) [90] . given the maturing evidence of increased thrombotic risk in covid-19, lmwh may be a good adjunct therapy for covid-css to reduce both il-6 driven inflammation and thrombotic risk. optimal dosing strategies in patients without proven thromboembolic disease is not currently known but is being investigated in upcoming clinical trials (nct04359277).il-1-receptor blockade with anakinra has been used in case series and retrospective studies for hlh, with a clinical trial currently ongoing [91] [92] [93] . anakinra has been hypothesized to have utility for car-t crs and neurotoxicity based on the observation that il-1 elevations precede il-6 spike in murine crs models and treatment with anakinra therapy resulted in reduction of both cytokines [56, 58] . anakinra has the added benefit of having a very short half-life compared to other anti-cytokine therapies. a retrospective cohort study of 29 patients with covid-19 and moderate-to-severe ards, and hyperinflammation (crp ≥100 mg/l, and/or ferritin ≥900 ng/ml) treated with high dose anakinra demonstrated clinical improvement in 72% of patients, and improved survival compared to historical controls [94] . utriupper respiratory tract infection, pmlprogressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy, hhv-8human herpesvirus-8, crcomplete response, prpartial response, pfsprogression free survival. a may be used in conjunction with corticosteroids. b may be used in monotherapy or in conjunction with chemotherapy/corticosteroids.tnf inhibiting agents are available for the management of other inflammatory conditions, though at the time of this review no reports of tnf inhibition have been reported for covid-19. the use of tnf inhibitors has some potential concern these drugs have also been thought to trigger shlh in some case reports [95] [96] [97] . clinical trials for tnf inhibition in covid-19 are planned.to implement cellular responses to cytokines, cell surface receptors must connect these external environmental signals to the nucleus to guide gene expression, cell proliferation, and activity. this "bottleneck" of inflammatory communication through shared internal signaling molecular pathways has facilitated the creation of targeted therapies that inhibit multiple cytokine pathways simultaneously. many cytokine and growth receptors signal through the janus kinase (jak) signal transducer of activators of transcription (stat) pathway; this has spurred the development of small molecular jak inhibitors for the treatment of inflammatory and neoplastic conditions [98] . these agents may be advantageous for disease states in which broader inhibition of cytokine signaling is required to control inflammation compared to the table 5 potential therapies for covid cytokine storm syndrome.published data in covid-19 as of april 20, 2020 nih treatment guidelines select registered trials corticosteroids case series and retrospective cohort studies found possible improved outcomes in ards [9, 43] ; but there remains concern for prolonged viral shedding [67] for critically ill patients with covid-19:• case reports and case series report improvement in fever and inflammatory markers with possible improvement in cytokine storm and ards through inhibition of il-6 [74] [75] [76] [77] [78] [79] [80] 86, 119, 120] there are insufficient clinical data to recommend either for or against the use of the following agents for the treatment of covid-19 (aiii):• interleukin-6 inhibitors (e.g., sarilumab, siltuximab, tocilizumab)• interleukin-1 inhibitors (e.g., anakinra) pilot study of 12 patients has demonstrated improvement in fever, dyspnea, and hypoxia with an lower rate of icu admission than historical control [106] proposed to be effective against consequences of elevated cytokines observed in covid-19 by inhibiting the jak/stat pathway and reducing downstream cytokine signaling [122] baricitinib may inhibit viral entry into cells through blockade of ap2-associated protein kinase 1 (aak1) [104] the panel recommends against the use of janus kinase (jak) inhibitors (e.g., baricitinib) for the treatment of covid-19, except in the context of a clinical trial (aiii).nct04340232, nct04346147, nct04320277, nct04321993, nct04345289, nct04334044, nct04348071, nct04338958, nct04337359, nct04331665, nct04332042inhibition of complement activity to reduce inflammation and subsequent tissue injury.lmwh improves the coagulation dysfunction and exerts anti-inflammatory effects by reducing il-6 and increasing lymphocyte percentage a retrospective cohort study [90] no recommendation nct04344756, nct04345848 ivig case reports of clinical improvement when administered at the time of respiratory deterioration [123] no recommendation nct04261426nih -national institutes of health (https://www.covid19treatmentguidelines.nih.gov/mas -accessed may 11, 2020), masmacrophage activation syndrome, lmwh -low molecular weight heparin, ivigintravenous immune globulin.targeted blockade of single cytokines. ruxolitinib, a jak1/2 inhibitor already approved for the therapy of myeloproliferative neoplasm and rheumatologic disorders, has activity in murine hlh models by reducing inflammation through ifn-γ dependant and independent pathways. this results in reduced activity and tissue infiltration of t-cells and neutrophils [52, 53] . case series in relapsed/refractory hlh, as well as a single case of upfront therapy for moderate severity hlh, have described biochemical and clinical efficacy in treatment of hlh with ruxolitinib monotherapy [99] [100] [101] . early phase clinical trials are ongoing, but preliminary results have demonstrated biochemical, hematologic, and clinical recovery in the few patients enrolled thus far [102] . importantly, the treatment is tolerated well with few adverse events reported, especially in contrast to standard regimens of prolonged chemotherapy combined with high dose steroids.patients with the tafro subtype of imcd will typically have a more aggressive course and most have no substantial response to il-6 blockade. analysis of molecular signaling pathways active in imcd patients refractory to anti-il-6 agents has implicated downstream activation of the pi3k/akt/mtor pathway, common to signaling of the t cell receptor and vegf pathways [103] . use of the mtor inhibitor sirolimus has met with early success in limited numbers of patients and a clinical trial in il-6 blockade refractory tafro patients is underway [32, 55, 103] . pre-clinical studies of cells obtained from patients with imcd have also indicated that jak inhibitors may be able to interrupt il-6 driven mtor pathway activation [55] .currently there are limited reports of the use of jak-stat or other cell signaling pathway inhibitors in the management of covid-css. the use of jak inhibitors is attractive as the medications are well tolerated, have short half-lives, and have the potential to target numerous inflammatory cytokine signaling pathways simultaneously. while ruxolitinib has been the agent most studied in hlh other jak inhibitors may have potential advantages. baricitinib, an oral jak1/2 inhibitor that is currently approved for treatment of rheumatoid arthritis, was recently identified by artificial intelligence-based technology as a potential immunomodulatory treatment strategy for sars-cov-2 [104] . at therapeutic doses baricitinib is predicted to inhibit clathrin-mediated endocytosis and viral entry into cells by blocking the ap2-associated protein kinase 1 (aak1) [104] . aak1 regulates endocytosis in numerous cell types expressing ace2, the receptor that mediates sars-cov-2 viral entry, including lung at2 alveolar epithelial cells [104] . because any agent that dampens the inflammatory response could lead to a potential loss of immune-mediated viral control, the hypothesized anti-viral effect makes baricitinib an attractive investigational therapy over agents that target disordered inflammation alone. of concern with baracitinib is the increased risk of thrombosis which may increase the rate of thrombotic complications already observed with covid-19 [105] . clinical experience with covid-19 is limited, but a pilot study of 12 patients has demonstrated improvement in fever, dyspnea, and hypoxia with a lower rate of icu admission than a historical control cohort [106] .css are disorders driven and recognized by characteristic hypercytokinemia, however availability of objective cytokine profiles is limited. clinicians are forced to evaluate and base treatment decisions on clinical signs and symptoms of inflammation, and a few widely available markers of overall systemic inflammation. utility of cytokine levels for diagnosis and monitoring of cytokine storm syndromes are not standardized and currently limited to research settings. published values for inflammatory markers and cytokines observed in cytokine storm conditions are summarized in table 6 . importantly, many of these assays are not routinely performed in hospital laboratories, and as such their clinical relevance remains to be determined by future studies that address both analytical and clinical validation of these markers. table 6 biomarkers and cytokine levels in cytokine storm syndromes.marker median (range) hlh [107, 112, 124, 125] mcd [34, 35, 71, 110, 126] car-t crs [38, 57] published covid-19 data crp mg/l (normal < 1) 135 [124] 56 (4-236) [125] 17.6 (0.10-181.0) [71] median 112 [35] 162 ( ferritin, the iron storage protein, and c-reactive protein (crp) are the acute phase reactants most widely available at hospitals for monitoring systemic inflammation. hyperferritinemia is the most common feature to prompt further evaluation for secondary hlh, with levels > 10,000 μg/l observed in 78.9% of adult patients and can frequently be in excess of 100,000 μg/l [27, 107] . patients with crs also demonstrate elevated ferritin levels with most patients reaching a peak over 3000 and many in excess of 10,000 μg/l [38, 57] . patients experiencing higher grade crs have greater median peak ferritin and crp though with significant overlap in the observed ranges [38, 57] . similarly, ferritin and crp levels in patients with covid-19 are reportedly higher in patients with severe compared to moderate disease, and in patients who died compared to those that recovered [7, 8, 10] . in our experience with covid-css patients in the icu we have observed ferritin levels in the range of 1000-10,000 μg/l with crp levels typically above 100 mg/l (hoiland r et al., manuscript under review).the measurement of d-dimer, a fibrin degradation product, is a widely available test that shows active clot formation and breakdown. its increase in systemic inflammation reflects the overlap between the physiologic inflammatory and thrombotic pathways. though not frequently used in the evaluation of the cytokine storm disorders, it has been correlated with severity of crs following car-t [38] . d-dimer levels correlate with disease severity in covid-19 and admission ddimer > 1 μg/ml has emerged as one of the earliest prognostic marker to identify patients with high mortality [43] .the pattern of inflammatory markers may be more useful than relying on absolute values alone in order to establish a diagnosis. in children with sjia the ratio of ferritin to erythrocyte sedimentation rate (esr) was useful for identifying patients with mas [108] . in one study of japanese hlh cases a ratio of sil-2r to ferritin was predictive of those with lymphoma-associated rather than benign disease [109] .the soluble interleukin-2 receptor (sil2r) level is integrated into the hlh-2004 diagnostic criteria [26] . in adults with secondary hlh, levels > 2400 u/ml demonstrate good sensitivity and specificity for diagnosing adult hlh with an area under the curve of 0.90 (95% confidence interval, 0.83-0.97) [107] . soluble il-2r levels have not been widely reported on in imcd, but one study found elevated levels in 20 of 21 cases [34] . additionally it was observed that for patients on anti-il-6 therapy, sil-2r was one of the earliest markers that predicted disease relapse and failure of therapy [34, 110] . in car-t crs it has been observed that sil2r levels are markedly elevated in patients with severe compared to non-severe disease [57] . patients with covid-19 demonstrate higher sil2r levels in those with severe and fatal disease; though levels have thus far reported to be typically less than 2000 u/ ml [7, 8, 10, 111] .il-6 is a key cytokine common to the pathophysiology of most css disorders and has important therapeutic implications. in hlh, data available in pediatric patients demonstrate moderate il-6 elevation though it has not been useful in distinguishing hlh from sepsis or other inflammatory conditions [112] . idiopathic mcd is conceptualized as a primarily a disorder of il-6 elevation, though serum il-6 levels in imcd may be normal or only mildly elevated. response rates to il-6 blockade do correlate with baseline il-6 levels in imcd, but many patients with low il-6 levels will improve with therapy while patients with high il-6 levels can show no response [32, 71] . il-6 levels peak with disease flares in imcd and can be used to monitor disease course, but once il-6 blockade is initiated serial monitoring is not useful. tocilizumab and sarilumab block the receptor for il-6 leading to clinical improvement while serum il-6 levels will remain stable or increase [72] . similarly, il-6 levels cannot be accurately interpreted for 12-18 months following the last dose of siltuximab. car-t crs demonstrates substantial increases in il-6 that correlates with severity of crs and may be orders of magnitude greater the levels reported for imcd, and hlh [38, 71, 112] . in covid-19 il-6 levels have been high for patients with more severe and fatal disease [7, 8, 10, 111] . in our institutions experience with covid-css observed levels of il-6 have been in the range of 100-5000 pg/ml (manuscript under review). interferon-γ plays a central role in the pathogenesis of hlh, and elevated serum levels can help differentiate hlh from sepsis and other inflammatory disorders in children, but routine use for diagnosis in adults has not been studied [112, 113] . following emapalumab therapy, interferon-γ levels do not correlate with disease response, but downstream targets of interferon such as cxcl9 and cxcl10 appear to have utility in monitoring disease activity and treatment response [54, 70] .use of cytokine measurements in css to diagnose and monitor disease activity and response to therapy is an area in need of further refinement. monitoring response to therapy requires in depth knowledge of drug targets and expected impact on cytokine levels, laboratory testing, and downstream pathway activation. more data, research, and experience are needed in order to develop the clinical acumen in interpretation of patterns and profiles of these diseases.covid-css has many clinical and pathologic similarities with other cytokine storm disorders. therapy for classic css conditions such as imcd and secondary hlh has been hampered by low numbers of patients, lack of diagnostic clarity and incompletely understood pathophysiology. progress has been made with the introduction of targeted therapy aimed at interrupting the positive feedback loops of inflammatory pathways. the story of crs following car-t cell therapy with comparatively rapid determination of pathophysiology and use of existing medications for treatment has been a recent success. future goals for css include improved access to immunophenotyping and expression profiling to inform our understanding of disease mechanisms, and enhancing diagnostic and monitoring capabilities.due to the lack of currently available evidence, the nih guidelines for the management of covid-19 do not recommend for or against cytokine inhibition with il-1 and il-6 blockade and specifically recommend against off-label use of jak pathway inhibitors outside of clinical trial [12] . current industry sponsored trials of sarilumab (nct04327388) and tocilizumab (nct04320615) in patients with severe-critical covid-19 are underway. however, they exclude critically ill patients requiring vasopressors and therefore will not address the question of whether these agents will be of benefit in those who are critically unwell with evidence of css. development of consensus definitions for covid-css may lead to identification of patients most likely to benefit most from immune modulating therapy. we should use the lessons learned from hematologic cytokine storm syndromes to help expedite rapid identification, evaluation, and implementation of treatments urgently needed for covid-19 css.• a subset of patients with covid-19 develop a syndrome characterized by organ dysfunction and marked elevation of inflammatory markers dubbed cytokine storm syndrome (css).• to date, there is no consensus definition of covid-css. fever, organ dysfunction, hypoalbuminemia, and capillary leak are common to covid-19 and other cytokine storm syndromes such as shlh, imcd and car-t cell crs.• covid-19 appears to be a hypercoagulable state leading to microvascular thrombosis, a feature distinct from other hypercytokinemia syndromes • therapies targeting specific cytokines or common inflammatory signaling pathways have demonstrated benefit in hlh, imcd, and car-t crs and are well tolerated in those contexts. their role in covid-19 css is under active investigation.• a pragmatic definition of covid-css will likely require a combination of clinical criteria (such as fever, hypotension, critical illness), widely available laboratory parameters (such as crp, ferritin, d-dimer), as well as novel biomarkers (such as il-1, il-6, other cytokines, and immunophenotyping).• consensus definitions of css in general and covid-css in particular, with particular attention to the relationship with covid related coagulopathy and vasculopathy • rapid, coordinated investigations of potentially beneficial agents targeting inflammatory pathways in covid-19 css with methodologically rigorous clinical trials • measurement of biomarkers in css including traditional laboratory parameters as well as genetic studies, cytokine profiles and lymphocyte immunophenotyping at presentation and through the course of diseasekamran shojania: involved in investigator-initiated vasculitis study for bristol-myers-squibb.shahin jamal: attended roche advisory board for tocilizumab in giant cell arteritis and rheumatoid arthritis.kevin a. hay: attended advisory boards and received honoraria for celgene and gilead related to car-t cell products.james t. england, alym abdulla, ryan l. hoiland, cheryl l. wellington, mypinder sekhon, agnes y.y. lee, catherine biggs, luke chenno conflicts of interest to declare.severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus-2 (sars-cov-2) has infected over 4 million people worldwide, resulting in a pandemic responsible for over 278 000 deaths as of may 11, 2020 [1, 2] .the severity of coronavirus disease of 2019 (covid-19) ranges from asymptomatic infection to critical illness, with up to one third of hospitalized patients requiring mechanical ventilation in an intensive care unit (icu) [3] [4] [5] [6] . fatality rates vary between demographic groups, with old age and certain comorbidities (hypertension, obesity, diabetes) associated with higher risk.in a subset of patients with severe covid-19, rapid progression of pulmonary infiltrates and multi-organ failure coincides with dramatic increases in inflammatory cytokines and other biochemical of the car-t cell population, and a supraphysiologic increase in cytokines such as il-6 and interferon-γ.this cytokine release syndrome (crs) may occur in up to 70% of patients depending on conditioning therapy and cell construct, with icu admission rates up to 13% [36] [37] [38] . crs is grade 1-2 in the majority of patients but may be severe in 12-47% of patients [37] . crs typically presents within the first 6 days following car-t cell infusion as fever as defining feature followed by hypotension, tachycardia, hypoalbuminemia with capillary leak and weight gain, and consumptive coagulopathy [36, 38] . immune effector cell associated neurotoxicity syndrome (icans) with a varied symptom profile may also be observed with later onset: during an episode of crs or shortly after its resolution [36, [38] [39] [40] . icans can also occur in patients who did not develop crs and this observation in addition to the separate timeline of development has resulted in the separation of icans from crs in the consensus grading system as a distinct toxicity [39, 41, 42] . crs may also be observed after other tumour-directed immune therapies, including the bi-specific t-cell engager drug, blinatumumab [37] .for most people who contract covid-19, the clinical course is mild (and often asymptomatic) with the majority of those able to be recover from the disease at home. individuals who require hospitalization most commonly present with fever, cough, fatigue, and dyspnea [7] [8] [9] 43] . routine laboratory investigations on admission demonstrate lymphopenia, elevated d-dimer, and elevated crp.chest imaging demonstrates bilateral patchy shadows or ground glass opacities [7] [8] [9] 43] . twelve to 31% of patients admitted to hospital will eventually develop severe hypoxemic respiratory failure and require critical care support [5, 6, 9, 43] . severe covid-19 disease, as per who-china working group definition, includes the following: respiratory frequency ≥30/minute, blood oxygen saturation ≤93%, pao2/fio2 ratio <300, and/or lung infiltrates >50% of the lung field within 24-48 hours [44] . critical disease is defined as severe covid-19 with any of the following: respiratory failure, septic shock, and/or multiple j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f organ dysfunction/failure [44] . while multi-organ failure is frequently reported in this population, marked organomegaly has not been reported. one of the emerging facets of severe covid-19 is the association with a hypercoagulable state. d-dimer elevation was recognised early on in the pandemic to be an important prognostic marker for predicting severe disease and mortality [43] . klok et al. have reported a 31% incidence of thrombotic complications in covid patients admitted to the icu including demonstration of venous thromboembolism (vte) in 27% of patients [45] . increased thrombotic risk is seen with many inflammatory states and reflects overlap in the regulation inflammation and thrombosis [46] . the profound activation of thrombotic pathways may be a unique feature to covid-19 compared to other css, but remains to be confirmed in further studies.in the pediatric population affected with covid-19 there have been emerging reports of a hyperinflammatory shock syndrome, sharing features with an atypical kawasaki disease. initial symptoms of fever, conjunctivitis, rash, and gastrointestinal symptoms progress to shock requiring vasopressor support, fluid accumulation, and cardiac injury [47] . the delayed-onset and profound rise in inflammatory markers suggest a secondary pathologic immune response that may share features with adult covid-css but further study is needed to confirm these observations.there is no consensus definition of covid-css, and it is prudent to recognize that not all patients with severe or critical covid-19 infection develop dysregulated immune response and toxic cytokine secretion [11] . the working definition of covid-css at our institution used for consideration of adjunct immunomodulatory therapy is: critical covid-19 with evidence of derangement of multiple inflammatory markers including ferritin >1000 μg/l and crp > 100 mg/l although we are presently analyzing other clinical and laboratory parameters and immune biomarkers such as il-1 and il-6 to produce a more nuanced definition.the recent consensus recommendations for the management of adult hlh state that: "primary and secondary hlh, including mas-hlh, are hyperferritinemic hyperinflammatory syndromes with a common terminal pathway but with different pathogenetic roots" [24] . this concept of a common terminal pathway resulting from diverse pathophysiological mechanisms can reasonably be extended to other cytokine storm syndromes including covid-css. marked elevation in inflammatory cytokines such as il-1 and il-6, and chemokines associated with a th1 response, such as ip-10 and mcp-3, were reported in a subset of covid patients, affirming the notion of a cytokine storm in this disease [48] . the marked elevation in il-6 bears some resemblance to hyper il-6 syndromes such as car-t cell crs and castleman disease, and the hyperferritinemia and coagulopathy parallels shlh [49] . similarities and differences between the pathophysiology of covid-css and these hematological cytokine storm syndromes are outlined below.as the adult secondary hlh disorders result from many different etiologies and triggers, an indepth understanding of pathophysiology is lacking. inferring from studies of the genetic defects in primary hlh patients, the hlh syndrome results from the dysregulation and unrestrained activation of macrophages, cytotoxic t-cells and nk cells leading to the observed end-organ damage [24, 25, 31, 50] .the inability to resolve certain infections and subsequent uncontrolled immune activation may explain the amplified inflammatory response in shlh from viral, bacterial, and fungal infections. aberrant, autonomous cytokine production from malignant cells of the immune system may develop into the hlh observed in lymphomas [24, 25, 31] . secondary hlh can complicate auto-inflammatory conditions (sle, stills disease, etc) with the inappropriate response to self-antigen driving continuous activation of t-cells and macrophages [24, 51] . the observed responses to ifn-γ antibody therapy suggests this may be a key j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f journal pre-proof factor perpetuating the pathologic feedback loop of inflammation; but murine models of primary hlh have implicated both ifn-γ dependant and independent pathways [52] [53] [54] .the pathogenesis of imcd is less well understood than when the syndrome is driven by human herpesvirus 8 (hhv-8) or poems. increased il-6 is seen in the majority of patients and the response to il-6 targeted therapy has implicated dysregulation of this pathway as the main driver of disease [32] .elevated vascular endothelial growth factor (vegf) levels and dysregulated mammalian target of rapamycin signaling are also observed in some patients [32, 55] . the cause of the elevated il-6 levels and inappropriate inflammatory activation is not known. associations of imcd and autoimmune and malignant conditions may point to shared pathophysiology, while as-yet-undiscovered infectious triggers have also been hypothesized.the development and severity of crs correlates with car-t cell expansion, but preclinical mouse studies have also shown monocyte and macrophage production of il-1 and il-6 to be the major drivers of the inflammatory response [38, [56] [57] [58] . subsequent endothelial activation results in microvascular permeability and the clinical features of capillary leak, hypotension, and reduced serum albumin levels [38] . autopsy evidence also suggests activated endothelial cells produce additional il-6 reinforcing the pathologic inflammatory feedback loop [59] . eventual blood-brain barrier disruption as a result of increased il-6 levels and endothelial activation is thought to contribute to severe icans [37] .j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o four understanding of covid-css is rapidly evolving, with early clinical, biochemical, and autopsy observations supplemented by more thorough preclinical studies of the closely related sars -cov, responsible for the 2003 sars outbreak. mouse models of sars-cov suggest that delayed type i interferon signaling promotes accumulation of pathogenic inflammatory macrophages leading to hypercytokinemia, vascular leakage, and impaired t cell responses [60] . deleting the ifn-gamma receptor or depleting macrophages protected mice from lethal infection without affecting viral load, supporting that the inflammatory response may contribute more to severe disease pathology than direct viral effects [60] . in a subset of patients with covid-19, disease severity seems to correlate with inflammatory markers commonly implicated in other cytokine storm disorders including il-2r, il-6, il-10, and tnf cytokines [7, 8, 10] . in patients with covid-css, development of sepsis, need for intubation, and ards, are accompanied by worsening inflammatory markers and are observed between 7-14 days after illness onset consistent with clinical deterioration due to inflammatory sequelae [43] . an autopsy series from 6 patients who died from covid-19 demonstrated il-6 production by virus-infected macrophages present in lymph nodes and spleen tissue, suggesting that viral -infection leading to macrophage production of il-6 was the initial trigger for inflammatory dysregulation [61] .established and investigational therapies for shlh, imcd, car-t crs are summarized by condition in tables 2-4 . potential therapies and ongoing clinical trials for covid-css are summarized in table 5 .corticosteroids have been the cornerstone in managing hyper-inflammatory disorders due to their broad effects leading to reduced inflammatory mediators and immune cell activity. used alone or in combination with cytotoxic therapies, responses are frequent but often short-lived and associated j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f with significant long-term toxicity. the hlh-94 protocol combines upfront dexamethasone with etoposide for its specific reduction of t cell activity and cytokine production [62, 63] . cyclosporine may be introduced after 8 weeks, or after 1 week as per the hlh-2004 protocol, though it is often poorly tolerated in adult patients [24, 26] . despite the demonstrated efficacy in pediatric hlh syndromes, adults treated with the hlh-94 protocol and its variations demonstrate poor long-term survival around 30% [24] . relapses in secondary hlh occur frequently either despite standard therapy or as therapy intensity is tapered; mortality related to infectious or other complications of prolonged immunosuppression is also common.in imcd, corticosteroids are frequently used as adjunct therapy for disease flares, though only half of patients will demonstrate improvement with corticosteroids [32] . as high dose corticosteroid therapy is poorly tolerated in the long term, a number of lymphoma-like chemotherapy options have be used to treat patients with imcd [32] . steroid-containing immunomodulatory regimens with thalidomide, cyclophosphamide and prednisone has also shown promising efficacy and safety [64] .the use of corticosteroids in the management of crs following car-t cells is limited by the concern of unwanted cytotoxic effects on the car-t product reducing overall efficacy. however, given its effectiveness for rapidly reducing the systemic inflammatory burden in this population, corticosteroids are still used as therapy second-line after directed anti-cytokine therapy [36, 37] . steroids are particularly useful as first line therapy in the treatment of icans, with cns penetrating steroids such as dexamethasone preferred.corticosteroids were used frequently in the management of covid-19 in the early days of the pandemic in china, with reported use in 30-79% of patients [4, 7-9, 43, 65] . the indication for therapy is not widely reported and may be due to comorbid conditions (copd, asthma) or as adjunct therapy for sepsis. analysis has suggested improved outcomes in patients with ards treated with steroids though this has not been conclusive and ideal timing and patient selection are not known [9, 43, 66] . animal j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f models and some human data of the closely related sars-cov infection have demonstrated early corticosteroid use may reduce initial inflammatory response, but raise the concern of increased viral replication and shedding that could worsen clinical outcomes and increase viral transmission [67, 68] .improved mechanistic understanding of hyperinflammatory syndromes has led to therapies targeting specific cytokines implicated in disease pathogenesis. emapalumab is a monoclonal antibody targeting interferon-γ that has demonstrated efficacy with overall response rates over 60% in a study of pediatric hlh [69] . based on this trial the us food and drug administration (fda) approved emapalumab for use in refractory, recurrent, or progressive primary hlh in both children and adults [22] . though there is a concern of secondary infections, particularly from organisms responsive to ifn-gamma driven immune reactions, the medication has been well tolerated in the majority of patients including those with infectious complications prior to therapy [54, 69, 70] . data are limited in the use of emapalumab for secondary hlh in adults.in imcd the disease process is thought to be dependent on elevated il-6 levels perpetuating the hyperinflammatory state in most patients; therefore, use of il-6 targeted therapy is now the front-line management for patients with imcd with or without adjunctive steroids. siltuximab, a monoclonal antibody directed against il-6, in a placebo controlled trial has shown reduction in tumour burden and symptomatic response in a third (34%) of patients with responders having sustained disease control up to 6 years of follow-up [71] . tocilizumab, a monoclonal antibody directed against the il-6 receptor, has demonstrated similar improvement in symptoms and biochemical markers of disease activity in a single j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f arm study [72] . anti-il-6 therapy is well tolerated for many years in patients with disease response, though relapses may be common following cessation of therapy [32, 72] .the early observation of a substantial increase in il-6 during crs prompted the introduction of anti-il-6 agents for management receiving car-t therapy, with good effect [73] . tocilizumab is now fda approved for use in crs with response rates of 70% following 1-2 doses with a median time to response of 4 days [22, 37] . doses can be repeated every 6 to 24 hours until crs symptoms begin to improve. as tocilizumab is only used in short courses for a limited period, there is less concern of serious adverse events that may be seen in patients taking the drug long-term for rheumatologic indications.tocilizumab administration has been demonstrated to not affect car-t cell efficacy, and is thus the preferred first line agent over corticosteroids. tocilizumab appears to be not as effective for icans, likely because it does not cross the blood-brain barrier and targets the il-6 receptor with no direct il-6 lowering effect, leading to elevated systemic il-6 levels after therapy without cns protection [38, 40, 72] . direct targeting of il-6 by siltuximab may have better cns response, though this has not been studied in clinical trials.as il-6 levels correlate with disease severity in hospitalized covid-19 patients, anti-il-6 therapy has been one of the first treatment strategies explored during the pandemic [7] [8] [9] [10] . there have been several published case reports, as a well as two larger case series f rom china, using tocilizumab as a treatment for severe covid-19 demonstrating biochemical efficacy with decrease markers of inflammation, but the impact of clinical outcomes such as time in intensive care and mortality compared to supportive care, remains unknown [74] [75] [76] [77] [78] [79] . a recent large series of 100 consecutive patients with severe covid-19 demonstrated clinical stability or improvement in 77% of patients following administration of tocilizumab [80] . a press release for corimuno-toci (nct04331808), a multi-centre, open-label randomized controlled trial of tocilizumab in moderate and severe covid19 has suggested positive results and with the study currently under peer-review [81] . optimal timing of tocilizumab j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f initiation is unknown, but there is sound rationale that earlier treatment in patients demonstrating a pathologic inflammatory response may ameliorate immune-mediated lung injury. repeated doses of tocilizumab, similar in strategy to its use in car-t cell related crs, may be reasonable for patients with refractory covid-css. serious risks of tocilizumab in the short term include a small risk of bowel perforation, acute hepatic failure, and osteonecrosis of the jaw [82, 83] . case reports of hypertriglyceridemia and candidemia following tocilizumab infusion for covid-19 have been reported [84, 85] . there is a concern that the use of tocilizumab in covid-19 could increase the risk of secondary infections and delay viral clearance, as was postulated in the report of 2 cases of viral myocarditis following tociluzumab for covid-19 [86] . these safety concerns should be thoroughly evaluated in future studies. clinical trials of tocilizumab, siltuximab, and sarilumab (an il-6 receptor blocker) are currently being conducted in patients with moderate and severe covid-19 though trials specifically evaluating these agents in the covid-css population are not yet planned.in addition to their well-known anticoagulant properties, heparins are known to have antiinflammatory effects with lowering of il-6 levels specifically described [87] [88] [89] . in patients with covid-19, a retrospective study has observed reduction of il-6 levels in patients treated with low-molecular weight heparin (lmwh) [90] . given the maturing evidence of increased thrombotic risk in covid-19, lmwh may be a good adjunct therapy for covid-css to reduce both il-6 driven inflammation and thrombotic risk. optimal dosing strategies in patients without proven thromboembolic disease is not currently known but is being investigated in upcoming clinical trials (nct04359277).il-1-receptor blockade with anakinra has been used in case series and retrospective studies for hlh, with a clinical trial currently ongoing [91] [92] [93] . anakinra has been hypothesized to have utility for car-t crs and neurotoxicity based on the observation that il-1 elevations precede il-6 spike in murine crs models and treatment with anakinra therapy resulted in reduction of both cytokines [56, 58] .anakinra has the added benefit of having a very short half-life compared to other anti-cytokine therapies. a retrospective cohort study of 29 patients with covid-19 and moderate-to-severe ards, and hyperinflammation (crp ≥100 mg/l, and/or ferritin ≥900 ng/ml) treated with high dose anakinra demonstrated clinical improvement in 72% of patients, and improved survival compared to historical controls [94] .tnf inhibiting agents are available for the management of other inflammatory conditions, though at the time of this review no reports of tnf inhibition have been reported for covid-19. the use of tnf inhibitors has some potential concern these drugs have also been thought to trigger shlh in some case reports [95] [96] [97] . clinical trials for tnf inhibition in covid-19 are planned.to implement cellular responses to cytokines, cell surface receptors must connect these external environmental signals to the nucleus to guide gene expression, cell proliferation, and activity. this "bottle-neck" of inflammatory communication through shared internal signaling molecular pathways has facilitated the creation of targeted therapies that inhibit multiple cytokine pathways simultaneously. many cytokine and growth receptors signal through the janus kinase (jak) signal transducer of activators of transcription (stat) pathway; this has spurred the development of small molecular jak inhibitors for the treatment of inflammatory and neoplastic conditions [98] . these agents may be advantageous for disease states in which broader inhibition of cytokine signaling is required to control inflammation compared to the targeted blockade of single cytokines.ruxolitinib, a jak1/2 inhibitor already approved for the therapy of myeloproliferative neoplasm and rheumatologic disorders, has activity in murine hlh models by reducing inflammation through ifn-γ j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f dependant and independent pathways. this results in reduced activity and tissue infiltration of t-cells and neutrophils [52, 53] . case series in relapsed/refractory hlh, as well as a single case of upfront therapy for moderate severity hlh, have described biochemical and clinical efficacy in treatment of hlh with ruxolitinib monotherapy [99] [100] [101] . early phase clinical trials are ongoing, but preliminary results have demonstrated biochemical, hematologic, and clinical recovery in the few patients enrolled thus far [102] . importantly, the treatment is tolerated well with few adverse events reported, especially in contrast to standard regimens of prolonged chemotherapy combined with high dose steroids.patients with the tafro subtype of imcd will typically have a more aggressive course and most have no substantial response to il-6 blockade. analysis of molecular signalling pathways active in imcd patients refractory to anti-il-6 agents has implicated downstream activation of the pi3k/akt/mtor pathway, common to signalling of the t cell receptor and vegf pathways [103] . use of the mtor inhibitor sirolimus has met with early success in limited numbers of patients and a clinical trial in il-6 blockade refractory tafro patients is underway [32, 55, 103] . pre-clinical studies of cells obtained from patients with imcd have also indicated that jak inhibitors may be able to interrupt il-6 driven mtor pathway activation [55] .currently there are limited reports of the use of jak-stat or other cell signalling pathway inhibitors in the management of covid-css. the use of jak inhibitors is attractive as the medications are well tolerated, have short half-lives, and have the potential to target numerous inflammatory cytokine signaling pathways simultaneously. while ruxolitinib has been the agent most studied in hlh other jak inhibitors may have potential advantages. baricitinib, an oral jak1/2 inhibitor that is currently approved for treatment of rheumatoid arthritis, was recently identified by artificial intelligence-based technology as a potential immunomodulatory treatment strategy for sars-cov-2 [104] . at therapeutic doses baricitinib is predicted to inhibit clathrin-mediated endocytosis and viral entry into cells by blocking the ap2-associated protein kinase 1 (aak1) [104] . aak1 regulates endocytosis in numerous cell j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f types expressing ace2, the receptor that mediates sars-cov-2 viral entry, including lung at2 alveolar epithelial cells [104] . because any agent that dampens the inflammatory response could lead to a potential loss of immune-mediated viral control, the potential anti-viral effect makes baricitinib an attractive investigational therapy over agents that target disordered inflammation alone. of concern with baracitinib is the increased risk of thrombosis which may increase the rate of thrombotic complications already observed with covid-19 [105] . clinical experience with covid-19 is limited, but a pilot study of 12 patients has demonstrated improvement in fever, dyspnea, and hypoxia with an lower rate of icu admission than historical control [106] . table 6 .importantly, many of these assays are not routinely performed in hospital laboratories, and as such their clinical relevance remains to be determined by future studies that address both analytical and clinical validation of these markers.ferritin, the iron storage protein, and c-reactive protein (crp) are the acute phase reactants most widely available at hospitals for monitoring systemic inflammation. hyperferritinemia is the most common feature to prompt further evaluation for secondary hlh, with levels >10,000 µg/l observed in j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f 78.9% of adult patients and can frequently be in excess of 100,000 µg/l [27, 107] . patients with crs also demonstrate elevated ferritin levels with most patients reaching a peak over 3,000 and many in excess of 10,000 µg/l [38, 57] . patients experiencing higher grade crs have greater median peak ferritin and crp though with significant overlap in the observed ranges [38, 57] . similarly, ferritin and crp levels in patients with covid-19 are reportedly higher in patients with severe compared to moderate disease, and in patients who died compared to those that recovered [7, 8, 10] . in our experience with covid-css patients in the icu we have observed ferritin levels in the range of 1,000-10,000 µg/l with crp levels typically above 100 mg/l (hoiland r et al., manuscript under review).the measurement of d-dimer, a fibrin degradation product, is a widely available test that shows active clot formation and breakdown. its increase in systemic inflammation reflects the overlap between the physiologic inflammatory and thrombotic pathways. though not frequently used in the evaluation of the cytokine storm disorders, it has been correlated with severity of crs following car-t [38] . d-dimer levels correlate with disease severity in covid-19 and admission d-dimer >1 μg/ml has emerged as one of the earliest prognostic marker to identify patients with high mortality [43] .the pattern of inflammatory markers may be more useful than relying on absolute values alone in order to establish a diagnosis. in children with sjia the ratio of ferritin to erythrocyte sedimentation rate (esr) was useful for identifying patients with mas [108] . in one study of japanese hlh cases a ratio of sil-2r to ferritin predictive of those with lymphoma-associated rather than benign disease [109] .the soluble interleukin-2 receptor (sil2r) level is integrated into the hlh-2004 diagnostic criteria [26] . in adults with secondary hlh, levels >2400 u/ml demonstrate good sensitivity and specificity for diagnosing adult hlh with an area under the curve of 0.90 (95% confidence interval, 0.83-0.97) [107] . soluble il-2r levels have not been widely reported on in imcd, but one study found elevated j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f levels in 20 of 21 cases [34] . additionally it was observed that for patients on anti-il-6 therapy, sil-2r was one of the earliest markers that predicted disease relapse and failure of therapy [34, 110] . in car-t crs it has been observed that sil2r levels are markedly elevated in patients with severe compared to non-severe disease [57] . patients with covid-19 demonstrate higher sil2r levels in those with severe and fatal disease; though levels have thus far reported to be typically less than 2000 u/ml [7, 8, 10, 111] .il-6 is a key cytokine common to the pathophysiology of most css disorders and has important therapeutic implications. in hlh, data available in pediatric patients demonstrate moderate il-6 elevation though it has not been useful in distinguishing hlh from sepsis or other inflammatory conditions [112] . idiopathic mcd is conceptualized as a primarily a disorder of il-6 elevation, though serum il-6 levels in imcd may be normal or only mildly elevated. response rates to il-6 blockade do correlate with baseline il-6 levels in imcd, but many patients with low il-6 levels will improve with therapy while patients with high il-6 levels can show no response [32, 71] . il-6 levels peak with disease flares in imcd and can be used to monitor disease course, but once il-6 blockade is initiated serial monitoring is not useful. tocilizumab and sarilumab block the receptor for il-6 leading to clinical improvement while serum il-6 levels will remain stable or increase [72] . similarly, il-6 levels cannot be accurately interpreted for 12-18 months following the last dose of siltuximab. car-t crs demonstrates substantial increases in il-6 that correlates with severity of crs and may be orders of magnitude greater the levels reported for imcd, and hlh [38, 71, 112] . in covid-19 il-6 levels have been high for patients with more severe and fatal disease [7, 8, 10, 111] . in our institutions experience with covid-css observed levels of il-6 have been in the range of ~100-5000 pg/ml (manuscript under review).interferon-γ plays a central role in the pathogenesis of hlh, and elevated serum levels can help differentiate hlh from sepsis and other inflammatory disorders in children, but routine use for diagnosis in adults has not been studied [112, 113] . following emapalumab therapy, interferon-γ levels do not j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f correlate with disease response, but downstream targets of interferon such as cxcl9 and cxcl10 appear to have utility in monitoring disease activity and treatment response [54, 70] .use of cytokine measurements in css to diagnose and monitor disease activity and response to therapy is an area in need of further refinement. monitoring response to therapy requires in depth knowledge of drug targets and expected impact on cytokine levels, laboratory testing, and downstream pathway activation. more data, research, and experience are needed in order to develop the clinical acumen in interpretation of patterns and profiles of these diseases.covid-css has many clinical and pathologic similarities with other cytokine storm disorders.therapy for classic css conditions such as imcd and secondary hlh has been hampered by low numbers of patients, lack of diagnostic clarity and incompletely understood pathophysiology. progress has been made with the introduction of targeted therapy aimed at interrupting the positive feedback loops of inflammatory pathways. the story of crs following car-t cell therapy with comparatively rapid determination of pathophysiology and use of existing medications for treatment has been a recent success. future goals for css include improved access to immunophenotyping and expression profiling to inform our understanding of disease mechanisms, and enhancing diagnostic and monitoring capabilities.due to the lack of currently available evidence, the nih guidelines for the management of covid-19 do not recommend for or against cytokine inhibition with il-1 and il-6 blockade and specifically recommend against off-label use of jak pathway inhibitors outside of clinical trial [12] .current industry sponsored trials of sarilumab (nct04327388) and tocilizumab (nct04320615) in patients with severe-critical covid-19 are underway. however, they exclude critically ill patients requiring vasopressors and therefore will not address the question of whether these agents will be of  covid-19 appears to be a hypercoagulable state leading to microvascular thrombosis, a feature distinct from other hypercytokinemia syndromes  therapies targeting specific cytokines or common inflammatory signalling pathways have demonstrated benefit in hlh, imcd, and car-t crs and are well tolerated in those contexts.their role in covid-19 css is under active investigation. a pragmatic definition of covid-css will likely require a combination of clinical criteria (such as fever, hypotension, critical illness), widely available laboratory parameters (such as crp, ferritin, d-dimer), as well as novel biomarkers (such as il-1, il-6, other cytokines, and immunophenotyping). hlh -hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis; car-t cell -chimeric antigen receptor t cell; crscytokine release syndrome; icans -immune effector cell-associated neurotoxicity syndrome; imcd -idiopathic multicentric castleman disease; covid-css -coronavirus disease of 2019 associated cytokine storm syndrome; ebv -epstein-barr virus; cmv -cytomegalovirus; ardsacute respiratory distress syndrome the considerable associated illness leading to death has transformed it into a critical global public health issue. the current clinical investigation in patients with covid-19 has showed strong upregulation of cytokine and interferon production after critical infection with sars-cov2-induced pneumonia. the current research suggests that few groups of patients with covid-19 might have a cytokine storm syndrome. thus, identification and treatment of hyperinflammation using existing, approved therapies with proven safety profiles to address the immediate need to reduce the rising mortality.to date, no specific therapeutic drug or vaccine has been discovered to treat this covid-19. intensive research is in progress to identify a promising drug therapy.hence, several options were proposed to control this fast-emerging pandemic, including antiviral drugs, vaccines, small-molecules, monoclonal antibodies, oligonucleotides, peptides, and interferons (ifns).covid-19 pathogenesis covid-19 caused by sars-cov2 virus; a potentially fatal disease represents great global public health concern. this virus infects the lower respiratory tract and cause pneumonia in human, seems that the symptoms are milder than sars and mers [1] . as off now not much information about the mortality, pathobiology and cellular responses about this disease is known, a probable course of events can be postulated based on past studies with sars-cov. based on the cells that are likely infected, j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f sars-cov-2 infection can be roughly divided into three stages; i. asymptomatic phase with or without detectable virus, ii. non-severe symptomatic with upper airway and conducting airway response and iii. hypoxia, ground glass infiltrates, and progression of acute respiratory distress syndrome (ards) with high viral load that correspond to different clinical stages of the disease (fig 1) [2] . coronaviruses genome encodes four major proteins spike (s), nucleocapsid (n), membrane (m), and envelope (e). the s protein helps viral entry in to target cell of the body. research has shown that about 75 percent of the covid-19 s genome is the same as the sars-cov genome. however, the amino acid residues needed for receptor binding are the same between these two viruses. this also suggests that the entry receptor, ace-2, used by sars-cov is the same for sars-cov-2 as well [3] .the study in published in lancet shows ards is the main death cause of covid-19 causing common immunopathological event for sars-cov-2, sars-cov and mers-cov infections [4] . one of the main mechanisms for ards is the cytokine storm, the deadly uncontrolled systemic inflammatory response resulting from the release of large amounts of pro-inflammatory cytokines and chemokines by immune effector cells in sars-cov infection [5] . significantly high blood levels of cytokines and chemokines were also noted in patients with covid-19 infection that included   il1-β, il1ra, il7, il8, il9, il10, basic fgf2, gcsf, gmcsf, ifnγ, ip10, mcp1, mip1α, mip1β, pdgfb, tnfα, and vegfa. some of the severe cases that were admitted to the intensive care unit showed high levels of pro-inflammatory cytokines including il2, il7, il10, gcsf, ip10, mcp1, mip1α, and tnfα that are reasoned to j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f promote disease severity [6] . the cytokine storm will trigger a violent attack by the immune system to the body, cause ards and multiple organ failure, and finally lead to death in severe cases of sars-cov-2 infection, just like what occurs in sars-cov and mers-cov infection [5] . patients infected with covid-19 showed higher leukocyte numbers, abnormal respiratory findings, and increased levels of plasma proinflammatory cytokines. the main pathogenesis of covid-19 infection as a respiratory system targeting virus was severe pneumonia, rnaaemia, combined with the incidence of ground-glass opacities, and acute cardiac injury [4] .covid-19 cytokine storm actually refers to the phenomenon caused by sars-cov-2 infection and replication, in which the variety of cytokines in body fluids are rapidly produced after viral infections triggering the "suicide attack" of the human immune system (fig 2) [7] . the direct cause of death from acute covid-19 is that the sars-cov-2 destroy the human immune mechanism and trigger excessive immunity causing cytokine storm. moreover, cytokine storm damages lungs and multiple organs of the human body like heart, kidney and liver and eventually leading to multiple organ functions exhaustion [8, 9] . studies have shown that the sars-cov-2 enters cells through angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ace2). for this reason, lung tissue has become the main invasion target of the sars-cov-2 with high expression of ace2.after the virus entered the lung, the immune system sent a large number of immune cells to the lung tissue to kill the virus. this formed pneumonia, and the patient showed fever, cough, and difficulty breathing [4] . however, these immune cells cannot locate the virus accurately because they are not recognizing it. they only attack j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f indiscriminately and recruit more immune cells to kill the virus. once a cytokine storm is formed, the immune system may not be able to kill the virus, but it will certainly kill a large number of normal cells in the lung, which will seriously damage the function of the lung [1, 2] .the cytokine release syndrome (crs) seems to affect patients with severe conditions. since lymphocytopenia is often seen in severe covid-19 patients, the crs caused by sars-cov-2 virus has to be mediated by leukocytes other than t cells, as in patients receiving car-t therapy; a high wbc-count is common, suggesting it, in association with lymphocytopenia, as a differential diagnostic criterion for covid-19 [10] . one caveat is that mscs need to be activated by ifnγ to exert their antiinflammatory effects, which may be absent in severely affected patients as t cells are not well activated by sars-cov-2 infection. to enhance effectiveness, one could consider employing the "licensing-approach": pretreat mscs with ifnγ with/without tnf or il-1 [2] . such cytokine-licensed mscs could be more effective in the suppression of hyperactive immune response and promotion of tissue repair, as licensed-mscs are effective in lps-induced acute lung damage [11] . lung damage is a major hurdle to recovery in those severe patients. through producing various growth factors, mscs may help repair of the damaged lung tissue. it is important to mention that various studies have shown that in animal models with bleomycin-induced lung injury, vitamin b3 (niacin or nicotinamide) is highly effective in preventing lung tissue damage [12] . at present there is any specific drug or therapy has been proven to be safe and effective for treating covid-19. there are no food and drug administration (fda)approved drugs specifically to treat patients with covid-19. although reports have appeared in the medical literature and the lay press claiming successful treatment of patients with covid-19 with a variety of agents, definitive clinical trial data are needed to identify optimal treatments for this disease. the chemical agents previously used to treat sars and mers used as potential candidates to treat covid-19. the number of drugs and combinational therapies were identified by using previously approved drugs that could inhibit clathrin-mediated endocytosis, targeting viral protease, regulating immunity, inhibiting the inflammatory cytokine surge, improving pulmonary function and reducing lung viral loads, as an inhibitor of the host cell serine protease and angiotensin receptor blockers, lower the risk of acute respiratory distress syndrome (ards) and death and thereby inhibit viral infection of cells (table 1) . also, the treatments of covid-19 cytokine storm primarily focus on the anti-shock therapy these include drugs targeting interleukin-1 (il-1), il-6, il-18, and interferon-gamma [29] . while randomized trials will be needed to confirm which, if any, of these therapeutics will effectively treat covid-19-infected patients with cytokine storm syndrome, il-6 blockade has recently been reported to be in use in china with successful outcomes in some individuals receiving this as part of their treatment [10] .while working to prevent future outbreaks of deadly coronavirus infections with vaccine development and discovering new or re-purposed anti-viral medicines to treat the virus, we must also use all the knowledge at our disposal to treat those patients most at risk of dying including from covid-19-induced cytokine storms.there are no financial or other interests related to this review that represent a conflict of interest. j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f table 1 . combinational remedies and drugs as potential targets for covid-19.thalidomide and glucocorticoids sars-cov-2regulating immunity, inhibiting the inflammatory cytokine surge[30]remdesivir and ifna2improves pulmonary function and reduce lung viral loads [13] chloroquine and hydroxychloroquine sars-cov-2regulating immunomodulatory effects through attenuation of cytokine production and inhibition of autophagy [31] lopinavir and ritonavir hiv, mers-cov and sars-cov-2inhibitor, inhibits 3clpro [13] lopinavir, oseltamivir and ritonavirtargeting viral protease [32] lopinavir, ritonavir, and interferon betaslightly reduces viral loads improving pulmonary function[20]convalescent plasma sars-cov-2,inhibits virus entry to the target cells, suppress viraemia [13] hydroxychloroquine and azithromycin sars-cov-2 viral load reduction through inhibition of replication [33] camostat mesilate hydroxychloroquine sars-cov-2 inhibitor of the host cell serine protease and angiotensin receptor blockers[34]darunavir and umifenovir sars-cov-2 viral load reduction through inhibition of replication [35] ribavirin and interferon-α sars-cov-2lower the risk of acute respiratory distress syndrome (ards) and death [36] hydroxychloroquine and nitazoxanide sars-cov-2 adjuvant therapy in covid-19 [37] fig 1. covid-19 pathogenesis phases and potential therapeutic targets (modified and adopted from siddiqi and mehra, 2020 [38] ).j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o fthe covid-19, now named sars-cov2, spreading in wuhan, china, and now spread globally rapidly [1] . it is reported that covid-19 has the same viral genome (above 85% identity in the genome), and pathophysiology mechanisms with the sars-cov [2] . the covid-19 infection affecting all age-groups, but it appears to be more severe in elderly adults [3] . it seems that very high pro-inflammatory cytokine release, which is described as cytokine storm, is a pivotal pathophysiological mechanism in elderly covid-19 patients [4] . aging is related to increased levels of systemic pro-inflammatory cytokines and decreased levels of systemic anti-inflammatory cytokines. hence, a chronic condition of inflammation may be created in aged subjects, known as "inflamm-aging" [5, 6] . ample studies have indicated elevated levels of interleukin (il)-6, il-1, tumor necrosis factor-α (tnf α), as well as c-reactive protein (crp) in aged subjects [7, 8] . although, the exact underlying mechanism of cytokine storm in elderly adults with severe covid-19 infection is far from clear. however, it is likely that dysregulation of the cytokine homeostasis in "inflameaging" phenomenon may play a critical role in the risk of a cytokine storm, and subsequently acute respiratory distress syndrome (ards) in some elderly patients with severe covid-19 infection. it seems that "cytokine storm" phenomenon in elderly patients with severe covid-19 infection, is associated with many age-related pathophysiologic processes, including alteration of angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ace2) receptor expression [9] , excess ros production [10] , alteration of autophagy [11] , the inflammatory phenotype of senescent cell activity, particularly adipose tissue [12] , and immune-senescence [13] , as well as lack of vitamin d content [14] . here, we are going to review and discuss all above mentioned age-related pathophysiological pathways that appear to contribute to the dysregulation of cytokine networks and possibly a cytokine storm in elderly patients with severe covid-19 infection.it has been shown that covid-19 infection has distinctive behavior among elderly adults (severe infection) as compared with children and young adults (none or mild infection). indeed, covid-19 infection can induce severe infection, including pneumonia and ards in some elderly adults or sick patients, and not in children or young adults [15] . what is the reason that the deadly cases of covid-19 mainly seen in elderly patients? here, first we are going to review and compare the possible pathophysiology mechanisms of mild infection and severe infection in young and elderly adults with covid-19, respectively.despite increasing evidences on the immune response to pathogens, however, less is known about the exact immunologic mechanism of covid-19 infections. as shown in fig. 1 , initiation of the immune response against invading coronavirus begins with a direct infection of the bronchi and bronchiole epithelium. first, antigen-independent innate immunity provides the first line of leukocytes defense against microorganisms. innate immune defense involves several cell types, including leukocytes such as neutrophils, eosinophils, basophils, monocytes, macrophages, lung epithelial cells, mast cells, natural killer (nk cells) [16] . following initial covid-19 infection, lung-resident dendritic cells (dcs) become activated and change to antigen-presenting cells (apcs). indeed, apcs are the first line of defense in recognizing various pathogens. in the lung, dcs resides in and below the airway epithelium, the alveolar septa, pulmonary capillaries, and airway spaces [17] . activated apcs ingests, and processes an antigen and migrate to the lymph nodes. then, in the lymph nodes, apc presents the antigen in the form of mhc/peptide complex to naïve circulating t helper cells (th0), inducing the immune response [18] . following activation of th0 receptor by mhc/peptide complex, t helper cells become activated, proliferate and differentiated to cd4 + (t helper lymphocytes) and cd8 + (cytotoxic t lymphocytes) cells. then, cd4 + th lymphocytes further differentiated into th1 and th2, with different cytokine profiles [19] . th1 cells drive cellular immunity and released pro-inflammatory cytokines such as ifn-γ, il-1β, il-12, and tnf-α [17] . it is reported that cytokine ifn-γ can inhibit viral replication and enhance antigen presentation [20] . th2 cells activated humoral immunity and antibody production and released anti-inflammatory cytokines such as tgf-β, il-4, il-5, il-9, il-10 and il-13 [21] . in fact, a balanced between th1 and th2 lymphocyte activity is observed in healthy adults with covid-19 infection. furthermore, cd8 + t lymphocytes cytotoxic t cells, as cytotoxic cells, secrete cytotoxic molecules such as granzyme b that kill infected epithelial cells. indeed, cd8 + t lymphocytes and natural killer cells (nk) play a critical contribution in viral clearance [17] . both t and b cell responses against covid-19 observed in the systemic blood pool 1 week after the initiation of covid-19 symptoms. the autopsy of a patient with covid-19 identified an accumulation of mononuclear cells (likely monocytes and t cells) in the lungs, with low levels of hyperactive t cells in the peripheral blood. these findings suggested that likely t cells are attracted away from the systemic blood pool and into the infected site (lung) to control the covid-19 infection [21] . generally, activation of different th cells and release of ample cytokines and chemokines recruit more innate, cell-mediated and humoral immunologic responses to control covid-19 in adults. additionally, it seems that the balance between proinflammatory and anti-inflammatory immune responses in the healthy adult can shut down immune activity at the right moment [22] .it was observed that ards, pneumonia and multi-organ dysfunction are the main immune-clinical symptoms of covid-19 infection. it is well accepted that ards and pneumonia in deadly cases are due to severe inflammatory responses to the immune system, this so-called a cytokine storm [23] . on the other hand, severe multi-organ destruction is due to the cytokine storm rather than a direct damaging effect of the virus itself [24] . it is noteworthy when covid-19 pathogen reached to the alveoli in elderly and weak adults, pro-inflammatory immune responses become vigorous and un-controllable active. furthermore, impaired anti-inflammatory responses in elderly adults may correlate to increased activity of pro-inflammatory responses [25] . hence, some elderly adults with severe covid-19 infection cannot shut down their pro-inflammatory immune response. several studies reported most patients with severe covid-19 exhibit markedly increased serum levels of pro-inflammatory cytokines, including; ifn-α, ifn-γ, il-1β, il-6, il-12, il-17, il-18, il-33, tnf-α, g-csf, gm-csf, ip10, c-reactive protein (crp), mcp1, and mip1α [26] [27] [28] . it is necessary to mention that cytokines storm directly may lead to immune cell death, tissue damage, and respiratory shut down [25] . for example, the autopsy findings of aged subjects revealed spleen atrophy and necrosis, lymph node necrosis, hemorrhage in the kidney, hepatomegaly, and degeneration of the neurons in the central nervous system in covid-19 patients. the number of immune cells also changed in covid-19 infection [29, 30] . indeed, in patients with severe covid-19 infection, but not in patients with a mild infection, lymphopenia is a common feature, with significantly reduced numbers of cd4 + t cells, cd8 + t cells, b cells and nk cells. furthermore, exhaustion markers, such as nkg2a receptors on nk cells and cd8 + t cells, are up-regulated in patients with covid-19 [28, 31] . histochemical staining showed that cd4 + t cells and cd8 + t cells were decreased in spleen and lymph nodes. in addition, in the lung with characteristic diffused alveolar damage, the major infiltrated cells were monocytes and macrophages, but very few lymphocytes [32] . tian and colleagues in 2020 using postmortem biopsies identified alveolar damage, fibrosis of the heart and myocardial hypertrophy, and also lobular infiltration of the liver by small lymphocytes in four died cases of covid-19 [33] .in addition to cytokine storm, viral particles of covid-19 can also directly induce multiple organ dysfunctions. because viral particles of covid-19 infection were identified in the bronchial and type 2 alveolar epithelial cells, fecal, and urine samples [29, 34, 35] . hence, it is suggested that multiple organ dysfunction in severe covid-19 patients can also cause by a direct attack of the virus. it is far from clear whether cytokine storm, direct effects of the virus, or the synergistic effects of both, contribute to the multiple organ failures in severe covid-19 patients [35] . here, proliferate and differentiated to other cells such as cd4 + (t helper lymphocytes) and cd8 + (cytotoxic t lymphocytes) cells. in healthy adults, due to sufficient vitamin d level, vd can decrease the expression of pro-inflammatory genes in immune cells. a balanced between pro-inflammatory and anti-inflammatory activity causes shut down of the immune system at the right moment we are going to review the link between cytokine storm in elderly patients of covid-19 and "inflame-aging".aging is related to elevated systemic levels of pro-inflammatory cytokines, including il-6, il-8, tnf-α, il-13, ifnγ, as well as acute phase proteins. ample studies reported a chronic mild inflammation in aging, which is described as "inflame-aging". this phenomenon can promote ageassociated disorders, including diabetes mellitus, alzheimer's disease, atherosclerosis, etc. accordingly, it seems that increased generation of pro-inflammatory markers and "inflame-aging" have a critical role in the process of cytokine storm in severe covid-19 patients and enhanced mortality risk [8, 36] . as shown in fig. 2 , several factors, including alteration of ace2 receptor expression, excess reactive oxygen species (ros) production, senescent adipocytes activity, alteration of autophagy and mitophagy, immune-senescent, as well as vitamin d (vd) deficiency, may associate "inflame-aging" to cytokine storm in elderly patients of covid-19.the renin-angiotensin system (ras) is an important regulator of several physiologic events, including cardiovascular and blood volume, natriuresis, diabetes, chronic renal disease, and hepatic fibrosis [37, 38] . this system is composed of two different pathways, including angiotensin-converting enzyme (ace)/angiotensin ii (ang ii)/angiotensin receptor type 1 (at1) (ace/ang ii/at1) pathway; and angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ace2)/ang 1-7/mas receptor (ace2/ang 1-7/mas) pathway. these two pathways have opposing effects to accommodate a coordinated response to specific triggers. the activity of ace/ang ii/at1 pathway related to tissue injury, inflammation and fibrosis [39] . in contrast, the activity of the ace2/ang 1-7/mas pathway exerts anti-inflammatory and anti-fibrosis effects [39, 40] . ace2 degrades ang ii, as a major substrate for ace2, and generates ang-(1-7) [38] . recently, it is well accepted that ace2 on lung epithelial cells are the entry-point receptors for covid-19 particles [41] . it is demonstrated that the highest expression of ace2 is in the lungs (type ii alveolar epithelial cells), kidney, heart, and also vascular beds [37] . yu and colleagues in 2018 revealed that ace2/ang-(1-7)/mas pathway markedly suppressed in pancreatitis by inhibition of the p38 mapk/nf-κb signaling pathway [38] . fu and colleagues in 2017 transfected ace2 plasmid in primary cultured human retinal pigment epithelium cells (hrpe) followed by stimulation with amyloid-β (aβ). they observed that overexpression of ace2 markedly decreased aβ-induced inflammatory response by activating the ace2/ ang-(1-7)/mas pathway in hrpe [42] . in the respiratory syncytial virus, ace2 protected against severe lung injury both in children and an experimental mouse model. in addition, in the ards model, ace2 knockout mice displayed more severe symptoms of respiratory shut down compared fig. 2 the link between "inflame-aging" and cytokine storm in in elderly adults with severe covid-19. several aging-related factors may associate chronic inflammation to cytokine storm in elderly patients of covid-19 with wild-type mice [43] . indeed, treatment strategy using ace2 analogs or vector containing ace2 result in beneficial effects in diabetic nephropathy, hypertension, cardiac disease [37] . specific inhibitors of at1 receptors, losartan, have been shown to be effective in animal models of septic shock. therefore, the above mentioned studies suggested that ace2 pathway has anti-inflammatory effects. several studies identified age-related decline of ace2 expression [40, 44, 45] . for example, in the study of xudong and colleagues in 2006 revealed age-related difference of ace2 expression revealed in rat lung. they observed ace2 expression is significantly reduced with aging. they are suggesting the more elevated ace2 in young adults as compared to age groups may contribute to the predominance in sars attacks in this age group [44] . using gtex gene expression data and analysis, chen and colleagues in 2020 found markedly higher expression of ace2 in asian females compared to males. furthermore, they found an age-dependent decline of ace2 expression, and also a highly significant decrease in type ii diabetic patients. additionally, they established a negative correlation between ace2 expression and covid-19 fatality. interestingly, in severe cases, many vital tissues, including those with little ace2 expressed are severely damaged by covid-19 infection [45] . these evidences may partially suggest that the increase concentration of ace2 receptors in lung epithelial cells in children and young adults may have a protective effect on severe clinical manifestations due to covid-19 infection. therefore, it is highly likely that low ace2 expression and unbalance ang ii/ang1-7 level during aging can lead to cytokine storm and lung shut down [40, 41] . however, the genetic basis of ace2 expression and its function in different individuals is still far from clear [46] .it is well accepted that ros considered as a signaling molecule (at low concentrations), and also as a mediator of inflammation (at high concentrations) [47] . the main sources of ros are mitochondrial respiratory chain and nadph oxidase [48] . garrido and colleagues in 2019 identified that the immune cells of pre-maturely aging mice presented lower values of antioxidant defenses and higher values of ros and pro-inflammatory cytokines [10] . hence, it is suggested that excess ros production during aging can turn on an inflammatory machine and subsequently increased release of pro-inflammatory cytokines, including; tnf-α, il-1β, il-2, and il-6, and adhesion molecules. the excess ros production in aging can initiate the proinflammatory generation through activation of multiple transcription factors, including human polynucleotide phosphorylase (hpnpaseold-35), nuclear factor kappa b (nf-κb), activator protein 1 (ap-1), specificity protein 1 (sp1), peroxisome proliferator-activated receptors (ppars) [49, 50] . for example, it is reported that hpnpaseold-35, which is up-regulated during senescence, may promote the activation of nf-κb pathway and initiates the production of proinflammatory cytokines, such as il-6 and il-8 [51] . furthermore, the expression of hpnpaseold-35 itself induces ros production. this suggests that hpnpaseold-35 could be an upstream signaling molecule that increased ros generation and subsequent pro-inflammatory cytokines during aging. in addition to hpnpaseold-35, nf-κb is also an important transcription factor that up-regulated during aging by excess ros production. in resting states, an inhibitory protein, ikb, inactivated nf-κb in the cytoplasm. however, ros production can phosphorylate inhibitory ikb proteins, leading to nuclear translocation of nf-κb and regulation of gene transcription. then, activated nf-κb can initiate the secretion and release of pro-inflammatory cytokines, including tnf-a, il-1, il-6, il-8, ifn-g, inos, cox-2 [50] . interestingly, as the excess ros production can increase pro-inflammatory cytokines, the pro-inflammatory cytokines can also increase ros production [52] . for instance, it has been identified that the pro-inflammatory cytokine il-6 can increase ros generation by increased expression of nadph oxidase-4 in lung cancer [53] . additionally, it has been demonstrated that the pro-inflammatory cytokine interferon-γ and the pro-inflammatory component of the bacterial cell wall, lipopolysaccharide, can synergistically increase ros generation in human pancreatitis by nf-κb-dependent expression of duox2, a member of the nadph oxidase family [54] . hence, excess ros production and inflammation are closely related, which are taking part in the pathogenesis of chronic inflammation and "inflame-aging" in elderly adults.autophagy is a conserved catabolic turnover pathway in eukaryotic cells by which cellular material delivered into the lysosomes for degradation. autophagy process is related to the maintenance of cellular homeostasis, and its dysregulation could lead to the development of several aging-related pathophysiological diseases [11] . it has been shown that the autophagy process, decrease during aging, leads to the accumulation of damaged macromolecules and organelles. the decline of autophagy during aging can induce dysfunctional mitochondria, and subsequent increased ros production [55] . mitochondria are the major source of ros. in this context, two major processes are for protection from harmful effects of ros, including mitophagy and antioxidant capacity. in one hand, mitophagy, which is characterized by autophagic degradation of mitochondria, decreased with aging [56] . on the other hand, decreased mitophagy, together with decreased antioxidant capacity during aging can increased ros levels in the body. the excess production of ros in stress condition leading to memory deficits, anxiety-like behavior and increase pro-inflammatory cytokine secretion during aging [57] [58] [59] [60] . although, the exact underlying mechanism of how the decline in autophagy and a rise in ros levels during aging can elevate pro-inflammatory cytokine release is far from clear. however, it is well accepted that low activity of autophagy process and high level of ros production during aging, can activate and upregulate nod-like receptors (nlrs) [54] . the nlrs are a type of intracellular pattern-recognition receptors (prrs) for pathogen recognition. they monitor both inflammation and apoptosis signaling pathways. these receptors expressed in many cell types, including immune cells (lymphocytes, macrophages, dendritic cells) and even epithelial cells [61] . it is observed that activation of cytosolic nlrs increased during aging and in many age-related diseases such as type 2 diabetes mellitus. for example, from ebersole and colleagues study in 2017 identified that expression of nlrs increased with aging in the healthy oral mucosa [62] . additionally, luan and colleagues in 2018 found that nlrp3 expression increased in concanavalin a-induced hepatitis (as a model of autoimmune hepatitis) [63] . salminen and colleagues in 2012 reported that the decrease of autophagic capacity during aging generates the inflammatory situation by means the activation of pro-inflammatory factors, in particular nlrp3 [55] . it is accepted that nlrs activity can increase expression of caspase-1, and pro-inflammatory cytokines, including il-1β and il-18, leading to cell death (fig. 3) . for example, nadatani in 2016 reported that caspase-1 can induce pyroptosis, a unique form of programmed cell death, through the conversion of pro-il1β and pro-il18 fig. 3 the role of alteration of mitophagy in "inflame-aging" and subsequent cytokine storm in elderly adults. the decline of mitophagy during aging, increased ros production. on one hand, excess ros production can activate and up-regulate intracellular nod-like receptor type 3 (nlr3). nlrs over-activity increase expression of caspase-1, and pro-inflammatory cytokines, including il-1β and il-18, leading to pyroptosis (cell death) of immune cells. in other hand, the excess ros production can increase the pro-inflammatory molecules release through activation of multiple transcription factors, including human polynucleotide phosphorylase (hpnpaseold-35), nuclear factor kappa b (nf-κb), activator protein 1 (ap-1), specificity protein 1 (sp1), peroxisome proliferator-activated receptors (ppars) in their active forms, which promotes further inflammation. in pyroptosis, the dying cells release their cytoplasmic pro-inflammatory contents into the extracellular fluid [64] . similarly, wang's and colleagues revealed that treatment of ac-yvad-cmk, an inhibitor of nlrp3-caspase-1, suppressed isoflurane-induced microglial inflammatory response in aged mice [65] . this finding is a critical study for supporting that nlrp3/caspase-1 pathway is involved in the pathophysiology of chronic inflammatory disease in elderly adults (fig. 3) . furthermore, stranks in 2015 found that macrophages from aged mice exhibit markedly reduced autophagic flux as compared to young mice. they also reported that reduced autophagy during aging, increased macrophage populations and their phagocytosis function, decreased surface antigen expression, while the increased the inflammatory cytokine response [66] . additionally, in animal model studies, increase autophagy by means caloric restriction and also exercise, result in down-regulation of il-1β production and improve the aging-related proinflammatory profile. so, it seems that crosstalk between the decline of mitophagy pathways and elevated ros level during aging can imbalance, immune system activity of elderly adults [67] .senescent cells accumulate with aging in many animal and human tissues, leading to chronic inflammation and organ dysfunction [68] . senescent cells have lower cell viability, as well as insufficient protection against oxidative stress [69] . additionally, senescent cells can release pro-inflammatory cytokines, including il-1α, il-1β, il-6, il-8, il-18, ccl-2, tnf-α, granulocyte macrophages colony-stimulating factor (gm-csf), growth regulated oncogene (gro), monocyte chemotactic protein (mcp)-2, mcp-3, mmp-1, mmp-3 [70, 71] . so, the immune effector is not the main source of inflammatory markers. aging studies revealed the importance of adipose tissue inflammation in aged animals by the elevated release of interleukin 6, il-8, il-1β, as well as tnf-α [68] [69] [70] . adipose tissue is a dynamic structure that plays an important contribution in modulating of metabolism and inflammation. it is highly likely that adipose tissue dysfunction (for instance obesity during aging) is associated with chronic inflammation in aged subjects [12] . petrakis and colleagues in 2020 reported that age-related obesity leading to increased susceptibility of more serious complications of covid-19 as compared to younger individuals. in obese covid-19 patients, the adipose tissue interacts with the immune system and increased the lethality of the infection by fat tissue-associated cytokines (adipokines) release. adipocytes released amyloid-a (an adipokine), which act directly on macrophages and increased generation of pro-inflammatory cytokines. the mortality rate for young adults with covid-19 (with normal body mass index) was approximately 2%. however, the mortality rate for obese elderly adults with covid-19 was approximately 14% [72] . in addition to obesity, covarrubias and colleagues found that during aging senescent cells significantly accumulate in visceral white adipose tissue and inflammatory cytokines found in the supernatant from senescent cells, which are induced macrophages to proliferate and to express cd38, as a t cell activation marker [73] . alicka and colleagues in 2020 found that adipose-derived stem cells from older groups exhibited increased gene expression of pro-inflammatory gene and mirnas (such as il-8, il-1β, tnf-α, mir-203b-5p, and mir-16-5p), and apoptosis markers (such as p21, p53, caspase-3, caspase-9) [69] . ghosh and colleagues in 2016 reported that decreased autophagy activity during aging associated with increased adipose tissue er stress and inflammation in old adipose tissue-derived stromal vascular fraction cells (svfs) in mice. they also revealed that accumulation of autophagy substrates lc3-ii and p62 increased in old svfs, implicated impaired autophagy activity. furthermore, they reported that old svfs had reduced expression of autophagy markers. they also analyzed that decreased autophagy activity in old svfs is correlated with increased secretion of pro-inflammatory cytokines, including il-6 and mcp-1 [74] . therefore, the elevated release of pro-inflammatory cytokines by senescence adipocytes possibly leads to the elevated risk of the cytokine storm in covid-19 infection in poor prognosis patients.with progressive age, the function of the innate and adaptive immune system undergoes physiological and morphological alteration throughout a lifetime, which is characterized as an immune-senescence [13, 75] . indeed, immune-senescence is described as the progressive loss of all immune effectors in both the innate and cell-mediated immune systems with aging [76] . a normal and physiologic immunity depends on effective cross-talk between innate and adaptive immune systems, so senescent immune effectors markedly impact on the health of elderly individuals [75] . here, we are going to briefly report age-related alteration of both innate and adaptive immune cells. macrophages are central effector cells of the innate immune system and have many physiological functions [77] . macrophage can produce several pro-(tnfα, il-1, and il-6) and anti-inflammatory (il-10, tgfβ, acute phase proteins, and glucocorticoids) molecules, enzymes, growth factors, nitric oxide, toxic reactive radicals, metalloproteinases and inhibitors of metalloproteinases. as the clearance of pathogens proceeds, the anti-inflammatory effectors of macrophages turn off macrophage inflammatory activities [78] . therefore, during a pathogen-induced inflammatory episode, the balance of macrophage modulating secretion present in the tissues. during aging, the generation of several macrophage-induced factors is reduced, including fibroblast growth factor, vascular endothelial growth factor, epithelial growth factor, tgfβ, toxic free radicals, and expression of nitric oxide synthase. additionally, phagocytic and chemotactic activity of macrophages also decreased by a decline in production of macrophage-specific chemokines, including macrophage inflammatory protein (mip)-1 and mip-2 with advanced age. macrophages can also display antigen-presenting activity by expressing major histocompatibility class (mhc), leading to a cross-talk between innate and cell-mediated immune system. it is reported that with progressive age, the expression of (mhc)-ii, decreased in both mice and humans [79, 80] . natural killer (nk) cells are another cytotoxic effector of the innate immune system and involved in the early, and fast, faster than t cells, defense against virus infection and other challengers [81] . the nk cells, such as macrophages, linking innate and cell-mediated immune system. nk cells regulate immune function by the generation and release of various cytokines [82] . an increase in numbers of circulating nk cells reported during aging [75] . one of the important cytokines for cytotoxic activity of nk cells is il-2, which increases killing properties and proliferation of nk cells. in a healthy young individual, il-2 can induce ifn secretion by nk cells, but this effect decreased in elderly [83] . furthermore, aging can change the nk cells phenotypes, which are an increase in cd56 dim cells and a decrease in cd56 bright cells. in addition, aging can increase the expression of the immune-senescence marker, cd57, on nk cell populations [84] . dendritic cells (dcs), are another component of the innate immune system and have a critical role in both immunity and tolerance. the resident dcs are immature, but the capture of pathogens converts them to mature form, known as antigen-presentation cells (apcs), through up-regulation of mhc expression. then, mature apcs monitor th1 and th2 function. in contrast, immature dcs induce tolerance to self-antigens [25] . in physiological condition, dcs take up self-antigen and apoptotic cells and transport them to the lymph nodes [85] . but, during migration for the presentation of pathogens to th0 cells, they undergo several phenotype alterations, including up-regulation of mhc class i and ii molecules and down-regulation of adhesion molecules [86] . furthermore, dcs can generate and release various cytokines, so they can modulate inflammatory responses [87] . it is reported that increased age-related pro-inflammatory cytokines can induce activation and maturation of dcs. panda and colleagues in 2010 identified an increase of pro-inflammatory cytokines released from dcs in elderly adults [88] . moreover, the activity of dcs in elderly adults was higher than young individuals [89] . ageing is also accompanied by profound and consistent alterations of t-cell immunity [90] . although, t-cell numbers do not diminish during aging, however, the t-cell pool exhibit potent age-related alterations, including poor t-cell mitogen responses, an inverted cd4+/cd8+ t-cell ratio, reduced proportion of naive cells, as well as an increased proportion of memory cells, in older animals and human [91] . additionally, aging is related to the overproduction of pro-inflammatory cytokines by t cells, leading to immune pathology [92] . the cd8+cd28− subset of cells in the expanded memory cell population has shortened telomeres, suggesting that they have a longer reflective history [93] . in humans, almost all t cells express cd28 at birth, and the proportion of cd28+ declines by the age [81, 93] . the increase in these cells has been observed consistently and is used as a prognostic indicator of immune-senescence in older populations [94] . it is demonstrated that aging also changes the cytokine profile of th2 cells (il-4 and il-10) rather than th1 type (il-2, ifn-g), leading to mild age-related inflammation in elderly adults. aging can also potentially affect other th cells pool. the ratio of th17 cells/ t regulatory cells increased during aging, leading to a basal inflammatory state in elderly adults [95] . th17 cells have the pro-inflammatory phenotype, and they are in balance with tregulatory anti-inflammatory cells. these cells are derived from a common precursor (th0) [96] . t regulatory cells are a subset characterized by a high expression of cd25 and foxp3, a transcriptional factor for the function and differentiation of t regulatory cells [97] . in addition to anti-inflammatory effects of t regulatory cells, also recognize self-antigens [98] . furthermore, ageing is correlated with disruption of lymphocyte telomerase up-regulation [99] . it is accepted that shortened lymphocyte telomeres are associated with a variety of age-associated pathologies [100] . furthermore, during aging naïve t-cells show multiple alterations, including the shortening of telomeres, the reduced production of il-2 and the diminished ability to differentiate themselves into effector-cells. the loss in the number and function of the naïve t-cells, with increasing of t cd8+, cd45ro+, cd25+ clones in aged subjects [101] . cd28-cells are responsible for the production of pro-inflammatory cytokines and are resistant to apoptosis. it is proposed that they are undergoing cells to senescence, due to the shortening of telomeres and reduction of the proliferative capacity [102] . interestingly, pro-inflammatory cytokines have been also implicated in these age-associated alterations of t-cell immune-senescence. indeed, inflammatory conditions in elderly adults lead to alterations in t-cell immunity. for instance, age-related increased cytokine tnfα is a potent stimulator of tcd4+ cell senescence and t-cell differentiation [90] . humoral immunity mediated by b lymphocytes has a critical role in the modulation of adaptive immunity responses. b lymphocytes produce different types of antibodies for eliminating of challengers. additionally, b lymphocytes have an important role in the immune system through the presentation of antigens and secretion of cytokines [103] . b lymphocytes arising from hematopoietic stem cells in the bone marrow as pro-b lymphocytes. then, they differentiate into pre-b and then b lymphocytes [104] . ample studies identified that aging is accompanied by quantitative and qualitative alteration of b lymphocyte pool [105] . the number of b lymphocytes and the levels of serum immunoglobulin and antibody analyzed during the aging. the hematopoietic stem cells in the bone marrow from aged mice are less effective at generating both b lymphocytes as compared to young mice. the number and the size of the germinal centers of b lymphocytes also decreased with aging. production of precursor b lymphocytes in the bone marrow and the number of pro-b and pre-b lymphocytes decreased in aged mice and human [104] . it has been shown that aged pro-b lymphocytes havean impaired ability to respond to il-7. also, both human naïve and igm memory b lymphocytes impaired during aging [106] . the percentage of igm memory b lymphocytes are not markedly decreased, however, the total numbers of b lymphocytes decreased. additionally, the antibody level is decreased in the aged subjects. in addition, the affinity and protective ability of antibodies in aged mice decreased as compared to the young mice [75, 107] . it is also reported that the immune response to influenza in old mice has less igg level than in young mice. also, young mice had mostly igg1 plasma level with high-affinity antibody. in contrast, aged mice mostly had igm plasma cells [108] . hence, antigen-specific antibody responses decline in old mice. the decreased function of b lymphocytes (such as antigen-specific antibody response and antibody affinity) during aging has been attributed to lack of th function. because the function of b lymphocytes is t-dependent [97, 109] . taken together, immune-senescence alterations cannot properly fit cell-mediating and humeral immune response in elderly adults. the immune system appears to maintain a mild inflammatory state in elderly adult. therefore, it is suggested that fragile and mildly overactive immune system in elderly adults cannot turn off the pro-inflammatory machine in covid-19 infection. clinical findings in severe patients with covid-19 infection are in consistent with the above mention literature. several manifestations including; lymphopenia, reduced numbers of cd4 + t cells, cd8 + t cells, b cells and natural killer (nk) cells, monocytes, eosinophils and basophils reported in severe patients with covid-19 infection [25] . schouten and colleagues in 2019 identified that increasing pro-inflammatory cytokines during aging also correlated with the severity of ards and may partially explain age-dependent difference [110] .vd together with vitamin d receptor (vdr) has both classical functions (such as bone and calcium-phosphorus homeostasis), and non-classical function (such as antiinflammatory and immune-regulatory function) [111, 112] . vdr is expressed by several types of immune cells, including monocytes, macrophages, b and t lymphocytes, as well as dcs [113] . additionally, the α-1-hydroxilase enzyme, which converts inactive metabolite of vd (25(oh) d3) to the active form (1,25(oh)2d3), is expressed by the majority of immune cells such as macrophages [112] . liu and colleagues in 2014 reported that the expression of vdr and α-1-hydroxylase increased in macrophages following exposure to a pathogen [114] . this finding suggested that the intracrine immune-regulatory function of vd. as shown in fig. 4 , vd can decrease the expression of pro-inflammatory genes (such as tnf-α, il-6, monocyte chemotatic protein1 (mcp-1), and il-12β) in immune cells through suppressing excessive ros production, increasing intracellular glutathione levels, suppressing nf-κb and p38 map kinase expression. excess ros production can increase nf-kb expression in immune cells, leading to excess secretion of pro-inflammatory cytokines, including tnf-a, il-1, il-6, il-8, ifn-g, inos, cox-2 [50] . activation of p38 map kinase pathway can also increase il-6 and mcp-1 generation in immune cells by stimulation of the signal transducer and activator of transcription1/5 (stat1/5) [115] . it seems that pathogen challengers turn macrophages on by stimulation of pprs (such as tlr2/1or nlrs). activation of tlrs or nlr can increase intracellular vdr and α-1-hydroxylase expression. then, a complex of vd and vdr together can decrease the pro-inflammatory cytokines, increase the autophagy activity of macrophages, and antimicrobial product generation, including cathelicidin and β-defensin in macrophages [116] . in addition, of immune regulatory effects of vd on macrophages, it can also suppress the differentiation, and migration of human dcs, and decrease the expression of mhcii on dcs, which are characterized as the tolerogenic properties [114, 117] . tolerogenic dcs can increase the number of il-10 producing cd4+ t-cells and t regulatory cells. elevated circulating cd4+ t regulatory have of anti-inflammatory functions and also attenuated the inflammatory response of t-effector cells. these tolerogenic actions of dcs are mediated by increased expression of foxp3 transcription factor [118] . furthermore, vd can also make a complex with vdr on the t lymphocytes, leading to suppression of its proliferation. hoe and colleagues in 2016 reported that vd markedly decreased proinflammatory cytokines (tnf-α, ifn-γ, and il-1β, il-8, ifn-γ) in response to bacterial ligands exposure. vd also increased the level of anti-inflammatory cytokine (il-10) [119] . hence, vd can modulate both innate and adaptive immune responses. elderly adults are at risk for vd deficiency due to several factors, including decreased pre-vd production, poor skin integrity decreased dietary intake of vd, increasing adiposity, obesity, decreased renal function, as well as less time spent outdoors [120] . vd deficiency has been linked to various aging-related inflammatory diseases, including rheumatoid arthritis, asthma, inflammatory bowel disease, multiple sclerosis, cardiovascular disease, hypertension, diabetes mellitus, and cancer [121] . additionally, there is a correlation between vd deficiency and risk of respiratory tract infection such as covid-19 [122] . for example, ilie and colleagues in 2020 examine the association between the mean levels of vd in 20 european countries and morbidity and mortality caused by covid-19. their analysis data identified negative correlations between mean levels of vd (average 56 mmol/l) in each country and the number of covid-19 cases. in addition, a negative correlation was observed between mean levels of vd and the mortality of covid-19 cases. they also reported that vd levels are severely low in the aging population especially in spain, italy and switzerland, the most vulnerable countries in relation to covid-19 [123] . additionally, ebadi and montano-loza in 2020 reported that vd can suppress the expression of pro-inflammatory markers, including il-1α, il-1β, as well as tnf-α. therefore, vd deficiency during aging related to overexpression of th1 cytokines. they also reported that 50% of patients with covid-19 and about 70% mortality of covid-19 observed in african-american population in chicago, who are at a greater risk for vd deficiency [124] . there are reports that polymorphism of vdr gene, including polymorphisms of foki, apai, and taqi, is associated with vd deficiency and increased risk of inflammatory diseases [125] . hence, vd and vdr pathway together have an important anti-inflammatory function fig. 4 the role of vitamin d content on pro-inflammatory cytokine release in young and elderly adults with covid-19 infection. following exposure to covid-19 particles in young adults, sufficient vitamin d content increasing intracellular glutathione levels, suppressing excessive ros production, suppressing nf-κb (nuclear factor kappa b) and p38 map kinase expression. in contrast, vitamin d deficiency in elderly adults leads to over-activity of p38 map kinase/ stat (signal transducers and activator of transcription) and ros/ nf-κb pathways in the immune cells. so, elderly adults with severe covid-19 infection cannot turn off their pro-inflammatory immune machine in immune effectors through decreasing pro-inflammatory cytokine generation and increasing anti-inflammatory cytokines in immune cells. furthermore, the lack of vd in aged subjects is associated with the pro-inflammatory phenotype of immune cells, leading to likely increasing the risk of elderly adults with chronic mild inflammation condition [122] . this chronic inflammatory condition likely leads to cytokine storm in elderly covid-19 patients.in summary, it seems that young adults have balanced between pro-inflammatory and anti-inflammatory cytokine networks (fig. 1) . therefore, their balanced immune system can limit the progression of covid-19 infection. however, elderly patients do not have the same balanced immune response as young adults. as shown fig. 5 , with advancing age, the immune system appears to maintain a condition of mild inflammation. so, the activation of the body with pathogens, such as covid-19 infection can exaggeratedly increase the amplitude of the immune response, which is known as a cytokine storm. as mentioned above, alteration of ace2 receptor expression, oxidative stress, adipose tissue-and immune-senescent cell activity, lack of vd content, as well as decrease of autophagy and mitophagy may contribute to high amplitude of the immune response to external challengers in elderly adults. this high amplitude of the immune response in elderly adults can favor induction of the cytokine storm and death in severe and critical cases of covid-19 infection. nevertheless, the covid-19 infection is not deadly in all elderly patients, because the aging process is dependent on several markers, including genes, coronaviruses are common human and mammalian positive-strand rna viruses [1] . in december 2019 a new strain of coronavirus, severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2), was identified as the pathogenic cause of coronavirus disease 2019 (covid-19). as of april 21, 2020, there were 2,397,217 confirmed cases of and 162,956 deaths from covid-19 worldwide [2] .although most patients with covid-19 experience only mild-to-moderate disease, approximately 15% progress to severe pneumonia, and 5% develop acute respiratory distress syndrome (ards), septic shock, and/or multiple organ failure, which can rapidly lead to death [3] . no vaccines or specific antiviral treatments have yet proven effective against covid-19; current clinical management consists of palliative treatments with organ support to moribund patients. understanding the immunopathologic mechanism and appropriately targeting the key pathways involved has the potential to minimize pulmonary immune injury and mortality.following infection, sars-cov-2 binds to alveolar epithelial cells and activates innate and adaptive immune responses [1] . cd4+ and cd8+ t cells play an important role in balancing the adaptive immune response against pathogens and the potential development of autoimmunity or excessive inflammation [4] . activation of cytotoxic cd8+ t cells is vital for clearing virus from infected cells but also induces immune injury in tissues [5] . on the other hand, rapidly activated cd4+ t cells become pathogenic t helper 1 cells that generate proinflammatory cytokines and chemokines [6] . the marked production of cytokines and chemokines leads to recruitment of lymphocytes and leukocytes to the site of infection; however, a massive release of cytokines can occur as part of a positive feedback loop associated with immune response amplification, resulting in cytokine release syndrome, or a "cytokine storm" [1] .j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f journal pre-proof cytokine storm appears to be a common manifestation in severe covid-19. compared   with healthy controls, patients with covid-19 experienced elevated plasma levels of interleukin   (il)-1β, il-1rα, il-2, il-4, il-6, il-7, il-8, il-9, il-10, il-13, il-17, granulocyte colony- stimulating factor (g-csf), granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor (gm-csf), interferon gamma (ifn-γ), interferon gamma-induced protein 10 (ip-10/cxcl10), monocyte chemotactic protein-1 (mcp-1), macrophage inflammatory protein (mip)-1α, platelet-derived growth factor-bb, mip-1β, basic fibroblast growth factor, tumor necrosis factor alpha (tnf-α), and vascular endothelial growth factor [7] . furthermore, patients admitted to the intensive care unit had higher plasma levels of il-2, il-7, il-10, g-csf, ip-10, mcp-1, mip-1α, and tnf-α compared with patients who did not require critical care. the high levels of pro-inflammatory cytokines lead to massive immune cell infiltration of the lungs in patients with covid-19, resulting in alveolar damage, decreased lung function, and rapid progression to death [7, 8] .indeed, respiratory failure from ards is the leading cause of mortality associated with covid-19 [9,10].among the cytokines implicated in covid-19-associated cytokine storm, several signal predominantly via the janus kinase (jak)/signal transducer and activator of transcription (stat) pathway. il-2, il-6, il-7, il-10, ifn-γ, g-csf, and gm-csf are dependent on jak1, jak2, or both; furthermore, ip-10, mcp-1, and mip-1α are ifn-γ dependent [11, 12] . tnf-α has been shown to activate jak/stat signaling in a tnf receptor 1-dependent manner [13, 14] .these data suggest that jak inhibition could ameliorate the hyperinflammatory state associated with severe covid-19.ruxolitinib (incb018424) is a selective inhibitor of jak1 and jak2 that is approved for the treatment of myelofibrosis (mf), polycythemia vera, and steroid-refractory acute graft-versus-j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f journal pre-proof 6 host disease (sr-agvhd) [15] . the in vitro pharmacology of ruxolitinib has been studied using enzymes and cell-based assays. in biochemical assays, ruxolitinib has demonstrated potent inhibition of jak1 and jak2, with half maximal inhibitory concentration (ic50) values in the single digit nanomolar range (table 1 ) [16] . ruxolitinib has consistently demonstrated robust inhibition of jak/stat signaling in cell-based assays. in whole blood assays for the inhibition of phosphorylated stat3 following stimulation with il-6 (a prototype cytokine that signals through the effect of ruxolitinib was also evaluated in a major histocompatibility complexmismatch mouse model of agvhd characterized by significant upregulation of inflammatory cytokines (ifn-γ, tnf-α, and il-6) in peripheral blood ( fig. 1 ) [18] . ruxolitinib (60 mg/kg bid) treatment significantly reduced the inflammatory cytokine milieu in circulation. no differences j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f journal pre-proof 7 were observed in the proportion of peripheral cd4+ or cd8+ t cells in groups treated with ruxolitinib ( fig. 2) , and there were no detrimental effects on donor engraftment. these alloreactive gvhd data are consistent with previous reports suggesting that ruxolitinib has immunomodulatory but not immune-depleting effects [17, 19] .data supporting reduction of the cytokine burden has emerged from multiple clinical studies with ruxolitinib. mf is a type of myeloproliferative neoplasm with progressive cytopenias, bone marrow fibrosis, and splenomegaly, driven by a hyper-inflammatory state [20] . plasma levels of pro-inflammatory cytokines, including ifn-α, il-6, il-8, il-16, il-18, as well as creactive protein, intracellular adhesion molecule 1, vascular adhesion molecule 1, and matrix metalloproteinase 2, were significantly higher at baseline in patients with mf compared with healthy controls (fig. 3a) . after one cycle of therapy with ruxolitinib (28 days), levels of these pro-inflammatory biomarkers decreased (fig. 3b ). these changes were not related to jak2 mutational status or disease subtype, indicating that the effects of ruxolitinib in patients with mf are reflective of a broad anti-inflammatory effect. in addition, constitutive phosphorylation of stat3 and/or stat5 was observed at baseline in patients with mf, and a dose-and timedependent reduction of phosphorylated stat3 was observed after treatment with ruxolitinib. high-risk mf [20, 21] . anemia and thrombocytopenia were the most frequent any-grade and grade 3-4 adverse events experienced.sr-agvhd is a condition characterized by an allogeneic hyperinflammatory response that can lead to organ damage and death [22] . ruxolitinib was approved for sr-agvhd based on the results of the phase 2 reach1 trial [23] . ruxolitinib proteomics analysis revealed robust changes in the expression of inflammatory mediators after treatment with ruxolitinib and corticosteroids, with il-2-receptor alpha among the most significantly downregulated proteins [24] .hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis (hlh) is another disease with elevation of many pro-inflammatory cytokines (eg, ifn-γ, il-2, il-6, il-10, il-18, ip-10, mip-1α, and tnf-α) that frequently results in cytokine storm [25, 26] . ruxolitinib (5-20 mg bid) has demonstrated improvement in symptoms and inflammatory markers in the treatment of patients with hlh [26] [27] [28] . in two consecutive patients treated with ruxolitinib, rapid reduction in fever was observed [28] . in a study of 34 patients with hlh, the overall response rate was 73.5% with a complete response rate of 14.7% [26] . in the 25 patients who responded, there was a significant reduction in the levels of ifn-γ, il-18, mip-1α, and ip-10. in another study of five patients with secondary hlh and two additional patients treated off-protocol, 100% achieved a response at the time of the first assessment (day 14), with three patients achieving a complete response [27] . furthermore, hematologic parameters including platelet, red blood cell, and neutrophil counts improved within the first week of ruxolitinib treatment. all patients treated on-protocol also experienced substantial improvements in ferritin and soluble il-2 receptor concentrations.at 15 mg bid, ruxolitinib was generally well tolerated in this population.the sudden surge in hospitalization of patients with covid-19 and the high mortality rate of hospitalized patients has encouraged treating physicians to look to repurpose approved drugs to lessen the burden of disease. increased understanding of the immunopathology of severe covid-19 [6] [7] [8] monoclonal antibodies targeting il-6 are likely to have an impact on the cytokine storm associated with covid-19 given that il-6 is among the cytokines reported to be elevated in those patients compared with healthy individuals. at the time of writing, anti-il-6 antibody products tocilizumab and sarilumab are being evaluated in phase 3 studies [29, 30] . however, other cytokines, such as il-2, il-7, il-10, ifn-γ, g-csf, and gm-csf, are also elevated and may be equally or more important in the inflammatory response in patients with severe covid-19. as these cytokines signal through jak1 and/or jak2, it is likely that treatment with ruxolitinib will result in broader anti-inflammatory activity than targeting any one of the cytokines alone (fig. 4) .in addition to mf, sr-agvhd, and hlh noted above, jak inhibitors have shown promise in several autoimmune and inflammatory diseases such as rheumatoid arthritis, psoriasis, and ulcerative colitis [31] . ruxolitinib was the first jak inhibitor approved in the united states and european union, indicated first for mf; others have since been approved. there are notable differences in selectivity profiles between approved jak inhibitors. ruxolitinib is a balanced jak1/jak2 inhibitor with good selectivity over non-janus kinases, tofacitinib is a pan-jak inhibitor, upadacitinib is a jak1 inhibitor, and fedratinib is a jak2 inhibitor with activity against flt-kinase and other non-kinase proteins. these differences result in distinct biomarker activity profiles. singer et al. determined gene signatures of four different jak inhibitors in a panel of 12 human primary cell systems and concluded that only ruxolitinib has a biomarker profile that is consistent with broad anti-inflammatory activity [32] . these differences in selectivity may in turn be responsible for the differentiated safety profiles. for example, fedratinib shows a high incidence of gastrointestinal intolerance and cases of wernicke's encephalopathy [33] , whereas tofacitinib has been associated with an increased risk for j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f journal pre-proof lymphomas as well as cardiovascular events in patients 50 years of age and older with at least one cardiovascular risk factor [34] . non-melanoma skin cancers and elevated lipid parameters have occurred in patients treated with ruxolitinib [15] . dose-dependent and reversible cytopenias have been commonly observed with ruxolitinib treatment in patients with mf, pv, and gvhd [15, 20, 21, 35, 36] . use of ruxolitinib has also been associated with viral reactivation, including cytomegalovirus and herpes zoster virus [15, 35] , suggesting the potential for an increase in infections with ruxolitinib treatment.the pharmacokinetic profile of ruxolitinib is characterized by rapid oral absorption and a short terminal elimination half-life of approximately 3 hours (fig. 5a ) as well as a concentrationdependent and reversible pharmacodynamic effect (fig. 5b) [37]. this profile is in contrast with that of antibodies such as tocilizumab, which has a half-life of approximately 2 weeks [38] , and other jak inhibitors such as fedratinib, which has a half-life of 62-78 hours [39] . thus, ruxolitinib is more conducive to short-term therapy and withdrawal as needed. based on the similarity of the reported elevation of cytokine levels in covid-19 to hlh and mf, dose ranges of 5 to 15 mg bid may result in adequate inhibition of cytokine signaling while minimizing adverse events. furthermore, it is anticipated that patients would receive ruxolitinib for approximately 14 days, a brief time period that should minimize the risk of long-term infection or other complications, such as severe cytopenias. although preclinical models and clinical data show a lack of any impact on t-cell function and immune response with ruxolitinib treatment at pharmacologically relevant doses [17, 19, 40] , it would be prudent to both select patients who are likely to develop cytokine storm based on evolving clinical criteria such as h-score, and to identify the best time to initiate treatment based on onset of symptoms and other clinical indicators such as respiratory distress or the need for supplemental oxygen.taken together, these data suggest that ruxolitinib at pharmacologically achievable doses may be able to mitigate the hyperinflammatory state observed in patients experiencing covid-19-j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f journal pre-proof associated cytokine storm. indeed, early clinical evidence supports this premise. a team in northern italy has reported on the use of ruxolitinib in four of their hospitalized patients requiring supplemental oxygen, with clinical improvement seen in all four patients [41] . furthermore, emerging data from ongoing investigator-initiated trials suggest a potential benefit of ruxolitinib with a manageable adverse event profile. [42] [43] [44] [45] in a randomized trial of 43 patients in wuhan, china, patients treated with ruxolitinib had a numerically shorter time to clinical improvement compared with those treated with standard of care (median 12 vs 15 days) and better outcome for survival (0 vs 3 deaths in the control arm). [42] importantly, although higher rates of grade 1-2 anemia and thrombocytopenia were observed with ruxolitinib in this study, there was no increase in grade 3-4 cytopenias, and patients receiving ruxolitinib experienced a significantly shorter time to improvement of lymphopenia compared with standard of care (median 5 vs 8 days; hazard ratio, 3.307 [95% ci, 1.097 to 8.409]; p = 0.033). additionally, no increase in infections was seen with ruxolitinib treatment in these patients.these encouraging early clinical results, combined with a thorough understanding of the evidence supporting the posited mechanism of action of ruxolitinib in covid-19-associated cytokine storm and the urgent need for treatments in patients with severe disease, support expedited investigation of ruxolitinib for patients with covid-19 in phase 3 clinical trials. table 1 in vitro enzymatic and functional potency of ruxolitinib [16] . ic50nrf2 is a transcription factor that regulates cellular redox balance and the expression of a wide array of genes involved in immunity and inflammation, including antiviral actions nrf2 activity declines with age, making the elderly more susceptible to oxidative stress-mediated diseases, which include type 2 diabetes, chronic inflammation, and viral infections published evidence suggests that nrf2 activity may regulate important mechanisms affecting viral susceptibility and replication we examined gene expression levels by genechip microarray and by rna-seq assays we found that the potent nrf2-activating composition pb125(®) downregulates ace2 and tmprss2 mrna expression in human liver-derived hepg2 cells ace2 is a surface receptor and tmprss2 activates the spike protein for sars-cov-2 entry into host cells furthermore, in endotoxin-stimulated primary human pulmonary artery endothelial cells, we report the marked downregulation by pb125 of 36 genes encoding cytokines these include il-1-beta, il-6, tnf-α, the cell adhesion molecules icam-1, vcam-1, and e-selectin, and a group of ifn-γ-induced genes many of these cytokines have been specifically identified in the "cytokine storm" observed in fatal cases of covid-19, suggesting that nrf2 activation may significantly decrease the intensity of the stormnrf2 activator pb125(®) as a potential therapeutic agent against covid-19nrf2 is a transcription factor encoded in humans by the nfe2l2 gene. it has been called by many the "master regulator of cellular redox homeostasis" [1] as well as the "guardian of healthspan" and "gatekeeper of species longevity" [2] . nrf2 regulates most of the genes that defend us against oxidative stress, including superoxide dismutases, catalase, numerous peroxidases, and glutathione metabolism, as well as hundreds of genes involved in scores of important metabolic pathways [3] . the individual vulnerabilities of various structural and catalytic gene products to damage or inactivation by reactive oxygen species (ros) may lead to degenerative diseases and metabolic dysfunctions. importantly, nrf2 declines with age [4, 5] and contributes greatly to the "frailty" associated with aging [6] [7] [8] . because nrf2 transcriptionally upregulates genes that combat oxidative stress, its loss allows oxidative stress to go unmitigated and drive the aging phenotype [1, 8, 9] . oxidative stress is therefore a common theme among the key features associated with the aging process, collectively referred to as the "hallmarks of aging", as it disrupts proteostasis [10] , alters genomic stability [11] , alters susceptibility to viral and microbial infections [12] , and leads to cell death. it is this age-related from thermo fisher scientific (waltham, ma, usa). lps (lipopolysaccharides from escherichia coli o55:b5) was from sigma-aldrich (st. louis, mo, usa).we utilized the human hepg2 cell line (hepatocellular carcinoma) and primary human pulmonary artery endothelial cells (hpaecs) for genomic assays. hepg2 cells and hpaecs are suitable models in the present work because they each have a nrf2 pathway that responds in a normal manner to nrf2 activators [33, 34] , and do not have reported mutations in nrf2/keap1. the hepg2 cells (american type culture collection, manassas, va, usa) were cultured and maintained by standard methods, using opti-mem medium with 4% fetal bovine serum (fbs) and geneticin/penicillin/streptomycin. hpaecs were procured from lonza (morristown, nj, usa, catalog # cc-2530) and cultured in endothelial basal media-2 (lonza catalog #: cc-3516) supplemented with endothelial growth factors optimized for aortic and pulmonary arterial endothelial cells (lonza catalog # cc-3162). hpaec subculturing was limited to six passages in order to prevent senescence and de-differentiation. hpaecs were seeded at a density of 5 × 10 5 cells per 100 mm tissue culture dishes and incubated at 37 • c and 6.5% co 2 to 80-90% confluence. all experiments were performed with hpaecs at 80-90% confluence.we used the human il-6 quantiglo elisa (r&d systems, minneapolis, mn, usa) according to the manufacturer's instructions to determine the concentration of il-6 protein released from hpaecs cultured under various conditions.to examine the effects of pb125 on gene expression in hepg2 cells, the cells were subcultured in 24-well plates then treated overnight with 0 (control) or 16 µg/ml pb125 (as a 50 mg/ml extract in 100% ethanol). to examine the effects of pb125 on genes that are induced by endotoxin exposure and which may contribute to the cytokine storm (as is observed in covid-19 illness), we examined a model of pro-inflammatory lipopolysaccharide (lps)-treated human pulmonary arterial endothelial cells, with and without treatment with pb125. four groups of hpaec at 80% confluence were cultured in 24-well plates. groups 2 and 4 received pb125at 5 µg/ml and all groups were incubated for 16 h. then groups 3 and 4 received lps at at 20 ng/ml and all groups were incubated for an additional 5 h. cells were washed twice with pbs, and then extracted with trizol for total rna isolation. total rna was further purified with qiagen rneasy clean-up columns (qiagen inc., valencia, ca, usa) as previously described [24] .for each sample, rna concentration was determined by absorbance at 260 nm with a nanodrop spectrophotometer (thermo fisher scientific, waltham, ma, usa). rna quality was assessed by agilent tapestation 2200 (agilent, santa clara, ca, usa). gene expression levels were determined at the university of colorado anschutz medical center genomics and microarray core facility (aurora, co, usa). the genechip 3 ivt plus reagent kit (affymetrix/thermo fisher scientific, waltham, ma, usa) was used to convert 150 ng of total rna to cdna according to the manufacturer's protocol. each labeled sample was assayed with the affymetrix primeview human gene expression array read with an affymetrix genechip scanner 3000 (affymetrix/thermo fisher scientific, waltham, ma, usa).the gene transcript and variants are examined using 9-11 perfectly matched (pm) probes. the intensity of expression for all genes on the microarray was evaluated using affymetrix genechip antioxidants 2020, 9, 518 4 of 15 software (affymetrix/thermo fisher scientific, waltham, ma, usa), which supported pair-wise comparison between microarray chips.illumina hiseq libraries (4 assays based on 4 biological replicates in each treatment group) were prepared from hepg2 cell samples using 200-500 ng of total rna following the manufacturer's instructions for the truseq rna kit (illumina, san diego, ca, usa). with this kit, mrna is first isolated from total rna using polya selection, and then the mrna is fragmented and primed for creation of double-stranded cdna fragments. following this, the cdna fragments are amplified, selected by size, and purified for cluster generation. subsequently, the mrna template libraries were sequenced on the illumina hiseq 4000 platform (illumina, san diego, ca, usa) with single-pass 50 bp reads at the university of colorado anschutz medical center genomics and microarray core facility (aurora, co, usa). samples were sequenced at a depth to provide approximately 40m single-pass 50 base reads per sample. the derived sequences were then analyzed with a custom computational pipeline comprising the open-source gsnap [35] cufflinks [36] and r for sequence alignment and determination of differential gene expression [37] . reads generated were mapped by gsnap [35] to the human genome (grch38), expression (fpkm) was derived using cufflinks [36] , and differential expression was analyzed by anova using r.the data are presented as the mean ± standard error of the mean (sem). one-way anova with tukey multiple comparisons testing or student's t test for unpaired data was performed using prism software (version 6.0, graphpad software, san diego, ca, usa). statistical significance was set at p value < 0.05.using the elisa assay for il-6, we determined that pretreatment of hpaecs with pb125 decreased the lps-induced release of il-6 protein from the hpaecs. in this study, the hpaecs were plated as described above, and then, after 24 h, they were treated with 5 µg/ml of pb125 extract or with the corresponding amounts of vehicle control. after an additional 16 h of incubation, the cells were treated by adding 20 ng of lps (or vehicle control) per ml of medium. each of the four treatment groups was run in triplicate. after 5 h of lps treatment, aliquots of cell culture medium were removed from each well for il-6 measurement by elisa. lps stimulation of the vehicle-pretreated hpaecs greatly increased the release of il-6 protein into the culture media, but this lps-induced il-6 release was reduced by 61% in the cells pretreated with pb125 (p = 0.0067). the results are shown in figure 1 . illumina hiseq libraries (4 assays based on 4 biological replicates in each treatment group) were prepared from hepg2 cell samples using 200-500 ng of total rna following the manufacturer's instructions for the truseq rna kit (illumina, san diego, ca, usa). with this kit, mrna is first isolated from total rna using polya selection, and then the mrna is fragmented and primed for creation of double-stranded cdna fragments. following this, the cdna fragments are amplified, selected by size, and purified for cluster generation. subsequently, the mrna template libraries were sequenced on the illumina hiseq 4000 platform (illumina, san diego, ca, usa) with single-pass 50 bp reads at the university of colorado anschutz medical center genomics and microarray core facility (aurora, co, usa). samples were sequenced at a depth to provide approximately 40m single-pass 50 base reads per sample. the derived sequences were then analyzed with a custom computational pipeline comprising the open-source gsnap [35] cufflinks [36] and r for sequence alignment and determination of differential gene expression [37] . reads generated were mapped by gsnap [35] to the human genome (grch38), expression (fpkm) was derived using cufflinks [36] , and differential expression was analyzed by anova using r.the data are presented as the mean ± standard error of the mean (sem). one-way anova with tukey multiple comparisons testing or student's t test for unpaired data was performed using prism software (version 6.0, graphpad software, san diego, ca, usa). statistical significance was set at p value < 0.05.using the elisa assay for il-6, we determined that pretreatment of hpaecs with pb125 decreased the lps-induced release of il-6 protein from the hpaecs. in this study, the hpaecs were plated as described above, and then, after 24 h, they were treated with 5 μg/ml of pb125 extract or with the corresponding amounts of vehicle control. after an additional 16 h of incubation, the cells were treated by adding 20 ng of lps (or vehicle control) per ml of medium. each of the four treatment groups was run in triplicate. after 5 h of lps treatment, aliquots of cell culture medium were removed from each well for il-6 measurement by elisa. lps stimulation of the vehicle-pretreated hpaecs greatly increased the release of il-6 protein into the culture media, but this lps-induced il- because sars-cov-2 entry into a human cell depends on expression of ace2 for binding and on tmprss2 for proteolytic activation of the spike protein [27] , we examined the effects of pb125 on the expression of these two genes. because inhibition of the protease activity of tmprss2 has been shown to block viral entry [27] , we also examined the expression of plasminogen activator inhibitor-1 (pai-1, encoded by the serpine1 gene), a normal plasma component and known potent inhibitor of tmprss2 [30] . ace2 mrna was downregulated -3.5-fold and tmprss2 was downregulated -2.8-fold by pb125 in human liver-derived hepg2 cells, as seen in figure 2 . while these impediments may not completely block viral entry, they may significantly impair it, slowing the rate of viral progression. furthermore, pb125 strongly upregulated serpine1/pai-1 by 17.8-fold. pb125 downregulated hdac5 in human liver cells by -2.8-fold, also shown in figure 2 . in humans, hdac5 appears to be responsible for the deacetylation and attenuation of nrf2 activity [28] . the cytokine lif, an important antiviral cellular response to viral infection [38, 39] , was upregulated 6.6-fold by pb125. because of recent evidence that plasmin can trigger substantial proinflammatory release of cytokines [29] , we examined the effect of pb125 on plasminogen (plg) mrna expression, finding it to be downregulated by -1.9-fold. thus, all six of these gene regulatory effects of pb125 would appear to counter viral attempts to enter the cell and/or to usurp control of oxidative stress response.antioxidants 2020, 9, x for peer review 5 of 15 6 release was reduced by 61% in the cells pretreated with pb125 (p = 0.0067). the results are shown in figure 1 .because sars-cov-2 entry into a human cell depends on expression of ace2 for binding and on tmprss2 for proteolytic activation of the spike protein [27] , we examined the effects of pb125 on the expression of these two genes. because inhibition of the protease activity of tmprss2 has been shown to block viral entry [27] , we also examined the expression of plasminogen activator inhibitor-1 (pai-1, encoded by the serpine1 gene), a normal plasma component and known potent inhibitor of tmprss2 [30] . ace2 mrna was downregulated -3.5-fold and tmprss2 was downregulated -2.8fold by pb125 in human liver-derived hepg2 cells, as seen in figure 2 . while these impediments may not completely block viral entry, they may significantly impair it, slowing the rate of viral progression. furthermore, pb125 strongly upregulated serpine1/pai-1 by 17.8-fold. pb125 downregulated hdac5 in human liver cells by -2.8-fold, also shown in figure 2 . in humans, hdac5 appears to be responsible for the deacetylation and attenuation of nrf2 activity [28] . the cytokine lif, an important antiviral cellular response to viral infection [38, 39] , was upregulated 6.6-fold by pb125. because of recent evidence that plasmin can trigger substantial proinflammatory release of cytokines [29] , we examined the effect of pb125 on plasminogen (plg) mrna expression, finding it to be downregulated by -1.9-fold. thus, all six of these gene regulatory effects of pb125 would appear to counter viral attempts to enter the cell and/or to usurp control of oxidative stress response. figure 2 . regulation of pro-and antiviral genes by pb125. hepg2 cells were cultured overnight in 24-well plates with control vs. 16 µg/ml pb125 and gene expressions were determined using rna-seq analysis on four biological replicates. all six genes differed from control by p < 0.04.to examine the effects of pb125 on genes that may contribute to the covid-19-induced cytokine storm, we examined a model of lipopolysaccharide (lps)-treated hpaecs, with and without treatment with pb125. the results are seen in figure 3 . all 36 genes were significantly upregulated by lps in the absence of pb125 (group 3 vs group 1) and normalized to 100% indicated by the red bar, with percent suppression reflecting the decreased expression seen in group 4 (lps + pb125) vs group 3 (lps alone). sixteen cytokines, including two colony stimulating factors, are shown in green, with mrnas downregulated by pb125 as indicated. the average percent inhibition for the group of cytokines was 70%. two proinflammatory interleukins, il-1b and il-6, showed mrnas inhibited 61% and 44%, respectively. three proinflammatory cytokine-induced adhesion molecules, intercellular adhesion molecule 1 (icam1), vascular cell adhesion molecule 1 (vcam1), and endothelial cell selectin (sele) were suppressed an average of 78%. tumor necrosis factor, tnf, mrna was reduced by 33%, but a group of five tnf-induced proteins (tnfaips) were repressed even more, averaging 70%. four other genes representing the tnf family were downregulated an average of 65%. further, a family of five interferon-inducible genes is shown to be downregulated an average of 63%. this across-the-board reduction in genes that contribute to the "cytokine storm" is noteworthy as it is the intensity of this storm that predicts icu fatalities from covid-19 [32] . transforming this storm into a manageable "shower" is therefore a major therapeutic objective in the clinical management of covid-19 patients.inhibited 61% and 44%, respectively. three proinflammatory cytokine-induced adhesion mo intercellular adhesion molecule 1 (icam1), vascular cell adhesion molecule 1 (vcam endothelial cell selectin (sele) were suppressed an average of 78%. tumor necrosis facto mrna was reduced by 33%, but a group of five tnf-induced proteins (tnfaips) were re even more, averaging 70%. four other genes representing the tnf family were downregul average of 65%. further, a family of five interferon-inducible genes is shown to be downregu average of 63%. this across-the-board reduction in genes that contribute to the "cytokine st noteworthy as it is the intensity of this storm that predicts icu fatalities from covid-transforming this storm into a manageable "shower" is therefore a major therapeutic objectiv clinical management of covid-19 patients. the last decade has seen more than 10,000 publications on nrf2 and its involvement i homeostasis, inflammation and immunity, neurodegeneration, aging and diseases associat the last decade has seen more than 10,000 publications on nrf2 and its involvement in redox homeostasis, inflammation and immunity, neurodegeneration, aging and diseases associated with aging, ischemia-reperfusion injury, and many other areas, but relatively little has been published regarding its roles in viral infectivity and resistance, despite some rather tantalizing studies. kesic et al. showed that sirna knockdown of nrf2 expression in human nasal epithelial cells effectively decreased both nrf2 mrna and nrf2 protein expression in these cells, which correlated with significantly increased entry of influenza a/bangkok/1/79 (h3n2 serotype) and replication in the transduced human cells [12] . importantly, they also demonstrated that enhancing nrf2 activation via supplementation with sulforaphane (sfn) and epigallocatechin gallate (egcg) increased antiviral mediators in the absence of viral infection and also abrogated viral entry. yegeta et al. took a different approach and increased oxidative stress, not just by manipulating nrf2 expression genetically, but by alternatively exposing mice to an exogenous oxidative stress-cigarette smoke [15] . cigarette smoke-exposed nrf2-deficient mice showed higher rates of mortality than wild-type mice after influenza virus infection, with enhanced peribronchial inflammation, lung permeability damage, and mucus hypersecretion. cho et al. [40] have similarly studied respiratory syncytial virus (rsv) infection, the single most important virus causing acute respiratory tract infections in children. they found that nrf2 −/− mice infected with rsv showed antioxidants 2020, 9, 518 7 of 15 significantly increased bronchopulmonary inflammation, epithelial injury, and mucus cell metaplasia as well as nasal epithelial injury when compared to similarly infected nrf2 +/+ wt mice. the nrf2 −/− mice also showed significantly attenuated viral clearance and ifn-γ, and greater weight loss. importantly, pretreatment with oral sulforaphane significantly limited lung rsv replication and virus-induced inflammation in nrf2 +/+ wt mice. komaravelli et al. [16] [17] [18] have noted that rsv not only causes increased production of ros but actively lowers expression of antioxidant enzymes by increasing the rate of proteasomal degradation of nrf2. at 6 h post-infection, nrf2-dependent gene transcription was increased, indicating that the cell is in control and responding to the insult of viral infection and the increase in oxidative stress. by 15 h post-infection, however, the concentration of nrf2 had dropped significantly to about half its preinfection level reflecting a change-of-control to favor the virus. to accomplish this rsv had increased nrf2 ubiquitination, triggering its proteasomal degradation, representing one example by which viruses subvert cellular antioxidant defenses. taken together, these studies demonstrate the ability of nrf2 to impede viral entry, slow viral replication, and reduce inflammation, weight loss, and mortality, but without providing much detailed insight as to which genes and pathways are involved.the first challenge facing a virus, and particularly a virus that is jumping from one host species to another, is gaining entry to the cell. there are some fairly common ports of entry such as ldlr and icam1 that lead to endosomal entry and which are shared among various viral families [41] . sars-cov-2, however, seems to be largely, if not totally, restricted to a very specific mode of entry. the unique mode of entry may be the greatest vulnerability for the virus, opening the door to some potentially effective therapies. substantial evidence suggests that a transmembrane protease encoded by the tmprss2 gene plays a critical role in the entry for sars and mers coronavirus, for 2013 asian h7n9 influenza virus, and for several h1n1-subtype influenza a virus infections [27, [42] [43] [44] [45] , suggesting that targeting tmprss2 could be a novel antiviral strategy to treat coronavirus [42] . hoffmann and coworkers found that infection by sars-cov-2, the virus responsible for covid-19, may depend almost exclusively on the host cell factors ace2 and tmprss2 [27] . the spike (s) protein of coronaviruses facilitates viral entry into target cells. entry depends on binding of the s protein to a cellular receptor, ace2, which facilitates viral attachment to the surface of target cells. in addition, entry requires s protein "priming" by the cellular protease tmprss2, which entails s protein cleavage and allows fusion of viral and cellular membranes (figure 4 ). this priming can be blocked by clinically proven protease inhibitors of the tmprss2, camostat mesylate [27, 46] and nafamostat mesylate [47] . nafamostat is remarkably potent with an ic 50 in the nanomolar range for blocking cellular entry of mers-cov in vitro, but has not been clinically tested as an antiviral in humans. the drug appears not to be available at present in an oral formulation, and because of its lack of specificity there is concern over possible side effects [47] . it may prove suitable for treatment of severe covid-19 cases.tmprss2 can also be blocked by the human antiprotease plasminogen activator inhibitor-1 (pai-1) [34] , as shown in figure 4 . iwata-yoshikawa et al. [43] found that knockout of tmprss2 improved both pathology and immunopathology in the bronchi and/or alveoli after infection of the mice by sars-cov and completely prevented loss of body weight. this is especially noteworthy in sars-cov infection where tmprss2 is not the sole mechanism for entry, as is the case with sars-cov-2. thus, our data showing that pb125 downregulated ace2 by -3.5-fold, downregulated tmprss2 by -2.8-fold, and upregulated pai-1, the potent tmprss2 inhibitor, by 17.8-fold (figure 2 ) strongly suggest that pb125 treatment might diminish the ability of sars-cov-2 to bind to a host cell and to obtain spike protein activation as a result of less ace2 and tmprss2 on the cell surface, and as a result of a 17.8-fold increase in plasma pai-1, which would inhibit the remaining tmprss2. dittmann et al. [30] have found that influenza a virus (iav) infection provokes a host response that is both necessary and sufficient for viral inhibition-increased production of pai-1. they found that for iav, proteolytic cleavage of the viral coat protein hemagglutinin by host proteases (such as plasmin or tmprss2) was a requirement for maturation and infectivity of progeny particles. addition of recombinant pai to the apical side of haec significantly reduced iav growth compared to carrier control, with about 90% inhibition of infectivity at 48 h post-infection. in contrast, addition of α-pai-1 antibody dramatically enhanced iav growth. thus, many viruses rely on both host endo-and exo-proteases for various entry and maturation functions. moreover, they found that tmprss2, necessary for sars-cov-2 infection, is among the trypsin-like proteases effectively inhibited by pai-1 [30] . tmprss2 can also be blocked by the human antiprotease plasminogen activator inhibitor-1 (pai-1) [34] , as shown in figure 4 . iwata-yoshikawa et al. [43] found that knockout of tmprss2 improved both pathology and immunopathology in the bronchi and/or alveoli after infection of the mice by sars-cov and completely prevented loss of body weight. this is especially noteworthy in sars-cov infection where tmprss2 is not the sole mechanism for entry, as is the case with sars-cov-2. thus, our data showing that pb125 downregulated ace2 by -3.5-fold, downregulated tmprss2 by -2.8-fold, and upregulated pai-1, the potent tmprss2 inhibitor, by 17.8-fold (figure 2 ) strongly suggest that pb125 treatment might diminish the ability of sars-cov-2 to bind to a host cell and to obtain spike protein activation as a result of less ace2 and tmprss2 on the cell surface, and as a result of a 17.8-fold increase in plasma pai-1, which would inhibit the remaining tmprss2. dittmann et al. [30] have found that influenza a virus (iav) infection provokes a host response that is both necessary and sufficient for viral inhibition-increased production of pai-1. they found that for iav, proteolytic cleavage of the viral coat protein hemagglutinin by host proteases (such as plasmin or tmprss2) was a requirement for maturation and infectivity of progeny particles. addition of recombinant pai to the apical side of haec significantly reduced iav growth compared to carrier control, with about 90% inhibition of infectivity at 48 h post-infection. in contrast, addition of α-pai-1 antibody dramatically enhanced iav growth. thus, many viruses rely on both host endoand exo-proteases for various entry and maturation functions. moreover, they found that tmprss2, necessary for sars-cov-2 infection, is among the trypsin-like proteases effectively inhibited by pai-1 [30] .a recent publication by kumar et al. [48] has used computer modeling to predict that withaferin a and withanone, present in extracts of the ayurvedic plant ashwagandha (withania somnifera), stably interact at the catalytic site of tmprss2, mimicking the pharmaceutical inhibitor camostat (1) occurs via ace2 receptors. the spike protein must then be cleaved (indicated as scissors representing serine protease tmprss2) to allow entry into the cell (2) . the activated spike protein penetrates the cell membrane (3), allowing entry of the viral genome (4), which is replicated, translated, and assembled into mature virus particles (5) . on the left, tmprss2 inhibition is shown by the antiviral drugs camostat and nafamostat, as well as by plasminogen activator inhibitor, pai-1, encoded by the serpine1 gene. pb125 upregulates pai-2 and downregulates both tmprss2 and ace2 in hepg2 cells.a recent publication by kumar et al. [48] has used computer modeling to predict that withaferin a and withanone, present in extracts of the ayurvedic plant ashwagandha (withania somnifera), stably interact at the catalytic site of tmprss2, mimicking the pharmaceutical inhibitor camostat mesylate [27, 46, 48] . in addition, kumar et al. found that withanone downregulated the tmprss2 gene similarly to what we report here with pb125 ( figure 2 ). ashwagandha is one of the three components of pb125, so there is a probability that pb125 may both inhibit the enzymatic activity of tmprss2 as well as downregulating the expression of its mrna.quite apart from direct involvement with viral entry mechanisms, pb125 downregulates hdac5 in human liver-derived hepg2 cells by -2.8-fold, also shown in figure 2 . acetylation of nrf2 increases binding of nrf2 to its cognate response element in a target gene promoter, and increases nrf2-dependent transcription of target genes [49] . in humans, hdac5 appears to be the isozyme responsible for the deacetylation and attenuation of nrf2 activity [28] , and is likely the gene upregulated by rsv infection described above by komaravelli et al. [18] . thus, pb125, by inhibiting the deacetylation and subsequent degradation of nrf2, maintains more active acetylated nrf2 in the nucleus for a longer time, counteracting one of the mechanisms enumerated above by which viruses attempt to commandeer control of the cell's redox status and, indirectly, amplifying all nrf2-dependent actions.the upregulation of the cytokine lif, an important antiviral cellular response to viral infection, is shown to be strongly upregulated by pb125 in figure 2 , again countering potential attempts by a virus to downregulate it. lif gene expression was downregulated by h7n9 infection, and knock-down of lif increased virus titers for three influenza a strains investigated, indicating an important role of lif in virus defense [39] . in vivo studies were performed with lif knockout mice that were infected with rsv. lif knockout mice yielded higher virus titers compared to control mice, and lif signaling was shown to be critical for the protection of the lung from injury during [38] .while we have discussed the role of pai-1 in preventing tmprss2 from activating the sars-cov-2 spike protein, mention should also be made of what many would consider its "real job", the blocking of the conversion of plasminogen (encoded by the plg gene) to plasmin by both urokinase-type plasminogen activator (upa) and tissue plasminogen activator (tpa). fibrinolysis was the first recognized function for plasmin, so one might expect that high expression of pai-1 would cause low plasmin levels which might be a risk factor for venous thrombosis. genetic plasminogen deficiency, however, is not strongly associated with risk of thrombosis [50] . in a study of 23 subjects with homozygous mutations in the plg gene and little or no detectable plasmin, 96% had clinical inflammation of the conjunctivae (ligneous conjunctivitis) but 0% had experienced venous thrombosis [51] . new roles, however, have been recognized for plasmin regarding cytokine release [29, 31, [52] [53] [54] . a "cytokine storm syndrome" is a form of systemic inflammatory response that can be triggered by a variety of factors such as severe infections. it occurs when large numbers of leukocytes are activated and release inflammatory cytokines, which in turn activate yet more leukocytes. sato et al. found that pharmacological inhibition of plasmin significantly prevented mortality in a mouse model of acute graft-versus-host disease, proposing that plasmin inhibition could offer a novel therapeutic strategy to control the deadly cytokine storm that results from graft-versus-host disease, preventing tissue destruction [31] . macrophage activation syndrome (mas) is a life-threatening disorder characterized by a cytokine storm and multi-organ dysfunction due to excessive immune activation. in a mouse model of mas, shimazu et al. saw a similar prevention in lethality, concluding that plasmin regulates the influx of inflammatory cells and the production of inflammatory cytokines/chemokines [29] . plasminogen has also been implicated in activation of astrocytes to produce an array of proinflammatory cytokines [54] . in figure 2 , we report that pb125 downregulates plasminogen mrna by -1.9-fold in liver cells. thus, in vivo, we speculate that the combined downregulation of plasminogen and 17.8-fold increase in pai-1 (which covalently reacts with and deactivates both tissue-and urokinase-type plasminogen activators) may significantly attenuate the plasmin-induced cytokine storm phenomenon.hyperinflammation in covid-19 is associated with such an elevation of proinflammatory cytokines, interleukins, and tumor necrosis factor-α (tnf) and a large number of tnf-induced proteins, and granulocyte colony stimulating factor (gcsf or csf3). among 41 hospitalized covid-19 patients in wuhan, china, all had elevated il-1b, ip10/cxcl10, and mcp1/ccl2. sixteen of the patients were subsequently admitted to the icu and had even higher plasma levels of gcsf/csf3, ip10/cxcl10, mcp1/ccl2, mip1a/ccl3, and tnf-α, and the intensity of the cytokine storm was a strong prognosticator of mortality [55] . all of these genes encoding these covid-19-related cytokines appear in figure 3 , as they were significantly upregulated by lps-treated hpaecs and significantly downregulated by pb125 treatment. importantly, a growing number of studies conclude that cytokine storm syndrome is the direct cause of death in most covid-19 fatalities [55] [56] [57] [58] .we speculate that the well-documented age-related loss of nrf2 expression [4, 5] is a potential contributor to the occurrence of a cytokine storm. a longitudinal study of 40 confirmed covid-19 patients [59] showed that the 13 severe cases, compared to the 27 milder cases, were older (mean age 59.7 vs 43.2), had significantly elevated c-reactive protein (mean 62.9 vs 7.6 mg/l), and showed consistently higher neutrophil counts and lower lymphocyte counts throughout the two week observation period. these observations [55, 59] document a clear predilection for severity of covid-19 infection directly associated with age and intensity of inflammatory response, and presumably inversely associated with nrf2 expression [8] . the production and self-amplifying nature of an acute inflammatory response demands a prompt subsequent "survival response" from the host tissue to break the self-sustaining attraction of neutrophils to inflamed tissues. we propose that it is a robust oxidative stress-induced activation of nrf2 in young healthy individuals that follows the gathering storm and rescues host tissues from irretrievable self-inflicted damage. in older individuals, or in the presence of comorbidities that may involve chronic inflammation, the nrf2-activation response may be insufficient to break the self-perpetuating cycle of events. figure 5 illustrates this proposed sequence of events. we propose that activating a larger fraction of the limited nrf2 available in the elderly or otherwise compromised patients might allow them, like their younger counterparts, to shut down cytokine production to stop the escalating cytokine storm, and to begin the recovery and repair phase of the inflammatory episode. this activation boost to suboptimal levels of nrf2 can be provided by several pharmacological agents, and as well or better by a number of phytochemical activators, as we show here with pb125. observation period. these observations [55, 59] document a clear predilection for severity of covid-19 infection directly associated with age and intensity of inflammatory response, and presumably inversely associated with nrf2 expression [8] . the production and self-amplifying nature of an acute inflammatory response demands a prompt subsequent "survival response" from the host tissue to break the self-sustaining attraction of neutrophils to inflamed tissues. we propose that it is a robust oxidative stress-induced activation of nrf2 in young healthy individuals that follows the gathering storm and rescues host tissues from irretrievable self-inflicted damage. in older individuals, or in the presence of comorbidities that may involve chronic inflammation, the nrf2-activation response may be insufficient to break the self-perpetuating cycle of events. figure 5 illustrates this proposed sequence of events. we propose that activating a larger fraction of the limited nrf2 available in the elderly or otherwise compromised patients might allow them, like their younger counterparts, to shut down cytokine production to stop the escalating cytokine storm, and to begin the recovery and repair phase of the inflammatory episode. this activation boost to suboptimal levels of nrf2 can be provided by several pharmacological agents, and as well or better by a number of phytochemical activators, as we show here with pb125. nrf2 and, within hours, the nearby tissues are inhibiting further tissue cytokine production, rescuing host cells from further damage and permitting (5) repair, clean up, and recovery. alternatively, in (4a), older cells deficient in nrf2 may be unable to mount nrf2 sufficient activation to break the self-sustaining chain reaction, resulting in an uncontrolled cytokine storm that ultimately destroys the host tissue and leads to death. a more robust activation of the limited nrf2 available in older cells may be provided by pharmacological or phytochemical nrf2 activators. (1) initiation occurs with bacterial or viral infection, which triggers (2) local production of cytokines by endothelial cells to call in inflammatory cells to neutralize the invasion. (3) an attack ensues in which superoxide and secondary oxidants are produced, phagocytosis occurs, and more cytokines are released by the first responders, calling in subsequent waves of activated inflammatory cells. (4) in young healthy cells, the oxidative stress generated by the battle activates nrf2 and, within hours, the nearby tissues are inhibiting further tissue cytokine production, rescuing host cells from further damage and permitting (5) repair, clean up, and recovery. alternatively, in (4a), older cells deficient in nrf2 may be unable to mount nrf2 sufficient activation to break the self-sustaining chain reaction, resulting in an uncontrolled cytokine storm that ultimately destroys the host tissue and leads to death. a more robust activation of the limited nrf2 available in older cells may be provided by pharmacological or phytochemical nrf2 activators.it is worth noting that the longitudinal study of covid-19 patients [59] reported a remarkably higher concentration of serum ferritin in the severe cases (averaging 835.5 µg/l, with a range of 635.4 to 1538.8) versus the milder cases (averaging 367.8 µg/l, with a range of 174.7 to 522.0). ferritin has long been recognized as a source of iron released under inflammatory conditions by the superoxide radical [60] [61] [62] [63] . under the intense oxidative stress precipitated by a cytokine storm, the release of iron would catalyze lipid peroxidation and greatly amplify host tissue injury. covid-19 has already been added to the short list of known "hyperferritinemic" diseases-all of which are characterized by high serum ferritin and life-threatening hyperinflammation sustained by a cytokine storm which eventually leads to multi-organ failure [64] . ferroptosis is a newly described form of regulated cell death that is iron dependent and causes cell death by mitochondrial dysfunction and toxic lipid peroxidation. nrf2 has been implicated as a "key deterministic component modulating the onset and outcomes of ferroptotic stress" [65] .we studied three different phenomena that may be involved in vulnerability to the sars-cov-2, and these interactive phenomena are not all present in any single cell type. the first objective, to study the effects of pb125 on expression of ace2 and tmprss2, could be studied in presumed point-of-entry cells, including alveolar type ii cells [27] and hpaecs [25, 26] . there are both clinical and laboratory suggestions that the virus may invade many organs containing cell types that co-express ace2 and tmprss2 (heart, gut, kidney, eye), including liver, where we showed downregulation of both ace2 and tmprss2. thus, liver is also a relevant cell in which to study these entry genes. a second objective was to examine whether pb125 could limit systemic plasmin activity by downregulation of plg and/or upregulation of pai-1, both plasma proteins not produced by the cells of the lung. in this case, the liver is the source of plasminogen, and is the appropriate cell type to examine. the source of pai-1 in plasma is not known but may be liver or muscle. for the third objective of whether pb125 could downregulate the cytokines identified as participating in the cytokine storm phenomenon, we believe the focus on primary hpaecs is appropriate, although a more complete picture would include study of the inflammatory cell types themselves. hpaecs generate the 36 cytokines we examined, sounding the systemic alarm that recruits inflammatory cells to the infected organ. the type ii alveolar cell has very little capacity for producing cytokines [66] . for studying how an intervention can break the inflammatory cycle leading to a cytokine storm, we believe that vascular endothelial cells may be the single most important players. a potential limitation of the study is the use of lps as a surrogate for sars-cov-2 to induce the inflammatory response.we propose that one evolutionary driving force for the nrf2 pathway may have been to provide a failsafe brake for out-of-control inflammatory events. the increase in oxidative stress at the site of an intense inflammatory locus may have been the intended trigger for a system to activate nrf2, allowing it to end the assault at a point where the invader has likely been vanquished but from which the host may be able to survive. in fact, the cadre of genes induced by nrf2 has long been referred to as "survival genes" [3] .we have shown that a group of 42 genes linked to respiratory virus infectivity and resistance, or to the associated immune response, are responsive to pharmacological nrf2 activation. it seems possible that the sum total of these multiple antiviral effects may confer a degree of resistance, attenuate viral replication rate, alleviate symptoms by limiting microvascular injury, and perhaps allow successful navigation through the "cytokine storm" that is a particular problem with covid-19. even though the never-ending evolutionary war of wits continues, and the viruses occasionally win a battle, this scenario of the complex and multi-faceted antiviral mechanisms regulated by nrf2 serves to underscore the importance of this very central transcription factor in keeping us protected and functional. until the sars outbreak (2002), during which coronaviruses (cov) showcased their potential for epidemic spread and significant pathogenicity in humans, they were mainly known as causes of mild respiratory and gastrointestinal disease (1). over the last two decades, three novel betacoronaviruses, severe acute respiratory syndrome (sars)-cov, middle east respiratory syndrome (mers)-cov and sars-cov2, have crossed the species barrier and caused significant outbreaks characterized by high case-fatality rates in humans (2) (3) (4) . the latest addition to human pathogenic coronaviruses (hcovs) is sars-cov2, the cause of covid-19. at the time of submission of this review sars-cov2 has infected over 2.6 million people worldwide and claimed 185.000 lives, threatening many more (https://gisanddata.maps.arcgis.com/apps/opsdashboard/index.html#/bda7594740fd40299 423467b48e9ecf6). in the following, epidemiological and clinical features of covid-19, pathophysiological mechanisms, and already available and future therapeutic options will be discussed based on limited evidence available, and extrapolation from related viral disease.the first hcovs were described in 1966, e229-cov and oc43-cov (5, 6) . they are part of a group of currently four known seasonal hcovs (shcov) that also includes hku1-cov and nl63-cov, which were only discovered in 2005 (7, 8) . all shcovs are globally endemic and frequently cause common colds, accounting for 2-18% of all respiratory tract infections (9) (10) (11) (12) (13) . by their fourth birthday, 75% of children show antibodies directed against at least one of the shcovs (14, 15) . anti-shcovs antibodies provide some cross-immunity and antibodymediated protection against infection by other species within the group (16) . while their overall pathogenic potential is comparatively low, in the immunocompromised, infants, the elderly and those with pre-existing pulmonary disorders, shcovs can cause severe respiratory or sepsis-like presentations (17) (18) (19) (20) (21) . oc43 displays some neurotropism and can cause demyelination and cns infections in vulnerable patient groups (22, 23) . while estimates of their contribution to annual respiratory illness vary, shcovs remain asymptomatic in approximately 50% of cases (24) (25) (26) . this is in stark contrast to the clinical presentation encountered in infections with so-called "novel coronaviruses" sars-cov, mers-cov and sars-cov2, which are associated with morbidity and case-fatality ratios that far exceed the ones in shcovs. than 60 years (28) . health care workers in contact with sars patients demonstrated a very low seroconversion rate of 2% in asymptomatic individuals. less than 5% of all affected were children, and post-containment seroprevalence among children considered high-risk for significant exposure was extremely low. this suggests that subclinical sars among children had not occurred (29) (30) (31) . approximately 20% of sars patients required intensive care support for acute respiratory distress syndrome (ards), half of who died within the following 28 days (32) .the severe clinical phenotype of sars was replicated during the emergence of mers in 2012, which continues to circulate, albeit to a lesser extent (36) . to date, 2494 cases of mers have occurred worldwide, presenting as severe pneumonia, and resulting in respiratory and multiorgan failure, with a case-fatality-ratio of 35%-45% (37) . individuals with comorbidities, males, and the immunocompromised are considered at particularly high risk.in both previous novel coronavirus outbreaks, the severity of the clinical manifestation has puzzled clinicians. common features included massive inflammatory cell infiltration of the lungs resulting in acute lung injury (ali) and ards, highly elevated inflammatory markers in the serum, evidence of monocyte/macrophage activation, activated coagulation and proinflammatory cytokine and chemokine profiles (33) (34) (35) (36) (37) (38) . this soon led to the implication of the host response as an important factor in this fulminant disease process (38) . animal models of sars suggest that lung inflammation intensifies after viral clearance, peaking as late as 14 days after infection (39) , and similar observations were made in human sars patients. this suggests that clinical deterioration later in the disease course was likely not due to uncontrolled viral replication, but rather uncontrolled immune responses and associated damage (40, 41) .similar descriptions of clinical presentations in covid-19 are now emerging. presenting features of cough and fever subacutely progress to respiratory distress and acute respiratory distress sydrome (ards) in 8-19% of patients, with the elderly and those with underlying comorbidities especially cardiovascular disease, diabetes mellitus, chronic pulmonary disorders or renal disease especially at risk https://www.epicentro.iss.it/coronavirus/bollettino/report-covid-2019_24_marzo_eng.pdf (42) (43) (44) (45) . it is estimated that about 14% of covid-19 patients develop respiratory symptoms requiring supplemental oxygen, and approximately 5% develop a need for mechanical ventilation (44) (45) (46) the cdc reports an overall case-fatality rate of 2.3%, though higher at 14.8% in patients over 80 years of age and 49% among the critically ill requiring mechanical ventilation (46) . pulmonary tissue impedes alveolar gas exchange. in addition, one fifth of hospitalized patients develop significant cardiovascular morbidity, characterized by troponin rise, tachyarrhythmias and thromboembolic events, which is strongly associated with mortality risk (49) (50) (51) . common features of covid-19 patients requiring hospitalization and intensive care level support therefore are severe pneumonia with hypoxic respiratory failure of subacute onset evolving into ards, with a clinical picture characterized by fevers, lymphopenia, highly elevated c-reactive protein, proinflammatory cytokines, serum ferritin, and d-dimers. histopathological evidence of a prominent pulmonary infitrate dominated by monocytes and macrophages, vasculitis and hypercoagulability is seen (52, 53) .based on current knowledge, clinical pictures, disease pathology and progression of sars-cov2 infections are similar causing significant morbidity and mortality that may be associated with hyperinflammatory responses in a subset of patients.coronaviruses are highly prevalent animal pathogens with a wide host range. overall, thousands of species of coronaviruses are known (54, 55). currently, seven covs are recognized as human pathogens (1). the family of coronaviridae is divided into two subfamilies: coronavirinae and torovirinae. coronavirinae include the genera alpha-, betacoronaviruses, infecting only mammals, and gamma-, and deltacoronaviruses which infect both mammals and birds. human covs e229 and nl63 are human pathogenic alpha-, while oc43 and hku1 and all novel covs (including sars-cov2) are betacoronaviruses. the potential of toroviruses to cause disease is humans is unknown https://talk.ictvonline.org/ictv-reports/ictv_9th_report/positive-sense-rna-viruses-2011/w/posrna_viruses/222/coronaviridae . coronaviruses (covs) are large enveloped viruses with a single-stranded, nonsegmented, positive sense rna genome that spans approximately 30 kilobases, making it the largest known genome of any rna virus (56) . being rna viruses, covs readily evolve by mutation and homologous and non-homologous recombination, which expands their host range and facilitates crossing of species barriers. extensive animal reservoirs, especially among bats, genetic recombination among covs, and their plasticity in terms of receptor use renders covs highly effective at host switching, sometimes across wide taxonomic distances (57, 58) .all hcovs are thought to be zoonoses. novel coronaviruses sars-cov, mers-cov and sars-cov2 are comparatively poorly adapted to humans, which affects their pathogenic potential (55, 59) . their genomic proximity to animal covs may allow for ongoing interspecies recombination events, as observed in mers (60) . mers-cov, sars-cov and sars-cov2 have a natural reservoir in bats. infection of humans likely occurred through intermediate hosts, including dromedary camels (mers), the masked palm civet (sars) and the pangolin (sars-cov2) (61) . as wild palm civets do not carry sars-cov, it must be assumed that the j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f proximity of animals in markets facilitates recombination events and the emergence of novel viruses that may be pathogenic in humans (62, 63) .coronaviruses are spherical in shape. their most prominent feature are club-like projections on the virus surface which are referred to as "spikes". the virus membrane contains four structural components, the spike (s), envelope (e), membrane (m) and nucelocapsid (n) protein (56) (figure 1). for sars-cov and sars-cov2, the s protein is the primary determinant for host tropism and pathogenicity. it is the main target for neutralizing antibodies and therefore of great interest in terms of immunological response and vaccine design (64) . the spike structure is formed by homotrimers of s-glycoproteins, each of which consists of two subunits, whereby s1 forms the part involved in receptor recognition, and s2 is highly conserved, anchors the protein in the viral membrane and facilitates viral fusion (65) (66) (67) . s1 contains a hypervariable loop which differs greatly between betacoronaviruses on both size and sequence. viral entry requires the proteolysis of the s protein in two locations, a process that utilizes host proteases, and results in irreversible conformational changes of the s protein (64, 67) . some anti-sars-cov antibodies in humans mimic receptor engagement, thus modeling conformational s protein changes upon antigen-antibody interaction (67) . the amino acid sequence of receptor binding sites of sars-cov2 is 74% homologous to that of sars-cov suggesting similar or even identical cell entry mechanisms for both viruses (68) .nl63, sars-cov and sars-cov2 all use the transmembrane angiotensin converting enzyme (ace)2 as host receptor, whereas mers cov utilizes dipetidylpeptidase-4 (dpp4) (65) . both receptors are transmembrane ectoenzymes that are highly conserved among mammals, thus facilitating interspecies transfer. however, their enzymatic activity in itself is not necessary for successful binding and fusion (69) (70) (71) .binding affinity of the s protein of sars-cov2 and ace2 is high. high sequence and conformational conservation of the s protein observed across sars-cov2 and sars-cov allows for some level of cross neutralization of the two viruses in vitro (64, 68) .hemagglutinin residues enhance binding by allowing interactions with sialic acid residues on host cell surfaces. betacoronaviruses feature yet another structural protein, hemagglutininesterase (he) which binds sialic acid on cell surfaces (72) (figure 1 ). this may enhance the virus' ability to bind and invade host cell surfaces and may constitute a virulence factor in novel hcovs.while data on sars-cov2 are still sparse, aforementioned parallels with sars-cov and mers-cov may (for now) allow extrapolation of knowledge to understand how sars-cov2 escapes the host's immune response. notably, sars-cov2 shares almost 80% rna sequence homology with sars-cov, and 50% with mers-cov (75), with sars-cov2 exhibiting additional genomic regions when compared to sars-cov. in particular, the viral spike protein, which binds to the host cell receptor, is 20-30 amino acids longer than sars-cov, and other closely related coronaviruses (75) . thus, it is possible, even likely, that sars-cov2 uses similar immune evasion strategies to other coronaviruses, but additional as yet undiscovered mechanisms may also be utilized by sars-cov2 (76).as mentioned above, sars-cov and sars-cov2 both use ace2 as their host cell receptor to establish infection (figure 2a ) (77). ace2 is expressed in almost all organs in the body. ace2 has been shown to be highly expressed on surfactant producing type 2 alveolar cells, and on ciliated and goblet cells in the airways; these cells likely provide a portal of entry for the virus in humans (78) (79) (80) . high ace2 expression is also observed on the intestinal epithelium (81) . furthermore, ace2 is expressed on cardiac cells and vascular endothelia, which may explain cardiovascular complications in some patients (53) . for sars-cov, infection of immune cells including monocytes/macrophages and t cells has been observed. it is not clear to date whether and to what extent sars-cov-2 can also infect these cell types. ace2 is also, but at lower levels and not ubiquitously, expressed on monocytes and macrophages, so this may also provide an entry mechanism into immune cells for sars-cov-2. however, other receptors and/or phagocytosis of virus containing immune complexes may also be involved (figure 1b) (76, 82, 83) .the host response and clearance of viral infections heavily relies on type i interferon (t1ifn) expression (84) . expression of t1ifn and down-stream signals modulate cell responses and reprogram cells into an "anti-viral state", subsequently promoting infection control and pathogen clearance (85) . as a first step, immune cells sense viral infection through identification of virus derived pattern associated molecular patterns (pamps), such as viral rna. these bind to and activate pattern recognition receptors (prrs) in/on immune cells and result in immune cell activation ( figure 2 ). rnas viruses, such as sars-cov, sars-cov2 and mers-cov are detected by endosomal rna prrs, including toll-like receptors (tlr-)3 and 7 and/or cytoplasmic rna sensors, namely retinoic acid-inducible gene i (rig-i) and melanoma differentiation-associated protein 5 (mda5) (figure 2). usually, tlr3/7 activation results in nuclear translocation of the transcription factors nfκb and irf3, while rig-1/mda5 activation result in activation of irf3. in turn, this triggers increased expression of t1ifn (through irf3) and other innate pro-inflammatory cytokines (il-1, il-6, tnf-α through nfκb) (76, 86) . in this context, t1ifn and other innate pro-inflammatory cytokines promote their own expression through auto-amplification: t1ifn activate the ifn-α receptor complex (ifnar) which results in the phosphorylation/activation of stat family transcription factors 1 and 2 (figure 2), while il-1, il-6, and tnf receptor activation feeds into pro-inflammatory j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f cytokine expression though the transcription factor nfκb (figure 2) (85) (86) (87) . activation and priming of innate and adaptive immune responses should result in pathogen clearance and recovery.however, in a proportion of infected individuals, sars-cov, mers-cov and likely sars-cov2 evade immune system recognition through suppression of these mechanisms, a phenomenon associated with more severe disease and poorer prognosis (38, 88, 89)(figure 2, red symbols). sars-cov has been shown to alter ubiquitination and degradation of rna sensors (rig-i and mda5). it inhibits activation of mitochondrial antiviral-signaling protein (mavs), which are essential for the activation and nuclear translocation of irf3 in response to cytoplasmic rna sensor activation. furthermore, sars-cov, and likely sars-cov2, inhibit the tnf receptor-associated factors (traf) 3 and 6, which are central for the induction of irf-3/7 in response to tlr3/7 and/or rig-i and mda-5 ligation as well as nfκb signalling pathways (which are usually activated in response to tlr3/7 ligation or cytokine receptor signaling) (88) . lastly, novel coronaviruses can counteract t1ifn signaling through inhibition of stat family transcription factor phosphorylation (86) . taken together, suppression of innate immune mechanisms in infected epithelial cells and, to some extent, infected monocytes/macrophages allow novel coronaviruses to proliferate without triggering the innate anti-viral response machinery of these cells.however, at a later stage, infected cells undergo cell death and release virus particles together with intracellular components that trigger innate inflammatory mechanisms through their recognition by prrs in/on innate immune cells. as a result of this innate immune activation and resultant expression of pro-inflammatory cytokines (including il-1β, il-6, tnf-α, etc.), adaptive immune cells become involved in the host's defense against viral infections. t lymphocytes play a central role in this anti-viral response, including cd4 + t cell derived cytokines, cd8 + t cell mediated cytotoxicity, and b cell activation resulting in antibody production. novel coronaviruses may also (partially) escape these mechanisms through the induction of t cell apoptosis (90) . however, lymphocytes may also become depleted due to the expression of pro-inflammatory cytokines by (not infected) innate immune cells that become recruited to the lungs and trigger hyper-inflammation, seen during the development of a "cytokine storm" (91).while symptoms of covid-19 disease may be (sometimes only slightly) milder in comparison to infections with sars-cov or mers-cov, several key pathogen-associated and clinical features of disease are similar and we can extrapolate knowledge from what is already known about the pathophysiology of sars and mers .in covid-19, as in sars or mers, several key findings were associated with poor outcomes in cohort studies, and suggest hyper-inflammation may be linked to more severe disease. three early studies from wuhan linked cytopenia and/or significantly elevated inflammatory parameters with severe disease and unfavorable outcomes. one study, involving 99 patients reported neutrophilia (38%), lymphopenia (35%), and increased systemic inflammatory proteins (il-6 in 52%, and crp in 84%) as common symptoms in covid-19 disease (72) . another study involving 41 individuals, linked severe disease culminating in icu admission and mortality, with neutrophilia and lymphopenia (4) . the third study reported significant leukopenia (11.8%), lymphopenia (77.6%), thrombopenia (41.2%), anemia (48.2%), hypofibrinogenemia (22.4%), and hypo-albuminemia (78.8%) in a cohort of 85 patients who died from covid-19 (83, 92) . these observations are in line with findings in severe or lethal cases of sars and mers, in which increased numbers of neutrophils and monocytes/macrophages are present in the airways (83, 93) . other groups reported severe clinical phenotypes and icu dependency of patients to be associated with increased plasma levels of innate chemokines, specifically c-x-c motif chemokine 10 (cxcl10)/interferon gamma-induced protein 10 (ip-10), chemokine (c-c motif) ligand 2 (ccl2)/monocyte chemoattractant protein 1 (mcp-1), macrophage inflammatory protein (mip-)1a/ccl3, and the pro-inflammatory cytokine tnf-α (2). this, indeed, is similar to the situation reported in sars and mers in which uncontrolled inflammation centrally contributes to poor outcomes (94) (95) (96) .though seemingly contradictory to mechanisms of immune evasion discussed above, enhanced innate immune activation, including increased t1ifn, il-1β, il-6, and tnf-α expression centrally contributes to morbidity and mortality in covid-19, mers and sars. one possible explanation is the induction of endothelial and vascular cell damage and cell death as a result of viral replication. virus-induced inflammatory cell death, including necrosis or pyroptosis result in pro-inflammatory cytokine expression, (uninfected) immune cell recruitment and activation (97) . mice infected with sars-cov exhibit excessive t1ifn secretion from myeloid cells in infected tissues. indeed, immune evasion through the suppression of anti-viral responses and t1ifn expression in respiratory epithelia results in high viral loads (38) . from this, it is hypothesized that (not infected) monocytes/macrophages and neutrophils recruited to the site of infection exhibit strong and poorly controlled inflammatory responses, resulting in tissue damage and systemic inflammation, both of which contribute to morbidity and mortality (53) (figure 3) .another factor thought to contribute to organ damage and poor outcomes is the early production of neutralizing antibodies against coronaviruses. antibody-dependent enhancement (ade) is a phenomenon shown to contribute to damage accrual during viral infections. it has been shown to promote cellular uptake of virus particles bound in immune complexes, through their binding to fcγ receptors (fcγr). this may contribute to aforementioned persistent viral replication in immune cells (including newly infected antigen-presenting cells), but also immune complex mediated inflammatory responses (figures 2,3,4) , that contribute to tissue and organ damage, including acute respiratory distress syndrome (ards) (98) (99) (100) . indeed, a subset of covid-19 patients reportedly develop vasculitic lesions, blood vessel occlusion and infarctions. histopathologic reports from tissue sections suggests features associated with immune complex mediated vasculitis, including infiltration of monocytes and lymphocytes within and around blood vessels, wall thickening, and focal hemorrhage (53, (101) (102) (103) .as is true for a number of systemic autoimmune/inflammatory conditions, uncontrolled activation of immune responses is (likely) not limited to the innate mechanisms. as a result of pro-inflammatory cytokine expression and the presence of nuclear antigens (from cell and tissue damage), adaptive immune cells may become activated and trigger a "second wave" of inflammation (potentially in those patients who deteriorate after 7-10 days of infection). indeed, adaptive immune cells, namely t lymphocytes, which are observed in lung tissue sections of covid-19 patients with ards and/or cytokine storm, may drive inflammation at later disease stages. similar mechanisms have been reported in influenza and other viral infections (104, 105) . overall, severely ill covid-19 patients experiencing cytokine storm exhibit lymphopenia and sometimes atrophy of the lymphatic tissues, namely lymph nodes and spleen (51, 106, 107) . this is in line with reports in primary and secondary forms of hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis (hlh) and associated cytokine storm, which result in inflammatory cell death and hypo-cellularity of lymphatic organs (108-110).poor outcomes are associated with age; indeed, children appear to contract sars-cov2 and usually do not develop severe symptoms or complications. this is surprising as children are prone to viral infections including severe manifestations. more than 75% of children get exposed to seasonal coronaviruses before their 4 th birthday and seroconverts. however, antibody titres wane over time, most obvious in those over 60 years (110) . this may reduce immune response to sars-cov2 in the elderly as (limited) cross-reactivity between antiseasonal coronavirus and anti-sars antibodies exists, but also contribute to increased inflammation and complications. immunological recall effects exist as anti-seasonal coronavirus titres increase in sera of convalescent sars patients (111) which may influence immune pathology. as mentioned above, antibody-bound virions can enter susceptible cells, such as macrophages through fcγ receptor ligation in a process termed antibody-dependent enhancement (ade) (112) . in other viral infections (e.g. dengue fever), ade allows immune cell infection and reduces type i ifn dependent antiviral responses while promoting proinflammatory il-6 and tnf-α expression (113, 114) . furthermore, massive recall antibody production in individuals with a history of exposure to seasonal coronaviruses but waning titres, such as the elderly, can result in immune complex deposition and promote inflammation and damage, including immune complex vasculitis (110) . mortality (115) . however, heterologous immune responses to unrelated antigens may also contrite to inflammation-related complications. frequently, adults exhibit memory t cells that are specific to antigens they were never exposed to, and cross-reactive memory t cells can narrow the t cell response by favoring "high affinity" clones. indeed, limited memory t cell repertoires are a feature of immune senescence and associated with disease progression and t cell mediated damage in other viral infections, such as virus hepatitis and infective mononucleosis (116) .as mentioned above, ace2 acts as transmembrane cellular receptor for sars-cov2 allowing cell infection (117) . variable ace2 expression patterns affect disease susceptibility between tissues (e.g. respiratory epithelia vs immune cells), but potentially also between individuals (men vs women, children vs adults) thereby determining disease progression and outcomes. recently, it has been suggested that ace2 expression is highest in children and young women, that its expression decreases with age, and is lowest in individuals with chronic disease, including diabetes and hypertension, inversely correlating with risk for severe disease and unfavorable outcomes (118) . while ace2 facilitates viral entry into cells, it also plays a role in controlling infection and inflammation. ace2 is part of the ace2/angiotensin-(1-7)/mas system as it counteracts the pro-inflammatory effects of the angiotensin-2. it catalyzes angiotensin-2 processing into angiotensin-1-7, which counteracts vasoconstriction, modulates leukocyte migration, cytokine expression, and fibrogenic pathways (119) . thus, ace2 contributes to limiting tissue inflammation while favoring repair mechanisms. furthermore, "high" ace2 expression may be of benefit as sars-cov2 virus particles may compete with angiotensin-2 for cell surface binding sites and cellular uptake. thus, relatively increased ace2 expression may explain why children and young adults, especially young women, are relatively protected from covid19 and associated complications.taken together, novel coronaviruses, such as sars-cov2, may effectively suppress early t1ifn responses, which contributes to uncontrolled virus replication resulting in delayed and potentially increased cytokine responses at later stages. early and sufficient control of virus replication and pathogen clearance may be altered in individuals at risk, such as the elderly, patients with diabetes or metabolic syndrome, etc. (74, 75) . healthy children and young people, on the other hand, may effectively control viral load at early stages of infection and less frequently develop severe disease and life-threatening complications. lastly, early antibody production may result in integration of viable virus into immune cells and increased viral replication, resulting in immune complex mediated pathology, which may contribute to pathology in young patients with no obvious risk factors (100).the rapid spread of sars-cov2 infection globally, has led to the immediate need for a vaccine or therapeutic intervention to prevent or treat covid-19 disease. due to the speed at which the virus has spread globally there are few studies on potential therapeutics j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f interventions or vaccine candidates. further, due to the minimal severity of the sars (774 deaths globally) and mers (866 deaths globally) epidemics, few studies to generate a vaccine or therapeutic for other closely related coronaviruses have been undertaken, which could have efficacy for covid-19 disease. clinical trials testing treatments for covid-19 are being undertaken, results from large randomized studies though remain outstanding at this stage. as a result, the following sections are not to be mistaken as evidence based treatment recommendations, but reflect (mostly) anecdotal experience with experimental treatment, extrapolation of data from related conditions, and expert opinion (figure 4) .(hydroxy-)chloroquine --medical use of chloroquine dates back decades. its phosphate and sulphate derivatives are administered as antimalarials, and hydroxychloroquine is widely used as immunomodulatory agent in systemic lupus erythematosus. in addition, chloroquine has antiviral activity against influenza, chikungunya virus, seasonal covs, and sars (120) (121) (122) (123) . as for these viruses, cell entry and replication of sars-cov2 depends on ph-dependent internalization by endocytosis and lysosomal fusion (figure 2 ). itself being a weak base, hydroxychloroquine follows the cellular ph gradient and accumulates in the acid environment of endolysosomes and other acidic cell organelles, thereby alkalinizing endosomes. in addition, hydroxychloroquine interferes with the terminal glycosylation of ace2, interfering with virus binding (123) . antiviral activity of chloroquine derivatives against sars-cov2 was identified in vitro early on (124) . based on this, the drug was rapidly introduced into clinical use, and preliminary reports suggested improved viral clearance and clinical outcomes in covid-19 patients receiving a 10-days course of hydroxychloroquine (125) . a small french pilot study, randomizing 36 patients with covid-19 suggested accelerated viral clearance in patients treated with a combination of hydroxychloroquine and azithromycin (126) . however, others have challenged results and found no benefit in either disease outcome or viral clearance (127) . disappointingly, the largest (also retrospective) study to date assessing hydroxychloroquine on its own or in combination with azithromycin found no benefit, but indeed an increased mortality risk among patients receiving hydroxychloroquine (128) . a study exploring chloroquine diphosphate in two dosing regimens was forced to terminate early for concerns over increased mortality in the high dose arm. the authors conclude that treatment with high dose chloroquine for 10 days is not sufficiently safe and should no longer be used in severe sars-cov2 patients (129) .immunomodulatory effects of hydroxychloroquine are well established, and may enhance its therapeutic effect in covid-19 complicated by macrophage activation and cytokine storm (130) . alkalization of endosomes reduces proteolysis, chemotaxis, phagocytosis, receptor recycling, and interferes with processing of epitopes displayed by antigenpresenting cells (131) . this overall contributes to decreased production of il-1, il-6 and prostaglandins, and alters intracellular calcium and tlr dependent signaling. furthermore, j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f preventing the acidification of lysosomes, hydroxychloroquine impairs cellular autophagy, a critical step for innate and adaptive immunity activation (132) . finally, hydroxychloroquine has antithrombotic effects, which may be beneficial in covid-19, where inflammatory stimuli and endothelial injury activate coagulation and promote micro-thrombus formation (133, 134) .while generally deemed safe when administered at correct dosing and under close monitoring, the therapeutic range of chloroquine and its derivatives is narrow. side effects include conduction defects, cardiomyopathy, retinopathy and hypoglycemia (135, 136) .azithromycin --as mentioned above, synergistic effects of azithromycin and hydroxychloroquine against sars-cov2 have been observed in vitro, which appeared to translate into clinical practice (126, 137, 138) . interestingly, azithromycin is also a weak base, and also accumulates in endosomes, with an alkalinizing effect at least equivalent to hydroxychloroquine. in addition to its antimicrobial properties, azithromycin is sometimes used for its immunomodulatory properties, especially in patients with chronic pulmonary disorders. azithromycin polarizes macrophages towards an anti-inflammatory m2 phenotype, and inhibits pro-inflammatory stat1 and nfκb signaling pathways (139, 140) . in the context of anti-inflammatory effects, it is of particular interest that azithromycin is used in patients requiring intensive care for non-covid-19 related ards and is associated with a significant reduction in mortality and shorter time to extubation (141) (142) (143) .adverse cardiac effects and proarrhythmogenic properties of hydroxychloroquine, especially in combination with macrolide antibiotics, such as azithromycin, deserves particular mention (144) . hydroxychloroquine, azithromycin and, to a lesser extent, lopinavir have been associated with prolongation of the qtc interval and increase the risk for tachyarrhythmias and sudden cardiac death. careful consideration of patient risk profile, pre-treatment ecg assessment and monitoring of pharmacokinetics, fluid and electrolyte status and polypharmacy are essential for the management of critically ill covid 19 patients (145) .remdesivir and other nucleoside analogues --nucleoside analogues are explored as treatment options for covid-19. candidates include favipiravir, geldesivir, ribavirin, and remdesivir, with the latter having received the most attention. remdesivir, a prodrug to adenosine (146) , was originally developed for the treatment of hemorrhagic fever viruses, namely ebola (ebov) and marburg viruses, but underperformed in ebov treatment compared to antibody strategies. both have antiviral in vitro activity in mers and sars (147, 148) . competing with atp and substituting for adenosine during rna synthesis, remdesivir inhibits the viral rna dependent rna polymerase (rdrp) (149) . human mitochondrial rdrp show significantly lower affinity to remdesivir as compared to their viral counterparts, mitigating side effects for the host cell (150) .the presence of cov-specific, proof-reading exonucleases capable of removing phosphorylated remdesivir from the rna chain could present a potential for development j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f of resistance. remdesivir treatment for murine hepatitis virus in a mouse model showed that, while conferring resistance, the trade-off in viral fitness was of a magnitude sufficient to significantly attenuate viral pathogenicity (147) . the timing of administration in animal models of ebov and mers was crucial for remdesivir's efficacy, with most benefit achieved when given early (148) . this is in keeping with aforementioned phases of the disease with highest virus replication rates early in disease, and host-mediated damage through immune responses at later stages. a recent case report, however, highlights persisting benefits also if late administration (151) .remdesivir underwent in vitro testing at the wuhan virus research institute early during the sars-cov2 outbreak (124) , and was identified as potently inhibiting viral infection in cell cultures at concentrations readily achievable in vivo. it was first used successfully in a covid-19 patient in january 2020 (152) . since, remdesivir has been employed on a compassionate use basis, and results for its use as a 10 day course reported for 53 patients with sars-cov2, 34 of whom required ecmo (4) or mechanical ventilation (30) at baseline (153) ; significantly reducing mortality. assessment in randomized controlled trials is needed, two of which had been in place in china for the treatment of moderate to severe covid-19, with recruitment terminated in march following declaration of containment (nct04257656; nct04252664). trials are currently ongoing in europe and north america. with effective reduction of pulmonary viral load in animal models, an acceptable safety profile in ebola patients and a small group of covid-19 patients, remdesivir may offer an effective and viable future treatment option.the combination of lopinavir and ritonavir (lpv/r), better known by tradenames aluvia® and kaletra®, is a frequently used antiretroviral treatment for hiv. combining two protease inhibitors limits otherwise extensive cyp3a4 activation and drug metabolism, thereby resulting in much improved bioavailability of lpv (154) . proteases are critical for viral replication, as they cleave both structural and functional proteins from precursor viral polypeptides (figure 5 ), thus enabling maturation into an infectious virion particle. lpv/r is mainly metabolized in the liver, and thus pre-existing hepatic impairment is considered a relative contraindication (154) .in sars, lpv/r in combination with ribavirin was associated with a significant reduction in unfavorable outcomes (ards and death) as compared to ribavirin alone (2.4% versus 28.8%) (155) . similar observations were made in a retrospective cohort study involving >1000 sars patients, where lpv/r was associated with significantly reduced mortality and need for intubation (73, 156) ; and it is currently being investigated by the who for use in mers patients in an ongoing randomized clinical trial. early use of lpv/r was recommended, based on aforementioned pathophysiological considerations rather than clinical data.in view of the in vitro activity against both sars and mers and the limited clinical data available for lpv/r in treatment of critically ill sars-cov2 patients, a randomized open-label trial was undertaken in wuhan, china (157) . it recruited almost 200 covid-19 patients, j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f randomized to either standard treatment or added lpv/r for 14 days. whilst confirming safety of lpv/r use in covid-19, no significant differences were seen between groups in relation to survival or time to recovery; thus leaving the authors question whether a combination of lpv/r with a nucleoside analogue, such as ribavirin, would have resulted in improved outcomes. trials exploring the therapeutic potential for lpv/r are currentlyongoing (https://www.remapcap.org/coronavirus; https://www.who.int/emergencies/diseases/novel-coronavirus-2019/global-research-onnovel-coronavirus-2019-ncov/solidarity-clinical-trial-for-covid-19-treatments).recombinant soluble ace2 --as ace2 has been identified as a key molecule for cell invasion (see above), its therapeutic blockade to control disease and aid viral clearance has been suggested (158) . however, unselective ace blockade with currently available agents may be problematic as it could alter angiotensin-1 through -7, which have anti-inflammatory and anti-fibrotic properties (159) . indeed, depletion of ace2 by sars-cov2 may potentially contribute to increased disease activity in critically ill covid-19 patients. in animal studies, ace2 protects from ards (160) (161) (162) , while angiotensin ii contributes to pulmonary pathology, including edema and fibrosis (163) . thus, accumulation of angiotensin ii in the absence of ace2 may aggravate disease and organ damage. consequently, ace2 induction has recently been suggested for covid-19 treatment (85, 159, 164, 165) . however, effects of ace2 may vary between tissues and environments. intestinal epithelia produce much higher levels of ace2 than bronchial epithelia which is notable as not all patients develop gastrointestinal symptoms and when they do, symptoms tend to be mild, and some patients remain sars-cov2 positive in stool samples long after respiratory specimen became negative (78, (166) (167) (168) . based on these observations, one could suggest that high-level ace2 expression such as that seen in the intestine and in contrast to the respiratory tract, or in children and young people as compared to individuals at risk (the elderly, especially when obese or chronically ill), may protect from inflammation and tissue damage. however, additional factors, such as the immunological micro-environment or regionally variable microbiomes may significantly affect virus uptake, replication and/or clearance. thus, the exact role(s) of ace2 in the context of covid-19 remains to be unveiled and may be complex.the administration of recombinant human ace2 to neutralize virions prior to their attachment to the host cells is also being explored as a therapeutic option in the future. in the attempt of exploiting the anti-inflammatory effect of the ace2/ ang-(1-7)/mas axis in non-covid-19 related ards, first pilot trials in humans have been published (169) , and whilst data supporting its efficacy as an ards treatment option remains outstanding, the treatment appeared safe and was well tolerated.type 1 interferons --as mentioned above, sars-cov2 effective inhibits the expression of type 1 interferons (38) . resulting tissue damage and expression of pro-inflammatory cytokines and chemokines from infected monocytes/macrophages promote excessive immune cell infiltration and cytokine responses (114) . more recently, also abortive infection j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f in t lymphocytes with sars-cov2 has been suggested (170) , but detailed characterization remains outstanding. altogether, unaltered virus replication in the presence of tissue damage and inflammatory cytokine expression can explain ards and cytokine storms in covid-19. overcoming immune evasion and enhancing antiviral activity may be a logical treatment strategy.in sars and mers patients, recombinant interferons have been used with varying success. while antiviral activity of recombinant ifn-α2a, ifn-α2b, ifn-β1a and ifn-β1b was shown in vitro for mers, sars and sars cov2, neither mortality nor viral clearance were affected by recombinant interferons in mers (171, 172) . however, the time of administration may be critical, as suggested by a mouse model of ifn i treatment for mers (173) , therefore human patients may have received treatment too late to be fully effective.plasma from convalescent patients --convalescent plasma, i.e. plasma from individuals following covid-19 resolution and rich in immunoglobulins directed against sars-cov2, is being entertained as possible treatment option (174, 175) . anecdotal use in sars, mers, ebola and influenza patients supports its use as a neutralizing and/or immunomodulatory agent (176, 177) . however, a larger randomized controlled assessment of hyperimmune intravenous immunoglobulin use for severe influenza (178, 179) and ebola (180) showed this intervention to not be superior to placebo. similarly, rigorously evaluated data for its use in coronaviral infections is lacking -not only for its use in sars-cov2 (181), and a feasibility study exploring its use in mers found that in many survivors, antibody titres were not high enough, thus further limiting the donor pool (182) . variable dosing, issues surrounding donor recruitment in times of rapidly increasing patient numbers, and drawbacks regarding safety of widespread use of human blood products all limit the availability and utility as widely available treatment option.finally, in viruses that are subject to ade (such as sears-cov2, see above) by nonneutralizing antibodies, the option of plasma therapy also holds significant risks. this complication has recently been exemplified by anti-zika virus antibodies enhancing dengue virus infection (183) . thus, the administration of hyperimmune/convalescent plasma may carry the risk of significant illness upon future exposure to related or yet-to-emerge coronaviruses.as mentioned above, current management of covid-19 is mainly supportive and approved treatments based on scientific evidence are not available. main causes of death include ards and cytokine storm syndrome (also referred to as macrophage activation syndrome, mas or secondary hemophagocytic histiocytosis, hlh) (74, 92, 106, 107) . indeed, ards occurs in 50% of patients with cytokine storm syndrome (184)). considering impressively rapid development of systemic and pulmonary inflammation in a subset of patients with covid-19, early identification and control of derailed immune responses is of utmost importance. based on data from chinese cohorts, markers associated with cytokine storm in j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f other conditions may be predictive of poor outcomes in covid-19, which include leukopenia, lymphopenia, thrombopenia, hypoalbuminemia, significantly elevated crp and il-6, hyperfibringenemia, and prolongedthrombin time (74, 185, 186) . however, this needs to be tested prospectively, and other more sensitive and specific biomarker may be identified.first data on cytokine storm syndrome and its catastrophic effects on tissues and organs was generated in patients with familial hlh, in which mutations in associated genes (including prf1, unc13d, stx1, stxp2, lyst, xiap, and others) result in systemic inflammation and, if not controlled, death (109) . standard treatment in these conditions include high-dose corticosteroids (dexamethasone), the calcineurin inhibitor cyclosporine a, chemotherapy with etoposide, and ultimately stem cell transplantation (187) . while the underlying molecular causes of familial hlh are different to covid-19 associated cytokine storm syndrome, clinical (fevers, organomegaly in some patients) and laboratory features (cytopenias, massively elevated inflammatory parameters including crp, esr and ferritin, hypalbuminemia, hyperfibrinogenaemia, etc.) and consequences (tissue and organ damage, death) overlap. furthermore, based on observations in the h1n1 influenza pandemic in 2009, a significant proportion of individuals developing disease-associated secondary cytokine storm syndrome may have mutations in one or more genes associated with familial hlh (in h1n1 36% of fatalities were associated with mutations in genes associated with the perforin pathway (188) .thus, clinical management of covid-19 associated cytokine storm syndrome may, to some extent, be informed by what we know from familial hlh. however, treatment of covid-19 associated cytokine storm should be more targeted and not include cytotoxic drugs and/or stem cell transplantation, as it is secondary to an infection, which will hopefully be cleared.corticosteroids are used in primary and secondary forms of hlh, and can control inflammation in ards (91, 189) . first preliminary data from sars and covid-19 suggest that high-dose steroids did not have beneficial effects on lung injury (190, 191) . instead, highdose corticosteroids are associated with complications in other forms of ards, including avascular osteonecrosis (192) . short courses of low-or medium-dose corticosteroids, however, have been suggested to be of benefit in a chinese cohort of critically ill covid-19 patients (193) . taken together, the limited data on the efficacy and safety of corticosteroids in ards are anecdotal and not conclusive; controlled trials do not exist. as their use is associated with widely variable effects on pathogen clearance, and evidence for their efficacy is lacking, high-dose corticosteroids cannot be generally recommended for the treatment of covid-19 (194) , and the use of low dose regimens must be trialed in formal and controlled studies. (195) . as mentioned above, immune complexes containing viable virus may mediate infection, activate fcγ receptors, and/or be deposited in tissues and organs, lastly resulting in pro-inflammatory responses (196) . of note, ards and cytokine storm in sars coincided with serum conversion in a majority of patients supporting these arguments. furthermore, patients who ultimately died, seroconverted significantly earlier when compared to individuals who recovered from infection (40, 197) . based on these observations, ivig may be of benefit to some patients by inhibiting fcγ receptors and limiting antibody-dependent enhancement (discussed above). furthermore, aforementioned "classical" antiinflammatory effects may limit systemic inflammation, and anti-pathogen properties may be supportive in cases with bacterial superinfection or in patients who previously cleared sars-cov2 and developed specific antibodies (186, 198) .the blockade of cytokines associated with hyper-inflammation during covid-19 is a more targeted approach when compared to the use of systemic corticosteroids, and is a promising therapeutic avenue. indeed, first anecdotal reports suggest efficacy at least in some patients.the il-6 receptor antagonist tocilizumab has been used successfully in patients with secondary cytokine storm syndrome (199) , including covid-19 (200, 201) . several studies have started or are about to be launched, investigating efficacy and safety of tocilizumab in patients with secondary cytokine storm syndrome in covid-19 (including chictr2000029765 in china) (202) .the recombinant il-1 receptor antagonist anakinra was originally developed to control cytokine storm and associated tissue damage in sepsis patients (203) . subsequently, anakinra has successfully been used in patients with cytokine storm syndrome secondary to autoimmune/inflammatory (204, 205) infectious or malignant disease (206) . anakinra may have significant potential at controlling hyper-inflammation in severe covid-19 disease, considering the absence of severe side-effects in aforementioned sepsis trials (203) , and reduced frequency of neutropenia and hepatotoxicity when compared to tocilizumab. currently, anakinra is being trialled in a randomised placebo-controlled study in children and adults with covid-19 associated cytokine storm syndrome in china (nct02780583) (91) . (jak) with small molecules is a relatively new concept used in systemic autoimmune/inflammatory conditions. jaks are involved in cytokine receptor signaling, including (but not limited to) the il-6 receptor, as well as type 1 and type 2 ifn receptors (91, 207) . they mediate the phosphorylation of stat family transcription factors which are, in turn, involved in pro-inflammatory cytokine expression. thus, jak inhibitors efficiently limit cytokine expression, and may aid in controlling cytokine storms (91) . however, jaks are also centrally involved in controlling the expression of t1ifn, which plays a key role in limiting virus replication and initiating pathogen clearance (208) . at least in the initial stages of covid-19 disease, when virus replication and infection may be limited to the epithelium, sars-cov2 likely limits t1ifn expression (see above). therefore, additional j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f inhibition of jak through small molecules may be counterproductive as they further limit pathogen containment and clearance, and may cause unforeseeable complications. thus, jak inhibition may not be the most suitable "target-directed" treatment option in covid-19 associated cytokine storm syndrome and/or ards. to our knowledge, at least two clinical trials are ongoing to test efficacy and safety of jak inhibitors in severe covid-19 (chictr2000030170, chictr2000029580).the previously discussed mechanisms of infection, immune evasion, and dysregulation of innate and adaptive immune responses cause significant concern for and among patients on systemic immune modulating treatments, including patients with malignant or systemic autoimmune/inflammatory diseases. based on previous coronavirus outbreaks (sars and mers) and first small observational studies in covid-19 cohorts, risk factors for poor outcomes include old age, presence of comorbidities (diabetes, metabolic syndrome, etc.), obesity, male sex, coronary heart disease, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, and kidney disease (209) . of note, immune modulation or suppression was not identified as a risk factor for poor prognosis in china or italy (186, 210) . while this could generally be considered "good news", immune suppression and associated altered immune function may predispose patients to infection and potentially prolong virus spreading. furthermore, as covid-19 is associated with lymphopenia, patients receiving immune modulating treatment may be prone to secondary infections, such as bacterial pneumonia.as discussed above, some immune modulating drugs may protect from viral infections. antimalarial drugs (chloroquine, hydroxychloroquine) may inhibit tissue infection and viral replication (53, 103) . furthermore, immune modulating medications (anti-malarial drugs, classical as well as biologic dmards, and others) may prevent or control cytokine storm syndromes.uncontrolled discontinuation of immune modulating treatment may result in disease flares in autoimmune/inflammatory conditions, organ rejection in transplant patients, or reoccurrence of malignancies, which (on top of obvious effects) may also all increase the risk for viral infection. thus, national and international societies, including the acr and eular, recommend continuation of treatment in the absence of symptoms and alterations to existing treatment regimens only in agreement with and under close monitoring by the responsible clinical service (211, 212). international collaboration is needed and under way to safely assess individual risk in these vulnerable patient groups. until reliable data is available, close clinical monitoring and social distancing should be prioritized.j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f as immunity does not exist and a significant proportion of humans develop severe disease, the novel coronavirus sars-cov2 is a threat to millions globally. sars-cov2 has the capacity to escape innate immune responses, which allows the pathogen to produce large copy numbers in primarily infected tissues, usually airway epithelia. through the infection of innate immune cells and/or the recruitment of uninfected cells from the circulation to the primary site of infection, massive immune reactions induce hyperinflammation that can result in a cytokine storm and life-threatening complications. we are only beginning to understand host factors, such as differential expression of cell surface proteins that may determine infection risk, disease presentation and outcomes. unveiling tissue and stage specific factors contributing to pathology will result in new, effective and disease stage specific therapeutic approaches that control virus replication while limiting inflammatory damage until vaccinations become available. while rna viruses usually activate tlr3 and/or 7 in endosomes (b) and cytosolic rna sensors rig-i and mda-5 (c), sars-cov2 effectively suppresses the activation of tnf receptor-associated factors (traf) 3 and 6, thereby limiting activation of the transcription factors nfκb and irf3 and 7, thereby suppressing early pro-inflammatory responses through type i interferons (ifn) and pro-inflammatory effector cytokines il-1, il-6 and tnf-α (red symbols). furthermore, novel covs inhibit the activation of stat transcription factors (d) in response to type i ifn receptor activation, which further limits antiviral response mechanisms. altogether, this prohibits virus containment through activation of anti-viral programs and the recruitment of immune cells. b) tissue monocytes/macrophages express ace2 to a significantly lower extent, making infection through this route less likely (a). however, immune complexes consisting of ineffective antibodies against e.g. seasonal covs and virus particles may be taken up by macrophages through fcγ receptors resulting in their infection (b). in a process referred to as antibody directed enhancement (ade), virions inhibit type i ifn signaling in infected macrophages while allowing pro-inflammatory il-1, il-6 and tnf-α expression, which may contribute to hyperinflammation and cytokine storm syndrome (c,d). inhibited type 1 ifn signaling suppresses anti-viral programs, while increased il-1, il-6 and tnf-α expression auto-amplifies itself through positive feedback loops (f).j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f figure 3 : inflammatory response through monocytes macrophages. uninfected monocytes/macrophages from the blood stream invade the lungs where they detect virus particles and/or cytoplasmic and nuclear components. within immune complexes, these particles are taken up into the cell (a) where they are presented to tlrs, activating nfκb and/or irf dependent pro-inflammatory pathways (b,c). as a result, uninfected monocytes/macrophages produce significant amounts of pro-inflammatory cytokines (d,e) which recruit additional innate and adaptive immune cells and cause additional tissue damage. while no approved and evidencebased treatments are available for covid-19, a number of treatments promise potential. virus particles may be caught and inactivated using antibodies from convalescent patients. recombinant soluble ace2 protein may bind sars-cov2 and/or mediate anti-inflammatory effects to prevent pulmonary damage and hyper-inflammation. (hydroxy-)chloroquine, potentially in combination with azithromycin), can change the ph of endosomes and reduce virus entry and replication. furthermore, both medications have immune-modulating effects that may control pro-inflammatory cytokine expression. anti-viral treatment with protease inhibitors (lopinavir, ritonavir, etc.) and/or nucleoside analogues (remdesivir, etc.) can limit virus replication. as sars-cov2 suppresses antiviral cytokine production, virus clearance may also be supported by the substitution of type 1 interferons, which activate their cytokine receptor (ifnar) and induce anti-viral cellular programs. hyperinflammation and resulting tissue damage may be prevented through immune modulation. blocking il-1 signaling (e.g. through recombinant il-1 receptor antagonist anakinra) or il-6 signaling (e.g. through il-6 receptor antibody tocilizumab) may limit further immune activation, tissue damage and cytokine storms. additional, less specific effects may be mediated through corticosteroids, immunoglobulins, hydroxychloroquine and/or azithromycin. severe acute respiratory syndrome-coronavirus-2 (sars-cov-2) is a new β-coronavirus responsible for the pandemic viral pneumonia known as covid- 19 . the disease started in wuhan, china in december 2019 and has rapidly spread throughout the world [1] . as of april 24, 2020, the overall outbreak had caused over 191,000 deaths and approximately 2,700,000infections. sars-cov-2 shares genomic similarities with two human coronaviruses, sars-cov and mers-cov (about 80% and 50%, respectively), which have caused fatal infections in the past 20 years [2] . covid-19 causes a wide spectrum of clinical manifestations, ranging from asymptomatic or paucisymptomatic forms (with cough, fever, myalgia, and malaise) to full-blown viral pneumonia, which can lead to acute respiratory distress syndrome (ards) [3, 4] . currently, three phenotypes are observed in covid-19 patients, indicating three stages of the infection's progression and extent: (i) "mild" (benign infection: 80%) in patients with minor and nonspecific symptoms who will not progress to a more severe disease; (ii) "moderate" (overt pneumonia with or without hypoxia and localized inflammation: 15%) in patients requiring hospitalization; and (iii) "severe" (systemic hyperinflammation and ards: 5%) in patients who require critical care management and at risk of fatal outcome (1-2%) [5, 6] . despite multiple targeted and non-targeted interventions, no treatment has yet proven effective in treating covid-19. numerous clinical trials are ongoing.as the pandemic progresses, the pathophysiology of covid-19 is becoming clearer and the potential of multiple cytokine and/or anti-cytokine interventions is raised. indeed, it has been reported that covid-19 associates states of both immunodeficiency and hyperinflammation, with the latter being manifested by a cytokine storm.in this paper, we summarize today's principal findings and attempt to establish a more definitive view of covid-19 pathophysiology, focusing on one key question: "how can lung injury directly induced by the virus remains poorly explained. patients with high viral loads and long virus-shedding periods are at higher risk of severe covid-19 [15] . the early onset of rapid viral replication may cause massive epithelial and endothelial cell apoptosis, vascular leakage, as well as pro-inflammatory mediator release [16] . furthermore, hace2 downregulation and shedding by viral s protein can cause dysfunction of the reninangiotensin system and exacerbate inflammation and vascular permeability leading to acute lung injury [17, 18] . finally, recent data have suggested that sars-cov-2 can directly infect t cells through receptor-dependent, s protein-mediated membrane fusion [19] . nevertheless, t cells have a very low expression level of hace2, suggesting either an alternative receptor or high s protein affinity for hace2. t cell infection is abortive, meaning that sars-cov-2 cannot replicate within t cells but rather induces cell death [19] . in sars-cov infection, the modulation of tnf-α-converting enzyme (tace or adam17) by the spike protein of sars-cov and hace2 induces tnf-α production which may accentuate t cell apoptosis [20, 21] . in this vein, xiong et al. reported upregulation of apoptosis, autophagy, and p53 pathways in pbmcs from covid-19 patients, when compared to healthy controls [22] .epidemiological studies have demonstrated an elevation of acute phase reactants in patients with covid-19, including esr, c-reactive protein (crp), serum amyloid a, and ferritin, suggesting a rapid activation of the innate immune response [3, [23] [24] [25] . accordingly, covid-pulmonary-centric disease by driving accumulated immune cells into the lungs and restricting the immune response to this particular organ.as stated above, type-i ifn is critical for protecting against viral infections, since it promotes intracellular rna degradation and virus clearance, induces tissue repair, and triggers a prolonged adaptive immune response [44] [45] [46] . type-i ifn is mainly produced by plasmacytoid dendritic cells (pdcs), which are less sensitive to productive viral infection and/or virus-mediated cytotoxicity and can produce other inflammatory cytokines, such as tnf-α and il-6 or control t cell response [47, 48] . pdcs are circulating immune cells, which act as sentinels and are activated after physical contact with virally-infected cells and transfer of pamps to the tlr7 sensors in pdcs, part of a process termed interferogenic synapse [49] . considering the 80% overlap between sars-cov and sars-cov-2, it has been speculated that the latter uses similar strategies to dampen innate immune response. nevertheless, sars-cov2 appears to have lower pathogenicity than sars-cov (with about a 10%-fatality rate) suggesting a lesser ifn antagonism [50] . on the other hand, exceptional genetic defects or j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f immunosenescence may account for a reduced type-i ifn response and greater severity of covid-19. accordingly increased age is associated with a poorer outcome [3, 6, 23, 51] .in mouse models of sars-cov and mers-cov infections, a delayed type-i ifn response may explain more severe disease, with compromised virus control and paradoxical hyperinflammation induced by type-i ifn itself [52] . this leads to an influx of neutrophils and monocytes-macrophages (the major sources of pro-inflammatory cytokines) and further apoptosis of t cells, epithelial and endothelial cells [52] [53] [54] [55] . these acute inflammatory mechanisms damage the pulmonary microvascular and alveolar barrier and cause vascular leakage and alveolar edema, converging to ards. therefore, not only the strength of the response but also its timing would appear to play a critical role in coronavirus infection ( figure 1 ).in vitro, sars-cov-2 displays a greater sensitivity to type-i ifn than sars-cov [56] .furthermore, sars-cov-2 does not impair stat1 phosphorylation. interestingly, mild/moderate infection by sars-cov-2 is associated with a potent type-i ifn response, characterized by the robust expression of isgs in patients' balfs [34] . moreover, preliminary results have revealed early ifn production in peripheral blood from patients with mild/moderate to severe forms during the first week of covid-19 (trouillet-assant et al., in press). in contrast, about 20% displayed no ifn production. another study found the type-i ifn response to be high (between days 8-12) in mild-to-moderate patients while reduced in more severe patients who had a striking downregulation of ifn-stimulated genes [57] . these results are in line with previous conclusions and would indicate that the characteristics of type-i ifn response -both in terms of kinetics and intensity -could be linked to clinical outcome [52] . how exactly sars-cov-2 escapes type-i ifn in some patients remains to be elucidated.lymphopenia is one of the most prominent markers of covid-19 and has been observed in over 80% of patients [23, 58, 59] . analyses have shown that all subsets of lymphocytes were decreased, including cd4+ and cd8+ cytotoxic t cells [57, 60] , natural killer (nk) cells, memory and regulatory t cells [61] along with b cells [62] . lower lymphocyte counts are closely linked to severe disease [61, 62] . in addition to being quantitatively decreased, t cells exhibit elevated exhaustion levels and reduced functional diversity [60, 63] . t cell numbers are negatively correlated with serum il-6, il-10 and tnf-α and with higher levels of exhaustion markers, such as pd-1 or tim-3 [57, 60, 64] . patients with severe form of covid- 19 have less multifunctional and more non-functional cd4+ t cells, as well as fewer nonexhausted cd8+ t cells than patients with mild covid-19 [63] .several explanations are posited to explain this sars-cov-2-induced lymphopenia.first, the virus can directly infect t cells but cannot replicate within the cells [19] . t cell infection may thus result in cell death by apoptosis, necrosis, or pyroptosis [19, 65, 66] .second, a number of inhibitory cytokines are released by infected lung macrophages or epithelial cells (first wave of hypercytokinemia), including tnf-α which causes t cell apoptosis [21] , il-10 which is known to prevent t cell proliferation [67] , and type-i ifn which regulates lymphocyte recirculation [68] . t cell exhaustion, characterizing severe covid-19, may stem from increased pd-1 or tim-3 expression, from elevated levels of inhibitory il-10 [60] or from increased il-6-induced expression of socs3 [69] [70] [71] .interestingly, il-2 and il-7, the cytokines responsible for expansion and differentiation of various t cell subsets are increased in the sera of patients having either mild/moderate or severe forms of covid-19 [23] . nevertheless, these increased levels most likely represent attempts by the immune system to reverse lymphopenia and t cell exhaustion.lastly, lymphopenia has been thought to be the result of immune cells redistribution, with accumulation of lymphocytes in the lungs or lymphoid organs [72] . however, though pathological results are scarce and contradictory, it would seem that alveolar or interstitial tissues are not invaded by lymphocytes but rather by monocytes, macrophages and moderate numbers of multinucleated giant cells [43] . more intriguingly, autopsies have revealed that secondary lymphoid tissues had been destroyed with atrophied spleen and decreased lymphocyte numbers, accompanied by significant cell degeneration, focal hemorrhagic necrosis, plus macrophage proliferation and phagocytosis. lymph nodes were atrophied and their number decreased, with signs of necrosis. immunohistochemical staining demonstrated decreased rates of cd4+ and cd8+ t cells in the spleen and lymph nodes [61] .sudden and rapidly progressing clinical deterioration has been widely mentioned in late stages of covid-19 (around 7-10 days). this often manifests as an unexpected aggravation of symptoms (fever, dyspnea) and is correlated with increased levels of acute phase reactants (esr, crp, ferritin), coagulopathy (elevated titers of d-dimers, disseminated intravascular coagulation), and cell lysis (ck, ldh) [3, 4, 11, 23, 59] . in the most severe patients, clinical and laboratory parameters correlated with increased levels of proinflammatory cytokines (il-1β, il-1ra, il-6, tnf-α, and sil2-rα), evocative of a cytokine storm [3, [73] [74] [75] . interestingly, ards occurs in sars-cov patients despite a diminishing viral load, suggesting that exuberant host immune response may be responsible for this outcome rather than viral virulence. such a cytokine profile is strongly reminiscent of both cytokine release syndrome (crs, seen in car t cell therapy) and hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis (hlh) [76, 77] .numerous authors have paralleled the covid-19 cytokine storm to either primary or reactive hlh (rehlh) because of its close resemblance, including high fever, cytopenia, j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f hyperferritinemia, abnormal liver tests, coagulopathy, and pulmonary involvement (including ards), occurring in approximately 50% of patients with rehlh [73, 74, 78] . in adults, rehlh is most often triggered by viral infections and is observed in 3 -4% of sepsis cases [79] .herpesviridae (e.g. epstein-barr virus) and influenza are major triggers of such cytokine storms [77] . systemic diseases, like systemic lupus erythematosus, or the autoinflammatory adult-onset still's disease and its pediatric counterpart, can also be complicated by cytokine storm, known as the macrophage activation syndrome (identical to rehlh) [80] [81] [82] . in all these conditions, il-1β, il-18, ifn-γ, and il-6 are key mediators of hyperinflammation.similar to what is observed in sars-cov-2 infection, the immunodeficiency linked to abnormal t cell number or function (genetically determined in primary hlh) appears to be the primum mobile of most cytokine storms [83] [84] [85] [86] [87] . although an alternative pathway of primary hyperactivated innate immunity is possible, it is more likely that this cytokine storm occurs due to the combination of a defective (or delayed) first line of defense, followed by persistent hypercytokinemia (il-6, il-1β, and tnf-α), and dysfunctional t cell response (generally cytotoxicity). this results in an impaired clearance of apoptic cells or infected/activated macrophages, an increase in viral replication and dissemination, followed by an il-18/ifn-γ feedforward loop activating macrophages, culminating in multiple cytokine release, hemophagocytosis, coagulopathy, and ards ( figure 2 ) [85, 88, 89] . some of these mediators may further fuel this vicious cycle, including nk cell function impairment by il-6 [71] or macrophage activation by the h-chain of ferritin [90] [91] [92] . quite importantly, hemophagocytosis has been reported in lung tissues from patients who succumbed to sars-cov infection [93] .thus, in covid-19, the onset of ards may be the consequence of a hlh-like syndrome, after a first period of lung damage, mainly localized within the lungs due to a prior accumulation of large amounts of innate immune cells. systemic features of hlh are lacking (such as extremely high titers of ferritinemia, organomegaly, and severe end-organ disease) but this is most probably the consequence of lymphoid organ immune cell depopulation of [43] .analysing more precisely the immunopathology of sars-cov2-related ards, giamarellos-bourboulis et al. have come to the conclusion that two patterns of immune dysfunction exist in worsening covid-19: (i) one pattern highly suggestive of macrophage activation syndrome (hyperferritinemia and elevated h score : 25% of patients), which is driven by il-1β; and (ii) one pattern with immune dysregulation driven by il-6 [71] . the latter was characterized by a combination of hypercytokinemia, immunoparalysis (as indicated by decreased hla-dr molecules on cd14 monocytes), and global lymphopenia (including cd4+ and nk cells). interestingly, il-6 blockade with tocilizumab partially restored hla-dr expression on cd14 monocytes and increased the circulating lymphocyte count.a number of key points stand out in this overview of the immunopathology of sars-cov-2 infection: 1) while the virus induces both impairment and hyperactivation of the immune system, these are sequential, and the latter seems to ensue from the former, at least partially;2) an early viral clearance by type-i ifn is a key to preventing further viral replication, t cell exhaustion, and subsequent cytokine storm;3) therapies (when applicable) should be administered with the right timing; i.e. nonetheless, except for advanced age, elevated body mass index, and comorbid conditions, there is still a lack of robust prognostic factors [3, 23, 24, 75] .routine and non-routine markers can be monitored to help evaluate the risk of developing cytokine storm. however, at present, no cut-off value has yet been proposed for any of these markers. it would be of great benefit to analyze their trends in depth, along with daily clinical evaluation.since type-i ifn's key role in antiviral response and low or delayed ifn response has been associated with poor outcome, ifn-α and ifn-β have emerged as potentially effective drugs against sars-cov-2 [52, 94] . evidence is mainly derived from experience with sars-cov and mers-cov infections [95] . in vivo, type-i is most often used in combination with other antiviral drugs, such as lopinavir/ritonavir [96] [97] [98] [99] or ribavirin [100] [101] [102] . in vitro, ifn-α and -β have very systematically demonstrated robust efficacy against coronaviruses, but proved disappointing when transposed to human diseases [95, 96, 100, 103] . multiple biases in these trials have prevented drawing conclusions from them. these biases include: coronavirus escape strategies to type-i ifn, limited sample sizes, heterogeneous experimental designs/clinical conditions, the nature of ifn isoform, administration route, plus difficulties in assessing whether disease outcome was linked to type-i ifn or to the drugs used in combination. key points which have emerged from these studies are: (i) ifn-β1b and ifn-β1a are the most potent subtypes for sars-cov inhibition (probably even more for sars-j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f cov-2) [56, 104, 105] ; (ii) type-i ifn must be administered as soon as possible after infection (ideally before symptom onset) although not in the late phase, because of possible tissue damage [5, 52, 106, 107] ; and (iii) although ifn-α inhalation can lower sars-cov-2 infection rate and serve in prophylaxis or treatment (chinese guidelines) [108] , the preferred solutions remain the better-evaluated, safer intravenous and subcutaneous routes [94, 109] . amounted to zero for both groups, whereas over 2,000 new covid-19 cases were diagnosed among medical personnel over the same period. despite problems of major bias, this study suggests that ifn-α1b could serve as an efficient prophylactic against covid-19.additional well-designed studies involving timely administration of ifn-α are thus eagerly awaited.lymphopenia and lymphocyte exhaustion are hallmarks of covid-19 and are possibly responsible for the cytokine storm due to defective clearance of both virus and infected cells.it is thus tempting to speculate that il-7 -the major cytokine promoting lymphocyte expansion and possibly reversal of t cell exhaustion -may be useful in restoring immune system homeostasis. il-7 exerts anti-apoptotic properties and induces potent proliferation of naive and memory t cells leading to replenishment of the circulating pool (cd4+ and cd8+) [112, 113] . il-7 also increases t cell receptor repertoire diversity [114] and promote the expression of cell adhesion molecules, improving the capacity of t cells to traffic to infection sites [115] . more importantly, the administration of recombinant il-7 (ril-7) does not induce hyperinflammatory response through stimulating adaptive immunity. indeed, ril-7 has been successfully used to treat t cell exhaustion following septic shock and restore cd4+ t cells in hiv patients, with no evidence of clinical deterioration nor proinflammatory marker exacerbation (tnf-α, il-6, crp) [116, 117] . surprisingly, at the time of writing this review, there is no trial registered yet to evaluate this strategy. if such a study were to be launched, the perfect timing for lymphocyte restoration would need to be strictly determined.j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o fnot only is il-6 a major mediator within the cytokine storm, its levels have been closely correlated with ards severity and outcome, along with blood sars-cov-2 viral load [71, 74, 118] . a recent meta-analysis reported 2.9-fold higher serum levels in patients with complicated covid-19 compared to patients with non-complicated disease [119] . inhibitors of il-6 or its receptor have been successful in treating other cytokine storm syndromes, such as rehlh associated with adult-onset still's disease [120] , or crs secondary to car t cell therapies [28, 121] . several drugs are available, including il-6 receptor inhibitors (tocilizumab, sarilumab) and il-6 inhibitors (siltuximab, clazakizumab, sirukumab) [122] . there was a trend, though no statistical difference, toward lower mortality. tocilizumab was well-tolerated, yet the author reported two mild liver test disturbances, and one ventilatoracquired pneumonia.these mixed results must be further clarified. most notably, since experimental models have shown that il-6 can either suppress or facilitate viral replication [128] , one crucial remaining question to answer will be the optimal timing for anti-il6 administration. if too early, the drugs may adversely affect viral clearance. if too late, the drugs may not be effective enough. be used only in the context of a clinical trial, due to "knowledge gap" [129] .il-1β and its natural antagonist (i.e. il-1ra) have been observed in the peripheral blood and balf of patients with covid-19-induced pneumonia [22, 23, 26, 71] . this is a striking result since il-1β has a short half-life in serum and is rarely isolated in peripheral blood. this finding suggests high levels of il-1β production, reinforced by reports indicating il1b and il1r1 gene upregulations [57] .il-1β is a proinflammatory cytokine that is activated and secreted upon activation of the inflammasome [32] . nlrp3, the most-frequently studied inflammasome, is activated by danger signals, which have been suggested to be viroporin a, e protein, or orf3 proteins from sars-cov and mers-cov [38, 40, 130] . pyroptosis has also been associated with coronavirus infection [16, 131] . elevated il-1β is central to ards [132] and hlh [89, 133] .indeed, hlh is a well-known and frequent complication in about 10% of juvenile and adultonset still's disease, whith pathophysiology marked by very high levels of il-1β [81, 134] .anakinra, a recombinant il-1ra, has proved effective in treating hlh (via continuous intravenous infusion) [135, 136] , and it is currently used in il-1-induced autoinflammatory diseases, including cryopyrinopathies (dominant nlrp3 gain-of-function) [137] , familialmediterranean fever (pyrin inflammasome deregulation) [138] , pfapa [139] , and still's disease [140] . in a reanalysis of data from a phase-iii randomized trial, anakinra was associated with significant survival improvement in patients with severe sepsis and features of rehlh, without triggering any serious adverse events [141] . today, anakinra is being evaluated in this context in the provide study (nct03332225 canakinumab, a monoclonal antibody targeting il-1β, is also being investigated in a singlearm observational study (nct04348448); however its longer half-life (26 days) may be problematic for infected patients.il-18 is mainly produced by macrophages as an inactive precursor which is processed by inflammasome-activated caspase-1, like il-1β [32, 142] . by binding to il-18r, il-18 (in combination with il-12/-15) acts on cd4+, cd8+ t cells, and nk cells to induce ifn-γ, the major driver of macrophage activation syndrome (i.e. hlh) [85, 86, 89, 143] . il-18 is one of the upregulated cytokines in sera and balf from covid-19 patients [26, 144] . in addition, il-18 has been reported as a biomarker of still's disease, its levels being correlated with disease activity [145] . high levels of serum il-18 have also been reported in patients with a newly-described autoinflammatory disease associating pulmonary alveolar proteinosis and j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f recurrent macrophage activation syndrome (il18pap-mas) [146] . tadekinig alfa is a recombinant il-18 binding protein (il-18bp, a naturally-occurring inhibitor of il-18) which has shown encouraging results in still's disease [135, 136] . interestingly, ril-18bp was uused to successfully treat a 6-week old girl with life-threatening nlrc4-associated hyperinflammation (hlh), which was refractory to corticosteroids, il-1 blockade, anti-tnf, cyclosporine, and vedolizumab [147] . although blocking il-18 could be of interest in covid-19, there is no clinical evidence, nor any registered rct assessing the safety and efficacy of ril-18bp in this framework.intriguingly, while being central to cytokine storm occurrence in sars-cov infection [148] , ifn-γ was not found to be elevated in the sera or balfs of patients with severe forms of covid-19 [22, 23, 26, 149] . actually, there are even conflicting results showing a mild elevation in the sera of non-severe patients [23, 26, 75, 150] . however, one meta-analysis has shown a link between high il-6/ifn-γ ratio and disease severity, thereby indicating that lower levels of ifn-γ should rather predict poorer outcomes [151] . emapalumab, a monoclonal antibody directed against ifn-γ is approved for treating pediatric and adult primary hlh patients with refractory, recurrent, or progressive disease or intolerance to conventional therapy (despite a lack of clinical trial data in adults) [152, 153] . however, in the single rct on 34 patients, serious adverse reactions occurred in 53% of the recipients, including (bacterial, viral, and opportunistic) infections and multiple organ dysfunction syndrome. in addition, data from mouse models suggest that simultaneously inhibiting multiple cytokinesignaling pathways (such as with jak inhibitors) may be more effective than targeting ifn-γ alone [154, 155] . rcts are now ongoing to evaluate emapalumab in hlh (either primary or j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f reactive: nct01818492, nct0331275, nct03985423, nct03311854) and in covid-19 (nct04324021).tnf is present in covid-19 patients' blood and diseased tissues and its levels are even higher in patients with severe disease [23, 61, 75, 156] . since tnf inhibitors are readily available and well-evaluated drugs, some authors postulate that there is sufficient evidence to conduct clinical trials in covid-19 [157] . nevertheless, the literature remains very scanty when exploring possible treatments for cytokine storm or hlh. indeed, while a few case reports described the benefits of etanercept [158] [159] [160] , other studies have shown that it may trigger or worsen disease progression [161] [162] [163] . however, some cases argue for tnf inhibitors use in covid-19: (i) tnf neutralization provides protection against sars-cov infection in animal models [164] ; (ii) anti-tnf induce a rapid decrease of il-6 and il-1 concentrations in patients with active rheumatoid arthritis [165] ; (iii) anti-tnf trigger a reduction of adhesion molecules and vascular endothelial growth factor, which is partly responsible for capillary leak [166, 167] ; and (iv) anti-tnf lead to less leucocyte traffick to inflamed tissues due to reduced adhesion molecules and chemokines with subsequent reduction of cell content and exudate [168] . it is suggested that initial assessments of tnf inhibitors should be done in patients with moderate disease, as soon as possible after their admission to hospital [157] . to date, only a single rct evaluating adalimumab in covid-19has been registered (chictr2000030089).j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o fcorticosteroids are potent cytokine inhibitors working through several mechanisms but mainly by inhibiting the nf-κb transcription factor. they are the cornerstone of treatments for cytokine storms and hlh associated with autoimmune/autoinflammatory diseases.however, their use in managing sars-cov-2 patients is currently highly contested [169] [170] [171] . indeed, a systematic review of observational studies on corticosteroids administered to sars-cov infected patients reported no survival benefit, plus potential harm (although mostly inconclusive) [95] . similarly, a systematic review of observational studies in influenza found a higher risk of mortality and secondary infections with (high-dose) corticosteroids [172] . further, a study of patients given corticosteroids for mers-cov infection revealed delayed clearance of the virus and zero effect of corticosteroids on mortality [173] . finally, while most previous guidelines did not recommend corticosteroid use for treating sepsis in the absence of refractory shock, a recent statement (triggered by the analysis of two rcts) made a weak recommendation to use corticosteroids in sepsis patients [174] . altogether, it has become apparent that corticosteroids may be more detrimental than beneficial in covid-19 and the who (as well as idsa) recommends that they not be used outside of clinical trials [175] . however, given that these data are derived from previous infections, corticosteroids binding to hace2 in vitro, or inhibit viral cycle [181] . in addition, they are used in autoimmune and inflammatory diseases (mainly systemic lupus erythematosus) for their immunomodulating properties. it is hypothesized that their action is tied to their ability to accumulate in lysosomes where they raise ph and interfere with antigen degradation and presentation to cd4+ t cells [182, 183] . data also indicate that they reduce proinflammatory il-6, il-18, and tnf-α [184, 185] . lastly, they inhibit endosomal tlrs and have antiinflammatory effects, such inhibiting prostaglandin synthesis or lipid peroxidation [186] [187] [188] .altogether, chloroquine and hydroxychloroquine are thought to be able to reduce viral load and prevent cytokine storm. at the time of writing this review, seven articles are reporting clinical data (observational studies or clinical trials), with either positive (n=4) [189] [190] [191] [192] or negative (n=5) results [193] [194] [195] [196] , but no definitive conclusions can currently be drawn because of major biases in all of the studies [197] . several rcts are also ongoing to evaluate j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f journal pre-proof these drugs in the context of covid-19 (n=32 registered with www.clinicaltrials.gov; n=16with the chinese clinical trial registry).in conclusion, it is noteworthy that several national guidelines already include chloroquine or hydroxychloroquine whereas the idsa recommends reserving its use (in combination with azithromycin or not) for clinical trials.other drugs are currently being investigated, such as the jak inhibitors (i.e. tofacitinib, nct04332042; baricitinib, nct04321993, nct04345289, nct04320277, nct04346147, nct04340232; ruxolitinib, nct04348695, nct04331665, nct04337359, nct04338958, nct04334044, nct04348071) or colchicine. the jak/stat pathway lies downstream of several cytokines which are increased in hlh and thus it is an attractive target to abrogate the signaling of multiple cytokine pathways [198] . however, caution should be applied in using jak inhibitors because: (i) covid-19 can be complicated by coagulopathy with increased frequency of thromboembolic events, and the fda has recently warned clinicians about increased thromboembolism risk with some jak inhibitors [199] ; ii) treatment with jak inhibitors is associated with increased frequency of herpes zoster virus reactivation; and (iii) pan-jak inhibitors may repress some cytokines required for antiviral defense (type-i ifn) or for immune restoration (il-2, il-7) [200, 201] .colchicine is a long-established drug with anti-inflammatory properties used to treat patients with behçet's disease or familial mediterranean fever. colchicine inhibits il-1β and its subsequent inflammatory cascade principally by blocking pyrin and (to a lesser extent) nlrp3 inflammasome activation. until now, there has been no data indicating that pyrin is activated upon sars-cov-2 infection and this would appear rather unlikely. on the other j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f hand, nlrp3 is likely to be activated following virus entry into the cell [38] [39] [40] 65, 130] .nevertheless, the inhibition of nlrp3 inflammasome by colchicine has not been firmly demonstrated since in vitro it does not prevent il-1β secretion induced by typical nlrp3 stimuli (i.e. atp, nigericin) [202] . five rcts are currently under way to test the efficacy of colchicine in covid-19 patients (nct04322682, nct04322565, nct04328480, nct04326790, nct04350320).the rapid diffusion of covid-19 drives an urgent search for effective treatments, mainly for its severe forms. the disease is polyphasic in nature, with secondary cytokine storm and ards resulting in poor outcomes, plus overwhelmed intensive care units and hospitals. in the very early stages of the disease, treatment should focus on reducing viral load either by specific antivirals or by stimulating type-i ifn. later on, in selected patients, therapies targeting proinflammatory cytokines could suppress hyperinflammation, while some cytokines (il-7) could theoretically trigger immune restoration. in clinical practice, unfortunately, patients are unlikely to be detected early enough (i.e. before/at symptom onset) to benefit from antiviral strategies. therefore, factors to predict progression toward severe forms of the disease are, at present, the most urgently needed and awaited determinants. a highly-structured approach, which includes immune monitoring, would thus be of utmost importance.j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f associated with circulating levels of il-2, il-4, tnf-α, ifn-γ and c reactive protein. antiinflammatory agents were believed to combat against severe covid-19 patients, we suggest the anti-inflammatory drugs should be used very carefully based on our observation. at least, each patients should be tested circulating levels of inflammatory cytokines before launching anti-inflammatory treatment. in summary, our study will benefit to guidance of covid-19 clinical treatment strategy.the pandemic outbreak of coronavirus disease 2019 (covid-19) is sharply spreading all over the world. the severity of a viral disease usually is positive association with immunemediated inflammatory responses. the aggressive and persistent inflammatory response leads to high risk of multiorgan failure and death (1) . antiviral drugs are a generally effective approach to treat severe viral infection. however, resistant viruses may arise upon administration of the antiviral drugs (2) . thus, anti-inflammation agents are critical for releasing severity of disease but not for viral clearance. the overproduction inflammatory cytokines results in cytokine storm, cytokine storm indicates excessive release of proinflammatory cytokines including c reactive protein and pro-inflammatory cytokines (tnf-α, il-8, et al) (3) . the extraordinary body of evidences suggest that severe covid-19 patients have cytokine storm (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) . the high levels of cytokines manifest the destructive process by leading to pneumonia, vascular endotheliitis, coagulopathy and other lifethreatening respiratory symptoms in covid-19 patients (9, 10) . moreover, coagulopathy was recently showed to be associated with covid-19 severity in caucasian patients (11) .however, the relationship between cytokines storm and covid-19 pathology still keeps elusive.here, we analyzed the cytokines level in covid-19 patients admitted to the intensive care unit (icu) with hypoxemic respiratory failure. we found cytokine storm of il-2, il-4, tnf-α, ifn-γ and c reactive protein is absent in these 25 patients. our observation suggest anti-inflammation agents can not apply to each patient although they are in icu. we highlight that circulating levels of inflammatory cytokines should be tested before any antiinflammatory treatment, in case inhibition of essential but not excessive cytokines for priming immune responses against sars-cov-2. the non-appropriate anti-inflammatory treatment might be harmful in the context of the covid-19 pandemic.a total of 25 patients from 39 to 85 years old were confirmed to be sars-cov-2 positive in nasopharyngeal swabs. the clinical characteristics and chest ct scans indicate these patients are severe covid-19 patients who were admitted to icu. the inflammatory cytokines and immune cells in peripheral blood of these patients were detected. all the patients were admitted in icu with hypoxemic respiratory failure. the comorbidities are hypertension (20%; 5/25) and diabetes (20%; 5/25). all of these 25 surviving patients were discharged from the icu to hospital ward before being discharged home. as showed in the table 1 , inflammatory cytokines including c reactive protein, il-2, il-4, il-10, tnf-α and ifn-γ were in the normal value range compared to the reference value. these cases showed that il-2, il-4, tnf-α, ifn-γ and c reactive protein level is not associated with severe covid-19 pathology. however, il-6 and il-10 level of some severe covid-19 patients is over to the reference value. these indicate these covid-19 patients has severe clinical characteristics independent on circulating levels of inflammatory cytokines in peripheral blood including of il-2, il-4, tnf-α, ifn-γ and c reactive protein.prognostic prediction based on machine learning tools (12) . in our study, c reactive protein is in the normal range in all patients who were admitted to icu and all of these patients are surviving. our observation is consistent with reports indicating c reactive protein as biomarkers covid-19 mortality (12) . dissertation of the level and role of proinflammatory cytokines in the pathophysiology of covid-19 is critical for evaluation anticytokine therapy. at present, very limited experience on cytokine inhibitors affects covid-19 patients. sars-cov-2 might well adapt for humans and the viral genomic rna or the intermediates can ' t be recognized by immune sysytem for activation downstream inflammation cascades. our study emphasizes circulating levels of il-2, il-4, tnf-α, ifn-γ and c reactive protein are not associated with severity of covid-19 symptoms. to address why severe covid-19 is independent on inflammation response that would be a fundamental question for us to understand of covid-19 pathophysiology.covid-19 has disparate features in term of severity, mortality and spread across countries. a striking variation in mortality rates has been observed in different countries (13) . enormous differences in human leukocyte antigen (hla) haplotype might confer the this article is protected by copyright. all rights reserved.different immune response to sars-cov-2, which leads to the variation in severity, mortality and spread rates of covid-19 (14) . however, the causation of covid-19 severity and mortality requires more investigation. some reports showed cytokine storm is correlated with severity and mortality of covid-19 patients (5, 7, 8) . but the correlation does not indicate causation. more viral replication also could drive consequent severity of covid-19. janus kinase (jak) inhibitors targeting cytokines with jak-dependent signaling was thought to be potential to restrain the excessive level of cytokine signaling (15) . currently, il-6r and il-6 inhibitors were used in covid-19 patients which has already been launched. experts hope il-6r and il-6 inhibitors could inhibit hyperinflammatory response in covid-19 patients independent on viral clearance (16) .the hypothesis that blocking cytokine storm eases covid-19 severity needs to be more careful investigation based on our observation. at least, each patients should be tested circulating levels of inflammatory cytokines before launching anti-inflammatory treatment.icu: intensive care unit crp: c reactive proteinall co-authors have approved the manuscript and agreed with the publication.each patient consents to participate in this study.not applicable.the authors have no conflict of interest to declare. this article is protected by copyright. all rights reserved.funding this work was supported by grants from the state key laboratory of veterinary biotechnology (no. 2020901 to q.w.)authors' contributions qw conceptualized the study. qw and wl analyzed the data. wl and jz contributed to manuscript preparation. wl, wz and yl collected the patients information. qw wrote the first draft of the manuscript. all of the authors contributed to revising the manuscript, and read and approved the final version for publication. coronavirus disease 2019 (covid-19) is a severe public health emergency worldwide caused by severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus-2 (sars-cov-2) [1] . the number of confirmed cases and the mortality rate are increasing worldwide and the world health organization (who) acknowledged covid-19 as a pandemic on march 11, 2020 [2] . currently, there have been many efforts to diagnose a number of patients with symptoms or close contacts to prevent the spread in the community. this may prevent some spreading of the virus, but not perfectly. moreover, many confirmed cases are occurring through diagnosis, but there is no definite guideline for the initial therapeutic approach for them and therefore, many patients have been dying. if the covid-19 symptoms are severe, the patients are hospitalized and the treatment is done, though they have not been established yet. currently, however, no treatment is provided for those who are isolated at home or shelter. among them, there will be also some cases in whom severe lung injury or cytokine storm has progressed [3] , leading to sudden death. case fatality rates in some countries, especially italy and spain, are high and effective therapeutic measures are urgently needed [4] . in this review, we discuss some important points dedicated to the management of patients with covid-19, which should help reducing morbidity and mortality. at risk to develop acute lung injury, followed by acute respiratory distress syndrome (ards) and eventually death. this circumstance is called cytokine release syndrome (crs) or "cytokine storm" [6] .the main pathogenesis of covid-19 may be similar to that of other viruses such as influenza or others. however, there have been few efforts to make a potential hypothesis why covid-19 could cause a higher incidence of acute lung injury, ards, cytokine storm and death than other viruses. we are going to make a simple hypothetical model for the inflammatory processes and "cytokine storm" for covid-19 to understand the pathophysiology of covid-19 and its associated lung injury, ards and cytokine storm.• first, covid-19 (sars-cov-2) is first attached to the angiotensin converting enzyme 2 (ace2) receptors in the nasopharynx and respiratory epithelium [7] .• second, host immune responses are initiated after entry of covid- 19 into the cells and the pro-inflammatory cytokines induced by covid-19 are formed by various kinds of immune cells such as t cells, b-cells, and macrophages, and others [8, 9] .• third, the degree of increase in pro-inflammatory cytokines determines the degree of covid-19-induced lung injury. the more increase in pro-inflammatory cytokines, the higher the injury to lung tissue and the more severe the ards, which could be related to higher mortality.• fourth, the degree of increase in pro-inflammatory cytokines in covid-19 is higher as induced by other viruses. especially, this effect is more pronounced in older age and comorbid conditions.• fifth, the reason why this effect is less pronounced in younger age groups may be obscure, but it could be due to the immaturity of immune system and the predominance of th2 immunity than th1 in these groups.• sixth, the reason why this effect is more pronounced in older age groups and those with comorbid conditions may be obscure, but it could be due to pre-existing subclinical or subtle inflammations, represented by increased high-sensitive crp (hscrp) in these groups.• seventh, the exaggerated increase in pro-inflammatory cytokines in covid-19 could be due to hyperactivation of various kinds of immune cells in response to n-protein of covid-19, which is called "cytokine storm".• eighth, this increase in pro-inflammatory cytokines induced by covid-19 ("cytokine storm") can cause acute lung injury, ards and eventually multiorgan failure.• ninth, "cytokine storm" may start from the early course of disease to later stage according to the degree of activation of host immune response and it may be rapidly progressive at any time.• tenth, there may be clinico-pathologic non-correlations between them [3] . the patient may be asymptomatic or have mild symptoms despite severely progressed conditions, which will delay the appropriate treatment at an early stage.the pathogenesis of covid-19 is summarized in fig. 1 . regarding our immunity, there are 3 states: (1) immunosuppressive state, (2) normal immune state (this is also classified as lower normal, normal, and upper normal), and (3) hyperimmune state. if there are 100 normal persons, they are distributed from 0 to 100 on a scale according to the degree of anti-viral immunity, which will be mostly represented by th1 response. if the person is immunocompromised, he/she will have minus points on the scale. the lower the minus number is located, the more severe the immunosuppressive condition will be. if the number is higher than 100, the person will get hyperactivated host immune response and will have lung injury, ards and multiorgan failure.if the person is infected with other usual respiratory viruses, such as rhinovirus or influenza, he/she will have fever and sore throat caused by host immune response. however, the degree of increase in inflammatory reaction will be 3-5. so, if the person who has the number of immunity scale of 90 and infected by other viruses, the number on a scale will increase to 93-95. however, the degree of increase in inflammatory reaction in patients with the current covid-19 will be 10-15. therefore, if the person who has the number of immunity scale 90 is infected by covid-19, the number on a scale will increase to 100-105, which means that there will be a high probability that this patient will progress to "cytokine storm" due to hyperactivated immune response, which might lead to death. because younger age groups' immune system may be immature and they may have the predominance of th2 immunity than th1 [10] , they might have the number of immunity scale 0-30. therefore, even though they are infected by covid-19 and the number is increased by 10-15 by covid-19, their number will be located between 10 and 45. therefore, there is a lower possibility that they will be progress to severe "cytokine storm", which may explain less mortality in this group.however, the person in an older age group will have multiple comorbidities by aging process such as atherosclerosis, hypertension, diabetes mellitus, metabolic syndrome and chronic kidney disease and they might have pre-existing subclinical or subtle inflammations, represented by increased hscrp in these groups [11] . therefore, they might have a number of immunity scale 85-95. therefore, if they are infected by covid-19 and the number of 10-15 is increased by covid-19, their number will be located between 95 and 110. therefore, there is high possibility that they will progress to severe "cytokine storm", which may explain high mortality in this group. surely, there will be additional factors that influence the susceptibility and severity of covid-19, such as genetic variant of different polymorphisms or environmental factors as smoking.in addition to this basic 10-15 increase in the degree of inflammatory reaction, if the patient progressed to "cytokine storm", the number will rapidly increase to 200-300. we are going to discuss the use of steroids later, but the basic increase of 10-15 in various proinflammatory cytokines induced by covid-19 might be suppressed by short-course low dose steroids in an early stage of disease, but steroids may not be effective in a later stage of disease such as ards and multiorgan failure to suppress "cytokine storm" because 200-300 cannot be suppressed even though high dose of steroids are used. recently, hydroxychloroquine has been shown to be effective in covid-19 [12] , and this drug may reduce the increase in the degree of inflammatory reaction. however, we do not know which agent may be better in decreasing inflammatory reactions and how much the number might be decreased by steroids or hydroxychloroquine.in addition to these, the rate of bacterial complications will increase in accordance with the progression with time after covid-19. we think if bacterial complication is combined with "cytokine storm", there will be more severe inflammatory reactions. although this theory may not be perfect, this may be helpful to understand the pathogenesis and potential harms of covid-19 and guide how patients should be treated.evidence based medicine (ebm) is the conscientious, explicit, judicious and reasonable use of modern, best evidence in making decisions about the care of individual patients [13] . ebm integrates clinical experience and patient values with the best available research information [13] . many clinicians are applying the treatment to the current coronavirus (covid-19) based on the previous experiences for mers or sars. however, this is not exactly evidence-based, since covid-19 is different. to be evidence-based, a large-scale randomized placebo-controlled trial for covid-19 should urgently be conducted. however, it is too difficult to find an appropriate drug for covid-19 in a pandemic state, because it will take a long time, although this effort should also be done concurrently.in addition, even if the results of small rcts are meaningful, those are often reversed when a larger rct is performed [14] . moreover, although the results of meta-analysis may be considered to be the best evidence, this should be interpreted with caution, because the metaanalysis results can be significant even though all the results of individual rcts have no statistical significance [15] . furthermore, it has been claimed that most published research findings are false and not useful [16, 17] (though this should also be interpreted with caution) and numerously published meta-analyses are also misleading [18] . in addition, guidelines suggested by experts can also have a mistake [19] . in this context, we should find what is the best strategies to protect the humans form the harms of covid-19. even though we apply several therapeutic strategies investigated in sars or mers, it should be interpreted with caution. if we cannot apply ebm immediately in this covid-19 pandemic, we should also make every effort to find wise ways to solve the problems. in this situation, an experience-based approach may be also important in this pandemic era and many publications should urgently be published even though they are case reports or case series.covid-19 is causing a severe public health emergency all over the word and the mortality is rapidly increasing all over the world. we would like to remind of the basic principle for the treatment of patients, but we often forget this: "do no harm" [20] . we should think of what "harms" means and what "do no harms" would look like in this pandemic. we have thought and summarized the potential harms and the things we are doing now regarding covid-19 and it is summarized as below and table 1 .(1) continuing smoking is a significant harm to respiratory epitheliums. if so, why don't we recommend cessation of smoking at this time? not doing so is causing a significant harm to the patients. (2) "cytokine storm" is considered to be a significant harm and an important cause of death. if so, why don't we make every effort to prevent this process at an early course of disease? not doing so is causing a significant harm to the patients. (3) currently, some asymptomatic patients or those with mild symptoms have severe radiologic findings and bacterial complications which can lead to sudden death, but no radiologic examinations and treatment are done for these patients until severe symptoms develop. this may be considered to be a significant harm. if so, why don't we make every effort to detect these patients and treat them at an early course of disease? not doing so is causing a significant harm to the patients. (4) currently, covid-19 infected patients are divided into two groups:one is the person who is isolated at home, but no medications are provided and the other is the person who developed severe symptoms with time and admitted to the hospital. currently, many patients with covid-19 are recommended to be at home until severe symptoms develop, due to infectivity to others. we think there will be a patient group with moderate symptoms in whom if early treatment is done with steroids and antibiotics, they will not progress to severe conditions. to let them at home will be a significant harm. if so, why don't we provide medications such as steroids or antibiotics at the time of covid-19 test and monitor the patient even by phone, considering it is practically difficult for the patient points of current potential harms in the novel covid-19 disease.• smoking cessation has not been recommended in this pandemic era, which may be a significant harm.• although "cytokine storm" is considered to be a significant harm and an important cause of death, there have been few efforts to prevent this process at an early course of disease.• the person with covid-19 who is isolated at home does not receive any medications or treatment until severe symptoms such as dyspnea develops.• although some asymptomatic patients with covid-19 or those with mild symptoms have severe radiologic findings, no radiologic examinations are given to these patients until severe symptoms develop.• although some mild patients with covid-19 have bacterial complications at any stage, no treatment is given until severe symptoms develop.• misinterpretation of the results from various studies including systematic review without considering the biases will lead to a false guidance for the treatment of covid-19, which will be a significant harm to visit the clinic again? if so, policy should be changed in this pandemic era as medications should be given to the patients more liberally than in usual situations. not doing so is causing a significant harm to the patients and hesitating for the use of steroids and antibiotics may be a harm to the patients with covid-19. (5) doing something is better than nothing. currently, there are no established guidelines for covid-19 and we rely on the previous treatments for sars, mers or influenza or on expert opinions. recently, some investigators are discussing the beneficial effect of hydroxychloroquine for covid-19, but this is just based on in vitro studies and not much experience. but why don't we have more interests on the use of elderberry supplements which was shown to be effective in cold and influenza by randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled study and meta-analysis [21] [22] [23] ? if some treatments such as elderberry supplements or betadine mouth or nasal spray are not causing significant harms, we think doing something is better than nothing. (6) misinterpretation of the various studies including systematic review without considering the biases will lead to a false guidance for the treatment of covid-19, which will be a significant harm [24] . the role of experts who are doing evidence-based medicine or metaresearch is very important to reduce the harm to the patients in this pandemic era. (see table 2 .)in addition to these, there may be more current harms in this pandemic era and this should also be urgently discussed.based on the pathogenesis of covid-19 infection and the principles mentioned above, we would like to suggest 7 recommendations for covid-19 which should urgently be considered in this pandemic era.first, smoking cessation should be encouraged. this has always been recommended for general population, but it has also been very difficult for the people to do so. because covid-19 can predominantly damage the respiratory epitheliums and lungs, this should at least be recommended. recently, it was also hypothesized that those individuals who have been exposed to nicotine prior to their exposure to the virus are "primed" to be at higher risk because nicotine can directly impact the putative receptor for the virus (ace2) and lead to deleterious signaling in lung epithelial cells. [25] in addition, several cytokines including il-2, il-6 and tnf-α which is induced by smoking might trigger "cytokine storm" in covid-19. we still do not know whether a short duration of smoking cessation could reduce the susceptibility or severity of covid-19 or not, but if it is beneficial, doing something (smoking cessation) is better than nothing.second, povidone-iodine (polyvinylpyrrolidone-iodine, pvp-i, betadine) mouth or nasal spray can be applied to kill the covid-19 viruses and it will reduce the number of covid-19 viruses which enter into the cells. covid-19 is initiated by the attachment of the virus to the pharynx or respiratory epithelium and this causes sore throat. currently, however, we do not know about whether the number of virus attached to the pharynx or respiratory epithelium will influence on the severity of covid-19. easily speaking, when you inhaled 10 viruses and when you inhaled 1000 viruses, will infection risk or the disease severity be same or different? currently, this cannot be proved easily. however, considering the effectiveness of a mask that prevents respiratory infections, less exposure is likely to prevent infection by an indirect evidence. one previous meta-analysis showed that physical measures are highly effective in preventing the spread of sars: wearing masks (odds ratio 0.32, 95% ci 0.25 to 0.40; number needed to treat (nnt) = 6, 4.54 to 8.03) vs. wearing n95 masks (0.09, 0.03 to 0.30; nnt = 3, 2.37 to 4.06) [26] . we can make a potential hypothesis: if 10 viruses were inhaled and attached to the throat, this may be cleared by host immunity. however, if 1000 viruses were inhaled and attached to the throat, it should go through a fight between the virus and host immunity. if viruses are cleared by host immunity, the person can be free from virus, but if the viruses win, they may replicate exponentially within a relatively short time and will cause viremia in the blood. in this situation, we still do not know whether the degree of viremia (viral load) might be correlated to the degree of host hyperimmune response, or whether reduction of viruses in the throat, for example, using betadine mouth spray or gargles, could decrease the degree of viremia in blood.currently, inhibiting angiotensin converting enzyme 2 (ace2) and blocking angiotensin receptor 2 (ar2) is considered to be the key target for sars-cov-2 vaccination and covid-19 therapy [27] . due to this finding, some authors recommend the use of angiotensin converting enzyme inhibitors (acei) or angiotensin receptor 2 blockers (arbs) [28] . currently, these findings and suggestions can't be transferred into clinical practice easily. acei and arbs are widely used in clinical daily practice, no clinical studies have been made in the set of covid-19 outbreak so far. even basic science, due to the pathophysiological mechanisms (e.g. effectiveness of blocking ar2) are limited [27] . due to a substantiated benefit-risk evaluation a therapy with arbs or acei cannot be recommended. in addition, we do not know about how many ace2 receptors could be downregulated or blocked by antibodies or vaccines and how many entries of viruses could be inhibited by these if they are developed. however, if blocking entry of virus is a potential therapeutic target, we think that direct killing of the virus in the throat by betadine mouth or nasal spray might be more efficacious than the receptor downregulation.several studies showed severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus (sars-cov) and middle east respiratory syndrome coronavirus (mers-cov) could be inactivated by pvp-i in vitro [29, 30] . one phase 1 study shows application of pvp-i nasal spray to the nasal mucosa did not result in any demonstrable limitation of the nasal function nor in detectable damage to the multilayer ciliated epithelium of the nose [31] . because anyone can buy betadine mouth or nasal spray or gargles without a prescription as over-the-counter medicines, if it does not cause any significant harm, there is no reason not to use it and it can be applied if a person feels sore throat at an early course of the disease. although side effects of pvp-i use are rare, the adverse effect of iodine and other precautions should also be recognized. pvp-i can cause allergic reactions and should not be used in patients suffering from thyroid diseases [32] . even there exist no studies for pvp-i and sars-cov-2 either due to the benefit-risk evaluation, pvp-i can be used in patients infected with sars-cov-2 with no or mild • hydroxychloroquine can be used as a secondary drug in patients with worsening symptoms.• policy for the drug use should be changed like giving steroids and antibiotics to the patients at the time of diagnostic test or by drive through system to reduce the harms of patients.autoimmunity reviews xxx (xxxx) xxxx symptoms without allergies to pvp-i or thyroid diseases. or if a person is visiting more crowded places such as airport, it can also be applied easily.third, the use of elderberry supplements should be considered at an early course of the disease. although it has not been tested in coronavirus, elderberry supplements which was shown to be effective in cold and influenza by randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled study and meta-analysis [21] [22] [23] . currently, there was one cleveland clinic news reported by emily bamforth on the use of elderberry supplements [33] . although there have been several reports on the beneficial effect of elderberry supplements on several viral infections [21] [22] [23] , there have been few hypotheses on the potential immunologic mechanisms on the beneficial effect of elderberry supplements focusing on covid-19.it is well known that angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ace2) is a receptor for sars-cov [34] . a recent study showed that sars-cov-2 (covid-19) spike (s) glycoproteins also uses ace2 to enter cells and that the receptor-binding domains of sars-cov-2 s and sars-cov s bind with similar affinities to human ace2, correlating with the efficient spread of sars-cov-2 among humans. [35] . although less discussed than ace2, it was shown that cd209l (l-sign), encoded by clec4m, is also a receptor for sars-cov [36] . in this study, cd209l was expressed in human lung in type ii alveolar cells and endothelial cells, both potential targets for sars-cov and the large s glycoprotein of sars-cov might use both ace2 and cd209l in virus infection and pathogenesis [36] . in addition, chan et al. demonstrated that individuals homozygous for clec4m tandem repeats are less susceptible to sars infection and l-sign is expressed in both non-sars and sars-cov-infected lung [37] . they also showed that compared with cells heterozygous for l-sign, cells homozygous for l-sign show higher binding capacity for sars-cov, higher proteasome-dependent viral degradation and a lower capacity for trans infection, suggesting that homozygosity for l-sign plays a protective role during sars infection [37] . in summary, the first encounter of the virus with the host might be through binding to attachment receptors, such as these receptors, which might play an important role of infection for a large number of enveloped viruses by capturing, concentrating and transmitting infectious virions [38] . once a virus reaches its target cell, a cascade of events generally starting with the interaction of viral envelope glycoproteins with specific entry receptors and co-receptors is necessary in order to trigger the virus-cell membrane fusion [38] .although not much studied in coronavirus, capture and transmission of hiv-1 by the c-type lectin l-sign was inhibited by carbohydrate-binding agents (cbas) [39] . in this study, both mannose-and nacetylglucosamine (glcnac)-specific cbas dose-dependently prevented virus capture by l-sign-expressing 293 t-rex/l-sign cells [39] . because coronavirus also uses l-sign as a receptor for entry, one study suggested that influenza virus and coronavirus infections might also qualify to be treated by cbas [40] .keyaerts et al. evaluated the effect of 33 plant lectins with different specificities to coronavirus [41] . they showed that the plant lectins possessed marked antiviral properties against both coronaviruses with ec(50) values in the lower microgram/ml range (middle nanomolar range), being non-toxic (cc(50)) at 50-100 microg/ml and the strongest anti-coronavirus activity was found predominantly among the mannose-binding lectins. in addition, a number of galactose-, n-acetylgalactosamine-, glucose-, and n-acetylglucosamine-specific plant agglutinines exhibited anti-coronaviral activity [41] . they also found that there was a significant correlation (with an r-value of 0.70) between the ec(50) values of the 10 mannose-specific plant lectins effective against the two coronaviruses but, little correlation was seen between the activity of other types of lectins [41] . therefore, they reported that two targets of possible antiviral intervention were identified in the replication cycle of sars-cov; the first target is located early in the replication cycle, most probably viral attachment, and the second target is located at the end of the infectious virus cycle [41] .de clercq summarized various compounds which have been reported to exhibit in vitro activity against sars-cov, though they have an ill-defined mode of action but selectivity indexes up to 100 (valinomycin, glycopeptide antibiotics, plant lectins, hesperetin, glycyrrhizin, aurintricarboxylic acid, chloroquine, niclosamide, nelfinavir and calpain inhibitors). among them, plant lectins and chloroquine (which is being discussed for the potential treatment of covid-19) are included [42] .this hypothesis has further been tested later in mers-cov epidemic, because coronaviruses are enveloped viruses, with the spike proteins present on their surface responsible for virus entry into the target cell [43] . because mers-cov also cause a high mortality rate of about 35%, no vaccine is available and therapeutic options for mers-cov infections are limited to palliative and supportive care, a search for specific antiviral treatments was urgently needed [43] . millet et al. thought that lectins are attractive anti-coronavirus candidates because of the highly glycosylated nature of the spike protein and tested the antiviral effect of griffithsin (grft), a lectin isolated from the red marine alga griffithsia sp. against mers-cov infection [43] . they demonstrated that griffithsin is a potent inhibitor of mers-cov infection without significant cytotoxicity [43] . griffithsin inhibited entry into host cells of particles pseudotyped with the mers-cov spike protein, suggesting that griffithsin inhibits spike protein function during entry at the binding step [43] .the compounds found in elderberries are phenolic acids, flavonoids, vitamins, lectins and aroma compounds, etc. [44] . a very similar lectin called sambucus nigra fruit specific agglutinin i (sna-if) was identified as a minor protein in ripe elderberry fruits [45] . although elderberry supplements have not been tested in the current covid-19 pandemic, lectin components might inhibit spike protein function during entry at the binding step as mentioned above or have unknown other effects.currently, because anyone can buy elderberry supplements without a prescription as over-the-counter medicines, if it does not cause any significant harm, there is no reason not to use it and it can be applied at an early course of the disease. although there have been some reports on the increase in some cytokines by elderberry supplements [46] , elderberry supplements also have various kinds of other effects. surely, however, we should also weigh the benefit and risk for the use of elderberry supplements like other otcs. we know that even otcs (eg. tylenol) have many adverse effects on the drug information. in addition, we should also look at the evidence-based systematic review of elderberry and elderflower (sambucus nigra) by the natural standard research collaboration [47] , which could be applied to the current covid-19 pandemic.in this point, we should be able to guide the use of these elderberry supplements to the general population or patients with covid-19 as this: "elderberry supplements can be used in those with covid-19 at an early course of disease, if you understand the previous efficacy of these and potential adverse effects".fourth, the use of oral steroids should be actively considered at an early course of the disease. if the cause of death of covid-19 is ards and organ failure due to "cytokine storm" by hyperactivated host immune response, why we are not considering to suppress or prevent this process at an early course of the disease? we think the increase in various pro-inflammatory cytokines induced by covid-19 may be suppressed by short-course low dose steroids in an early stage of disease, but it may not be effective in a later stage of disease such as ards and multiorgan failure. this situation can be assimilated by forest fire. if a first small fire by cigarette butts can be detected by hiker early (early covid-19), it can be extinguished by small amounts of water a. kronbichler, et al. autoimmunity reviews xxx (xxxx) xxxx (low dose steroids) easily. but if wild forest fires spread (persistent high fever, dyspnea) in the mountain without early suppression, it cannot be suppressed despite every effort by numerous fire trucks (long-term use of very high dose of steroids), and all mountains will be burned (destructed lung, requiring ecmo). there was one recent systematic review reporting that the use of steroids may be harmful to patients with covid-19 [48] . however, this result should be interpreted with caution because the quality of the included studies is extremely low and they have many biases, many studies are missing and the included studies are not on the use of steroids vs. no use. this result should not be generalized to the patients with early course of the disease and mild symptoms.one study investigated the structural arrangement of n protein, explaining the first steps of its interaction with nucleic acid at the initial stages of virus structure assembly [49] . the nucleocapsid (n) protein of covid-19 has nearly 90% amino acid sequence identity with sars-cov and the n protein antibodies of sars-cov may cross react with covid-19 but may not provide cross-immunity. in a similar fashion to sars-cov, the n protein of covid-19 may play an important role in suppressing the rna interference (rnai) to overcome the host defense [50] . in rat models, the n-protein of sars-cov had pathogenicity and could induce obvious pulmonary inflammatory reaction and acute lung injury, which were related to the increase and imbalance of pro-inflammatory and anti-inflammatory cytokines. [51] . in this study, glucocorticoids could effectively alleviate the pulmonary inflammatory reaction induced by n-protein of sars-cov, supporting the beneficial role of steroids on the inflammatory reactions caused by n-protein of the current covid-19 [51] .according to the chinese government's daily report, 13.2-21.3% of patients with covid-19 developed severe or fatal illness, and therefore, the china's national health commission released the fifth trial version of diagnosis and treatment scheme for pneumonitis with covid-19, and provided a systematic treatment strategy for severe cases and systematic corticosteroids treatment (methylprednisolone, <1-2 mg per kg body weight, for 3-5 days) was recommended to be an adjuvant therapy [52] . zou et al. recently showed that systematic corticosteroids therapy in the first 3-5 days in severe patients could enhance oxygen saturation (sao2) and arterial oxygen tension (pao2)/inspiratory oxygen fraction (fio2), but corticosteroids did not exert any intervention on survival of ncp patients complicated with both ards and shock or multiple organ injury [53] . nevertheless, they concluded that corticosteroids in the phase of ards would effectively inhibit furious inflammatory storm and gain valuable time for controlling infection and preventing secondary multiorgan damage and shock, which implies that corticosteroids have synergistic biological effects when combined with other intensivists' treatment against severe or fatal ncp patients. [53] . however, as we mentioned above, we think the increase in various pro-inflammatory cytokines induced by covid-19 may be suppressed by short-course low dose steroids in an early stage of disease, but it may not be effective in a later stage of disease such as ards and multiorgan failure because a later stage may be a big fire, which cannot be suppressed easily.one another thing is a short course of low dose oral steroids is easily prescribed in the treatment of urticaria, but why are we afraid of prescribing the use of oral steroids in the acute covid-19 setting even though many patients progress to severe disease, in whom there will be some patients with mild symptoms with severe radiologic findings. if we can lower the percentage of progressing to "cytokine storm" by early use of steroids, even though it is found to be statistically nonsignificant, such as p-value of 0.06-0.09, several patients will be rescued. therefore, we should interpret the results based on the p-value cautiously and conversely, misinterpretation or misunderstanding of pvalue will cause a significant harm to the patients with covid-19. recently, some groups showed the beneficial effect of hydroxychloroquine [12] . until these reports, there was evidence of hydroxychloroquine on coronavirus just from in vitro study [54, 55] . therefore, the doctor who first used this drug in a patient with covid-19 might have done this treatment by non-evidence-based medicine. we should try the oral steroids in patients with covid-19 at an early course of disease.fifth, the use of oral antibiotics should be actively considered if the patient feels not good, because secondary bacterial infection might aggravate acute immunological lung injury induced by several cytokines (eg. il-2, il-6 and tnf-α) in covid-19. there are no controlled clinical trials evaluating the use of empiric antimicrobials in covid-19 patients or other coronavirus driven diseases. therefore, recommendations can only be based on other viral diseases like influenza [56] . furthermore, another guideline on treating covid-19 patients was released. both guidelines suggest that blind or inappropriate use of antibacterial drugs, especially the combination of broad-spectrum antibacterial drugs should be avoided in patients with mild or no symptoms [57] . however, we are against these guidelines, because the current covid-19 situation is definitely different to other usual viral infections, because some patients with mild symptoms can have severe radiologic features and sudden death. furthermore, bacterial superinfection is hard to detect and cannot be easily diagnosed. symptoms of covid-19 and bacterial superinfection may overlap. data on the prevalence of bacterial superinfection in patients with covid-19 are very limited [58] . influenza pneumonia is often associated with staphylococcus aureus co-infection and can be especially virulent [56] . initiating empiric antibacterial therapy in adults with community-acquired pneumonia who test positive for influenza was recommended by recent clinical practice guidelines [56] . therefore, we suggest that according to the clinical manifestations of patients, if the accompanying bacterial infection cannot be ruled out, patients can take antibacterial drugs against community-acquired pneumonia, such as amoxicillin, azithromycin, or fluoroquinolones [57] . empirical antibacterial treatment in severe patients should cover all possible pathogens, deescalating therapy until the pathogenic bacteria are clarified [59] .in addition, the current special situation should also be considered. currently, if the patient is diagnosed as having covid-19, he/she will be isolated at home and is recommended that if severe symptoms are developed, come to the hospital and no medications are provided. however, we think this is a very dangerous situation, because some persons might have no or only mild symptoms despite severe progression of lung injury. and when these patients become to feel dyspnea, and come to the hospital, the time might be late for the recovery. they will receive not only intravenous antibiotics but also various kinds of multiple drugs. we speculate that many patients who became to get severe symptoms might have bacterial complications. it has been reported that bacterial coinfection is associated with approximately 40% of viral respiratory tract infections requiring hospitalization [60] . the incidence of bacterial complications of covid-19 is unknown yet, but considering that more patients with covid-19 get severe symptoms than observed in other respiratory viral diseases, we speculate that more bacterial complications might be combined not only in severe conditions but also in mild conditions. if the patient is having usual other respiratory viral infections, he/she will visit the clinic and will be prescribed antibiotics. however, in the current situation, the patient with covid-19 cannot visit an usual clinic and should wait until he will recover or get dyspnea. if virus damages the throat or lungs, other bacteria oral cavity can cause secondary infection and this cannot be exactly evaluated and diagnosed, because the laboratory examinations for bacteria such as culture or procalcitonin may not be exact due to false negative and all the bacteria cannot be examined.in this situation, based on the medical principle "do no harm", waiting until the patient deteriorate is a severe harm. therefore, to prevent the deterioration of the patient with covid-19, oral antibiotics and oral steroids should be given to the patient at the time of covid-19 and it should be recommended if the patient has high fever and feels bad, take the antibiotics and steroids empirically and it can be acceptable in the pandemic era as many patients are dying due to complications of covid-19. if the doctor can monitor and guide the patients with phone calls, it will be better if there are enough medical personnels, so, in the current situation, liberal and early use of oral antibiotics and steroids may be "do no harm", which may be a different situation than during the usual common cold situation. in our experiences, if the patient feels bad, earlier antibiotics and steroids are used, the patient's condition will recover.sixth, hydroxychloroquine can be used as a secondary drug in patients with worsening symptoms in covid-19. chloroquine and its metabolite, hydroxychloroquine, are antimalarial agents that have demonstrated antiviral effects on sars-cov and sars-cov-2 in vitro [54, 55] . chloroquine had inhibitory effects for multiple rna viruses in vitro. chloroquine showed no antiviral or clinical beneficial effects in treatment of dengue and chikungunya virus infections and as influenza prophylaxis [61] . a news briefing suggested that its use in more than 100 patients showed "that it was superior to the control in inhibiting the exacerbation of pneumonia, improving lung imaging findings, promoting a virus negative conversion, and shortening the disease course", but the data have not been published yet [62] . a recent consensus document recommended chloroquine phosphate 500 mg twice daily for minimum of 5 days [63] . another study found hydroxychloroquine more potent than chloroquine in vitro. based on these data, hydroxychloroquine for 4 days, 400 mg twice daily after a loading dose of 400 mg was recommended [54] . a recent systematic review found no published studies in covid-19 patients [64] . furthermore, adding azithromycin to hydroxychloroquine 600 mg daily treatment seemed to have a beneficial outcome in a small french cohort [12] . however, we should also be cautious in interpreting the results of hydroxychloroquine, because the current situation is just based on the in vitro studies and small number of case series. also, the adverse effects of hydroxychloroquine should also be considered. in this situation, we think hydroxychloroquine should not be used as a routine treatment of covid-19, but if the condition of the patients worsens despite the use of steroids and antibiotics, hydroxychloroquine can be used as a secondary drug.seventh, policy for the drug use should be changed to reduce the mortality of patients. in usual situation, the patient can visit the clinic frequently according to the condition. therefore, steroids and antibiotics can be given timely based on the judgement of doctors. however, this pattern of examination, diagnosis and treatment cannot be done in this covid-19 era. doctors' prescriptions are surely important to diagnose and treat patients. however, as we mentioned above, patients are just waiting for recovery or deterioration until severe symptoms and no treatment is done in the meanwhile. if the patient is infected occur with covid-19 and gets fever, and visit the different clinics, the treatment will not be standardized among doctors. if a doctor concerns for the fever and the nature of rapid deterioration in covid-19, he may use steroids and antibiotics early, while other doctors may not. if so, we can make some guidelines for the practical use of antibiotics, steroids and hydroxychloroquine for the patients to use these drugs. these should also include the benefit and adverse effect for each drug. the policy we are proposing is to give these drugs to the patients freely, although the range of drug should also be more discussed. in korea, the diagnosis of covid-19 is being done by drive through. our suggestion is to make another drive through place to give these drugs to the patients to avoid the dissemination of infection, because if the infected patient go to the hospital for the treatment, he/she can infect all other patients. also, it will be good if the drugs are given to the patient who is visiting the screening clinic, for example, at the time of drive through diagnosis and explain in detail the benefit and adverse effect for each drug. and then, the doctor can check the result for covid-19 and guides the patient for taking the drugs by phone calls. also, the patient can take these drugs at his/her judgement. this concept is based on that (1) any treatment for covid-19 has not been established, (2) even though the patient visits the doctor, the treatment patterns will be all different among doctors, (3) steroids have frequently been used in other mild diseases such as urticaria, (4) because we do not exactly know the presence or absence of secondary infection when the patient get fever, oral antibiotics for 3-4 days can be acceptable treatment in routine clinical practice. further, (5) hydroxychloroquine can also be given to the patients and it can be recommended that if the patient's symptoms worsen despite the use of steroids and antibiotics, he/she can take hydroxychloroquine after recognizing all the adverse effect of the drug. but if the symptoms worsen, the patient surely visit the hospital as well.covid-19 is causing a severe public health emergency and the mortality is rapidly increasing all over the word. in this era, we suggested 7 recommendations to rescue the patients and to reduce the morbidity and mortality due to covid-19 based an immunological point of view (table 2 ). ours may be personal opinions, but we believe these may be beneficial to control these complications exerted by covid-19. in addition, there will be more other or conflicting evidences and publications regarding our opinions. however, we would like to remind of the basic principle for the treatment of patients again, but we often forget this: "do no harm". we all should think deeply on what is harm and what is no harm. in addition, we would like to say again: "doing something is better than nothing." in the acceptable level of clinical practice. we hope that our opinions can be transferred to not only who and cdc but also clinicians, researchers and many institutions and covid-19 could be finished as rapidly as possible.hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis (hlh) comprises two different conditions that may be difficult to distinguish from one another: a primary form that occurs due to genetic disorders and a secondary form that is triggered by various infections, autoimmune/autoinflammatory diseases, or chemicals [1, 2] . recent reports suggest that the cytokine storm caused by the novel coronavirus infection, covid-19, has significant similarities with the clinical and laboratory findings of this disorder. due to the accelerated deterioration of patients' general status, hemophagocytic syndrome (hps) necessitates a timely diagnosis for the initiation of life-saving treatment.hps or hlh is an acute and rapidly progressive systemic inflammatory disorder characterized by cytopenia, excessive cytokine production, and hyperferritinemia. common clinical manifestations of hlh are acute unremitting fever, lymphadenopathy, hepatosplenomegaly, and multiorgan failure. due to a massive cytokine release, this clinical condition is considered as a cytokine storm syndrome. hlh has primary and acquired (secondary, reactive) forms. its primary form is mostly seen in childhood and caused by various mutations with genetic inheritance and, therefore, is called familial hlh (fhlh) (fig. 1) . secondary hlh (shlh) may be caused in the presence of an underlying disorder, that is, secondary to a malignant, infectious, or autoimmune/autoinflammatory stimulus [1] [2] [3] . this clinical condition was first reported by scott et al. in 1939. the first reported four cases were identified as atypical hodgkin's lymphoma, characterized by pronounced histiocytic erythro-phagocytosis in the bone marrow and cellular proliferation in the lymph nodes, medulla of the spleen and the periportal area. later, scott et al. named this clinical entity as histiocytic medullary reticulocytosis (hmr) because of the pronounced phagocytosis with intense hyperplasia in medullary areas. in the light of the data obtained, it was accepted as a welldifferentiated reticulum cell sarcoma, a malignant process until 1973. in 1991, it was designated as hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis the term of macrophage activation syndrome (mas) was used first in 1993. in 1997, the hlh working group classified the hps into primary and secondary hlh [4] [5] [6] .in this review, we aim to contribute to the rheumatologists' awareness of the life-threatening rare complication of hlh, the cytokine storm, to prevent a possible misdiagnosis in the presence of the clinical and laboratory features of covid-19 resembling or mimicking to that of an underlying or a new-onset rheumatological condition. we hope that this review will support the collaboration of the rheumatologist and hematologists with their colleagues, who treat covid-19 patients in the first place, such as the infectious disease specialists, pneumologists, or intensive care physicians. manuscript selection procedure and numbers are given in fig. 2 . briefly, med-line/pubmed was searched from inception to april 2020, and the following terms were used for data searching: "hemophagocytic syndrome" or "macrophage activation syndrome" or "hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis", or "cytokine storm". to increase the weight of the recent publications, the selection is restricted to the past 5 years and only limited numbers of earlier key references were manually selected. finally, (and "covid-19") was applied in this algorithm. only full-text manuscripts, published in an english language peer-reviewed journal were included. free full-text articles available at https ://pubme d.ncbi.nlm.nih and selected full-text articles indexed in web of science or scopus are downloaded using the ebsco discovery services.the author ms collected data and wrote the manuscript. the authors gts and ia carefully reviewed the data from the perspective of a hematologist. and the author pa reviewed the article for both immunologic and rheumatologic aspects, prepared tables, translated into english, and gave the manuscript's final form. no statistical method was used.the database search with the following terms of "hemophagocytic syndrome" or "macrophage activation syndrome" or "hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis" or "cytokine storm" yielded 6744 results from inception to april 2020. when the selection is restricted to the past 5 years and only limited numbers of earlier key references were selected, this algorithm resulted in 3080 manuscripts and the addition of and "covid-19" resulted in 115 publications of which 47 studies, together with four sections of an online book were used in the final review. only full-text manuscripts, published in an english language peer-reviewed journal were included. we used data only from the index papers for table creation and figures. about a quarter of total phlh cases have a genetic transition, and therefore, it is advisable to question a history of consanguineous marriage. infections, especially viral, frequently trigger an inappropriate cytotoxic immune response in the presence of some genetic conditions. mutations in cd8 + t cells and natural killer (nk) cells (homozygous, compound heterozygous, or digenic (with heterozygous mutations in two different genes) result in a loss of performance in the cytolytic pathway proteins such as prf1, stx11, unc13d, and unc18-2. the pathogenesis of this syndrome is underlined by the activation and proliferation of t lymphocytes (mainly cd8 + cytotoxic t cells), and natural killer (nk) cells leading to over-activation and proliferation of macrophages resulting in the phagocytosis of bone marrow hematopoietic cells and/or reticuloendothelial system cells in other organs with the hypersecretion of several cytokines including interferongamma (ifn-γ), interleukin (il)-1, il-6, il-18, and tumor necrosis factor-alpha (tnfα) [5, 7] (fig. 3) .the most important immunological abnormality in primary or reactive hlh is the impaired cytotoxic cell function. under normal physiological conditions, when a virusinfected cell or tumor cell is encountered, cd8 + cytotoxic t cells, nk and nkt cells release perforin (a tetrameric protein that creates pores in the target cell, facilitates the entry of granzymes, and disrupts the target cell's membrane) containing cytolytic granules, and granzymes (proteins involved in triggering apoptosis in the target cell) initiate cytolytic destruction of the target cell. for this process to proceed normally, perforin and granzymes must be structurally normal and properly distributed in the cell and packaged into granules. then the content of these granules should enter the target cell via exocytosis through the immunological synapse between the cytotoxic cell and its target. disruption of this process with genetic mutations leads to the development of primary or familial hlh. under normal conditions, perforin and granzymes contribute to the destruction of target cells and the elimination of the immune-activating stimulus; this eventually results in apoptosis of cytotoxic cells, together with reduced antigen stimulation. this physiological downregulation, called activation-induced cell death, is critical for the control of the immune response. failure to clear the antigenic stimulus for any reason results in persistence and strengthening of the immune response. immune activation is further driven by the high levels of macrophage activation, with proinflammatory cytokines released by activated immune cells, resulting in hemophagocytosis, tissue damage, organ failure, and other inflammatory symptoms of the syndrome [2, 4, 8, 9] . numerous serum proinflammatory cytokine levels, including il-1, il-2, il-6, il-12, il-16, il-18, tnf-, and ifn-γ, were found to be significantly high in hlh patients sera. the patient's prognosis worsens as the levels of these cytokines increase. inability to clear antigenic stimulation of certain infections, malignant or autoimmune/autoinflammatory processes leads to an inappropriate immune stimulation and a self-sustaining hyper-inflammatory condition known as the cytokine storm, characterized by excessive and persistent high cytokines levels listed above [9] . hlh may be classified as a cytokine storm syndrome in the presence of the intense and rapid cytokine elevation. cytokine storm has emerged as an important, under-recognized cause of death in covid-19 [10, 11] . high levels of anti-inflammatory cytokines have also been observed in hlh, especially the overproduction of il-10, indicating a mechanism, albeit insufficient, to suppress the hyperactivation of th1 cells and monocyte/macrophage functions in patients with this disease [9] . the source of il-10 probably is the hemophagocytes and this may imply that hemophagocytosis is a compensatory reaction to hlh [12, 13] . in phlh and related immunodeficiency syndromes, the inheritance of defective genes involved in the control of cytolysis (e.g., prf1, stx11, unc13d, unc18-2) leads to the uncontrolled proliferation and survival of cd8 + t cells by impairing the cytolytic activity of cytotoxic t lymphocytes [5, 7] . children with certain immunodeficiency syndromes, such as chédiak-higashi syndrome, hermansky-pudlak syndrome type ii, griscelli syndrome (partial albinism), x-linked lymphoproliferative disease, xmen disease, itk (interleukine-2-inducible t cell kinase deficiency), lysinuric protein intolerance, cd27 deficiency, and chronic granuloma also possess genetic defects associated with impaired cytolysis and are at risk of developing familial hlh. specific x-linked immune deficiencies such as signaling lymphocytic activation molecule associated protein (sap) and x-linked apoptosis inhibitor (xiap) deficiency, are also associated with hlh triggered by the epstein-barr virus (ebv) [3, 5, 14] . phlh is a rare (1/50,000 of all live births) condition and usually develops in the very first years of life. it should be kept in mind that phlh as accepted widely as a pediatric disease, may develop its first symptoms in adulthood. patients with shlh may have cytolytic genes with underlying hypomorphic defects found in phlh, as well. indeed, up to 40% of shlh and mas patients are reported to carry heterozygous (some dominant-negative) mutations of known familial hlh genes. therefore, some researchers suggest that mas, shlh, and familial hlh may be considered as members of a disease spectrum [3, 5, 7] . it is an interesting finding that the prevalence of some mutations differs in certain populations such as those who are linked to perforin mutations that are more common in turks [15, 16] .on the other hand, unlike primary hlh patients, observed differences in the pattern of t lymphocyte activation and differentiation in shlh patients may imply differences in the pathogenesis of these two conditions. for example, amman et al. demonstrated that the expression of hla dr4 and perforin in activated cd8 t cells were higher in genetically predisposed hlh patients [17] . it has been shown that lymphomas resulting in shlh produce proinflammatory cytokines that initiate and permanently stimulate the activation of cytotoxic t lymphocytes and nk cells as the triggers of this syndrome. epstein-barr virus (ebv) is the most common infectious trigger for both primary and secondary hlh. an interesting finding in this association is that ebv, which normally infects b lymphocytes, can also infect cd8 + cytotoxic t lymphocytes, resulting in ebvassociated hlh [4] .secondary forms of hlh can be triggered by infections, malignancies, autoimmune/autoinflammatory diseases, and medications. most frequently, shlh is triggered by infections (termed as hlh-associated with infection). in some cases, a history of traveling is present. in particular, infectious of especially ebv and other members of the herpesvirus family, hiv, bacteria, and fungi are the triggers of this clinical picture. malignancies, especially leukemia or lymphoma (termed as hlh-associated with malignancy) are among common triggers [14] . hlh, which develops in association with an autoimmune/autoinflammatory rheumatological disease, is often referred to as mas and will be discussed in detail below. however, it is worth pointing out that some authors prefer to use the term mas for secondary hlh. interestingly, secondary hlh may arise iatrogenically due to drugs used in the treatment of the primary disease. in 2014, ramos-callas et al. reported in a meta-analysis of 775 hlh cases that the disease was more frequent in japan, france, china, south korea, taiwan, italy, spain, and turkey [1] . infections and drugs were the most common reported causes in adults, while at least 30% had three or more possible triggering factors. the distribution of the causes varied between countries. malignancies were the leading cause in japan, s. korea, taiwan, china, france, and italy, whereas autoimmune diseases were more frequent in spain and the usa.secondary hlh, which develops in the context of rheumatological diseases, is often referred to as mas and is reported most frequently in systemic juvenile idiopathic arthritis (sjia, still disease) patients [5] . strippoli et al. suggested a trilayer mechanism for the hlh that is secondary to rheumatic diseases: firstly, a genetic tendency (such as defects in the cytotoxic activity of cd8 and nk cells and a genetic predisposition to tlr hyper-response), followed by a high disease activity caused by the high proinflammatory state mediated by the high levels of cytokines such as il-6, and finally the activation of immune cells such as the t cells and macrophages triggered by a viral infection that leads to the cytokine storm [19] .up to 10% of sjia cases develop mas. in adults, it is reported in association with cases of adult onset still disease (aosd), and to a lesser extent in systemic lupus erythematosus (sle) cases. mas is a not well known but life-threatening complication of these rheumatic diseases. similar to sjia, 10-15% of aosd patients develop mas. the activation of shared innate immunopathogenic pathways, including il-1 and il-18, leads to a similar systemic inflammation in both aosd and sjia. therefore, it is not surprising that mas is a common complication of both diseases [20, 21] . this hypothesis is supported by the observation that gain-offunction mutations in the gene encoding the innate immune protein nlrc4 promote the spontaneous formation of the nlrc4 inflammasome, production of il-1 family cytokines (il-1β and il-18) and inflammatory cell death in autoinflammatory diseases complicated by mas [22] . similar to sjia, mas in aosd may either occur at onset ora later stage, mostly triggered by viral infections [23] . in some patients, mas may lead to ards and death in the course of covid-19 infection [10, 24, 25] . therefore, mas should be kept in mind in a covid-19 patient with signs of rapid clinical and laboratory deterioration. every rheumatologist should be alert because of the cytokine storm, a severe complication of covid-19, and symptoms of covid-19 such as fever, arthralgia, and myalgia resembling those seen during several rheumatologic diseases [26] .mas occurring in the early stages of aosd is characterized by neutrophilic leucocytosis and this laboratory finding may be used in the differential diagnosis. later in the course of aosd mas may coincide with disease flares, infections, or the use of anti-inflammatory drugs such as sulfasalazine, methotrexate, hydroxychloroquine, and anti-tnf agents. secondary hlh (mas) is characterized by fever, pulmonary insufficiency, liver failure, neurological symptoms, and signs of pancytopenia and coagulopathy that could not be explained for any other reason. instead of a fever that rises typically in the afternoons with chills in aosd, unremitting fever is more common in the presence of mas. therefore, persistent fever despite the treatment of infections that develops in the course of sjia or aosd should raise the suspicion of mas [27, 28] . pulmonary involvement is found in about half of shlh patients and patients may develop acute respiratory distress syndrome (ards), which requires mechanical ventilation. ards has a poor prognosis and is more common in severe shlh requiring intensive care [29] . neurological involvement is a sign of poor prognosis, as well, and is usually a sign of established shlh. several clinical signs and symptoms of cns involvement ranging from mood and personality changes to seizures, muscle weakness in the extremities, cranial nerve palsy, decreased consciousness, and coma, may develop. acute renal failure necessitating chronic renal replacement may be seen and worsens the outcome [30] [31] [32] [33] . in aosd and mas cases, leukocyte and platelet count, hemoglobin, albumin, and fibrinogen levels are significantly lower than non-mas aosd cases. however, ferritin, ldh, and triglyceride levels (which develops due to tnfα suppression of lipoprotein lipase) are significantly higher in patients with mas [5, 27] . here, serum ferritin levels are of critical value in diagnosis. the probability of mas at levels below 500 ng/ml is rather weak. while the probability of mas increases for values between 500 and 1000, a value of 10,000 ng/ml (10,000 μ/l) or higher has a 96% specificity and 90% sensitivity for the presence of mas. ferritin is the most dynamic test that rises rapidly and extensively in the early inflammatory period and decreases significantly with active treatment and cessation of the inflammation. the ratio between baseline and recovery may reach 1-800. high levels persisting despite active treatment or a decline of less than %50 is associated with a poor prognosis. pre-and posttreatment levels of the laboratory parameters such as d-dimer, triglycerides, platelet levels, ldh, and transaminases differ as much as about %50 and may be useful in the diagnosis. the presence of hyperferritinemia in association with cytopenia in various series, low levels of fibrinogen (due to the procoagulant effects of tnfα or increased lysis), and the absence of a significant increase in sedimentation despite the increased crp may be used to support the diagnosis of mas [34] . thrombocytopenia and hypofibrinogenemia can lead to ecchymoses and bleeding, especially in critical cases. since hemophagocytosis is a late-stage finding, it may not be detected in early bone marrow examinations. bone marrow findings may not correlate with clinical symptoms or high ferritin levels and are, therefore, not essential for diagnosis [30, 34] . one should not wait for hemophagocytosis to be proven to initiate treatment, but a bone marrow biopsy, when available, is necessary, since hemophagocytosis in the bone marrow may support the therapy when present.scd25 as a marker of t cell activation, and scd163 as the marker of hemophagocytosis, are specific markers for hlh. however, the aforementioned parameters are not included in the mas classification criteria made for sjia due to difficulties in their routine use [35] . but, the hlh-2004 criteria include scd25 (sil2rα) ≥ 2400 u/ml [34] .in summary, it is crucial to exclude hlh/mas in sjia, aosd, and when patients with covid-19 suddenly deteriorate in the presence often remitting high fever, additional pulmonary, and/or neurological symptoms, cytopenia, and abnormal ferritin or ldh levels [24, 25, 36] . diagnostic tools: hlh-2004 score, hscore, mh score a timely diagnosis of hlh is of particular importance, because patients may be critically ill and delay in diagnosis contributes only to a poor outcome.the diagnosis is based mainly on clinical and laboratory criteria. there is no single laboratory test or clinical finding that is pathognomonic. the widely used hlh-2004 criteria set is developed by the histiocyte society (table 1 ) [37] . this score is developed to estimate the individual's risk of reactive hps for both primary and secondary hlh. clinical and laboratory features scored are given in table 1 [28] . for this scoring, the following nine variables are used: three clinical variables (underlying immunosuppression, high fever, organomegaly), five biochemical variables (triglycerides, ferritin, serum transaminases, fibrinogen, presence of cytopenia) and one cytological (findings of hemophagocytosis in the bone marrow) ( table 1 ). the median score for patients with a positive phlh diagnosis was 230 [interquartile range (iqr) 203-257 and 125 (iqr) 91-150] for patients with a negative diagnosis. the probability of suffering from hps was less than 1% for an hs score of ≤ 90 and 99% for an hscore of ≥ 250. a cutoff of 169 had 93% sensitivity and 86% specificity for hlh. note that bone marrow hemophagocytosis is not mandatory for an hlh diagnosis. this scoring system is available online for general use (http://saint antoi ne.aphp.fr/score /). ferritin values have prognostic value in septic patients, additionally [29] .a belgian group addressed this issue in detail. at the onset of the disease, hscore was more effective than the hlh-2004 criteria in accurately identifying hlh for both children and adults; diagnostic sensitivity and specificity were 100 and 80% for children and 90 and 79% for adults, respectively. hscore's performance dropped to levels similar to the hlh-2004 criteria, with 73% accuracy for the same specificity once the patient's clinical condition worsens. the authors concluded that hscore for children is generally more useful than the hlh-2004 criteria, and for adults, hscore is most useful only at the patient's initial presentation. the authors also concluded that the originally published cut-off value of 169 should optimally be adapted according to the target patient group of interest [38] . another group addressed this issue in rheumatological diseases. and proposed an adopted cut-off value for a target population with various rheumatological diseases. in a cohort of 94 patients with rheumatological diseases (30 with hlh and 64 controls), the optimal cut-off value was found to be 190.5 (sensitivity 96.7% and specificity 98.4%) [39] .although both shlh/mas and phlh are life-threatening conditions, the mortality rate in patients with phlh is much higher. before the era of treatment protocols involving aggressive chemotherapy and immunosuppression, only 5% of phlh patients survived 1 year after diagnosis. therefore, it is extremely important to start the hlh-2004 treatment protocol containing etoposide in patients with phlh immediately. yet, most patients with phlh need hematopoietic stem cell transplantation as the final treatment [3] . in contrast, the treatment of shlh/mas depends on the clinical severity and may either be treated with a moderate increase in the corticosteroid dosage or aggressive immunosuppressives drugs may be favored as the first therapeutic approach [8] .for these reasons, it is important to differentiate phlh from phlh/mas as early as possible. however, the diagnostic work-up required for phlh takes time and may not be readily performed everywhere. in this instance, some clinical and laboratory features gain importance. in a known sjia patient, the clinical diagnosis of mas is relatively simple in the presence of typical clinical features, but when mas coincides with the onset of sjia it may be substantially more difficult to distinguish mas from phlh. according to data from a large series of international mas cases in sjia patients, approximately 23% of reported mas episodes occurred at the onset of sjia and mimicked the characteristics of the underlying disease [40] . the first attempt to determine the laboratory properties that will separate mas from phlh was performed by lehmberg et al. [18] . an important issue of this report is that in 70% of mas patients included in this study, clinical manifestations of mas appeared before the diagnosis of sjia. neutrophil counts and crp were significantly higher in mas/sjia patients, and high levels of sil2ra were observed more frequently in phlh. minoia et al. proposed a more sophisticated composite score to distinguish better between phlh and mas: the macrophage activation syndrome/hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis (mh) score. the creation of the mh score is based on a much larger data set (362 patients with mas and 258 patients with hlh). the mh score consists of six demographic, clinical, and laboratory variables: age of onset, neutrophil count, fibrinogen level, presence of splenomegaly, platelet count, and hemoglobin level. a multivariate analysis was done to assess the weight of each variable for its contribution to the diagnosis of phlh. the mh score was initially developed based on the data of 80% of patients and then validated using the data of the remaining 20% of the patients. mh score performed extremely well in the validation. in this study, the mh score ranged from 0 to 123, and the median value was 97 (1st-3rd quartile 75-123) and 12 (1st-3rd quartile in phlh and mas, respectively. the probability of receiving a diagnosis of phlh was less than one percent for a score of less than one and 99% for a score of ≥ 123. the cut-off value of ≥ 60 had the best performance in separating phlh from mas [41] . however, for cases other than sjia such as sle or kawasaki disease, where cytopenia and liver enzyme elevations may also be related to the activity of the underlying diseases, the discriminatory value may be lower. in this case, it is advisable to make a decision based on the patient's history, clinical complaints, and response to treatment.these are the criteria developed by ravelli et al. to overcome some difficulties encountered in the diagnosis of mas developing in sjia cases (table 1 ). an important difference from hlh-2004 is the absence of scd25 measurement. the calculated sensitivity and specificity of this classification set was 73 and 99%, respectively [35] .the hlh2004 criteria set is a reliable tool in the diagnosis of hlh. the hscore estimates best the risk of hlh, and the mh score differentiates reliably between mas and phlh in pediatric cases. hscore is more accurate when used at the onset of the disease in adult patients, but cut-off values recommended for hscore may vary depending on the underlying disease. it is advisable to use the 2016 classification criteria to assess mas in the course of sjia.as described above, hlh is a life-threatening medical condition. early diagnosis and rapid intervention are lifesaving. it should be noted that the shlh-cytokine storm may be the main reason for the rapid deterioration seen in a covid-19 patient.despite treatment with the hla-2004 protocol, most patients with phlh need an allogeneic stem cell transplant. secondary forms and mas rarely necessitate transplantation. in these cases, triggering factors such as infection, malignancy, and medication should be searched for. remission is possible with a combined immunosuppressive treatment in shlh/mas cases. early use of high-dose steroids can be successful alone, but more than half of reported adult cases are steroid-resistant. unlike phlh, patients rarely need hemopoietic stem cell transplantation due to mas developing as a result of severe sjia [42] . carter et al. favor an immediate treatment with 1 g of intravenous methylprednisolone per day for 3-5 days combined with ivig 1 g/kg for 2 days (consider repeating every 14 days due to its half-life of 14-21 days) as the first-line treatment of shlh [23] . the emergence of established hlh features or clinical deterioration despite treatment may necessitate the early initiation of the il-1 blocker, anakinra [23] . in our personal experience, when caught early in the course, the patient often relieves with the elimination of the triggering factors (such as medication] and a medium dose of corticosteroid therapy. evidence in sjia-related mas suggests that early use of anakinra and il-1 blockade would also be beneficial in the adult mas population. anakinra is effective in mas treatment when corticosteroids, ivig, cyclosporin, and etoposide fail to control the disease for most of the time only in combination with corticosteroids [43] . it is encouraging that the use of anakinra is associated with an improved outcome in patients with sepsis and mas features, and gives an appropriate signal for safe use in the context of shlh, even when triggered by infection [44] . in refractory mas cases, doses of 100 mg anakinra four times a day may be required to achieve remission [45] . anakinra is safely used in the treatment of autoinflammatory diseases, such as sjia and fmf in rheumatology outpatient clinics.some studies of anakinra, canakinumab, and rilonacept reported that il-1 blockade alone is not sufficient to prevent mas in the course of sjia. in these studies, corticosteroids, cyclosporin, and/or other drugs had to be added to treat mas patients [23] . interestingly, tocilizumab is useful in the treatment of hlh. however, mas has also been reported in patients receiving tocilizumab. in these cases, clinical and laboratory findings of mas such as lower ferritin levels, frequency of hepatomegaly, and normal crp may become less subtle under tocilizumab treatment [46] . the cytokine storm seen in the course of covid-19 is effectively treated with tocilizumab or anakinra [11, 47] .rituximab may have a place in the treatment in combination with other drugs and has been shown to reduce ebv viral load, serum ferritin levels, and to improve the overall clinical outcome in patients with ebv-related hlh [18] . already, the first cases of mas in association with covid-19 cases treated successfully with jak inhibitors such as baricitinib and il-1 or il-6 blockers are accumulating [47] .hlh may be triggered by genetic conditions, infections including covid-19, malignancies, autoimmune-autoinflammatory diseases, and some drugs. hlh should be suspected in patients with unexplained progressive fever, cytopenia, ards, neurological and renal impairment. differentiation between the primary and secondary forms of hlh is utterly important, since primary forms of hlh require complicated treatments such as hematopoietic stem cell transplantation. as the covid-19 pandemic develops, large numbers of patients with rare complications of viral infections such as hlh accumulate. increasing cases of covid-19 and its severe complications such as the cytokine storm and hlh may necessitate a closer collaboration of rheumatologists and hematologists with intensive care physicians, infectious disease specialists, and pneumologists, who are more likely to treat these patients in the first place. early recognition of hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis and its severe complication of cytokine storm is possible only using the diagnostic sets of criteria and by knowing their shortcomings and advantages in specific patient groups. further studies addressing the performance of these criteria sets in the diagnosis in the setting of covid-19 is necessary.severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2), emerged from wuhan, china, has now become a threat to the whole world. the disease associated with sars-cov-2 is termed as coronavirus disease-2019 . world health organization (who) has now declared covid-19 as a global pandemic affecting more than 200 countries, resulting in 1991,562 confirmed cases and 130, 885 deaths, as of 16 april 2020, and still counting (1) . the main reason for disease severity in covid-19 is due to aberrant and excessive cytokine production, leading to pathophysiology called cytokine storm, and acute respiratory distress syndrome (ards) (2) (3) (4) . the serum of infected patients showed increased levels of pro-inflammatory cytokines such as il-2, tnf-α, il-1β, ifn-γ, mcp-1, and mip1a, resulting in cytokine storm (4) . building on the above observation, these patients were given corticosteroids to reduced inflammation-induced lung damage. however, previous studies with the influenza virus suggest that adjunctive corticosteroid therapy rather increase mortality. also, corticosteroid therapy in patients with middle east respiratory syndrome (mers) resulted in delayed viral clearance (5) , altogether suggesting the cautious use of corticosteroids in covid-19 patients. hence, due to the limited effectiveness of corticosteroids, the use of alternate immuno-modulators could be suggested at present.before the emergence of novel sars-cov-2 in late 2019, mers-cov, and sars-cov were considered to be highly pathogenic. these two cov contribute to acute lung pathology as a result of cytokine storm in infected patients, which could be lethal if left untreated (6) . the earlier study with sars-cov infection in nonhuman primates, cynomolgus macaques, resulted in increased expression of ifn-α, ifn-β, and ifnγ, ifn-λ at mrna level in lungs of the infected macaque (7) . similarly, sars-cov infection in balb/c mice showed increase pro-inflammatory cytokine secretion, eventually leading to lethal acute lung injury and high fatality rate in mice (8) . mouse model of mers coronavirus (cov) infection demonstrated enhanced expression of ccl2, il-6, and tnf-α at mrna level in the lungs of infected mice. comparative in-vitro infection studies with sars-cov and mers-cov showed that both these viruses upregulated the expression of tnf-α, il-6, and il-12 at mrna level in monocytes derived macrophages (9) .in context to sars-cov-2, reports are emerging from china, the epicenter of covid-19, which showed a similar trend in cytokine profile as with sars-cov and mers-cov (10) . in severe cases of covid-19, patients showed increased serum cytokine levels of il-2, tnfα, il-1β, ifn-γ, mcp-1, mip1a, and il-6 (4, 11). another life-threatening complication, namely ards could be developed more often in elderly covid-19 patients as a result of cytokine storm (4, 12, 13) . according to recent research, patients with ards have reduced serum s1p levels as compared to healthy controls, which was further associated with non-pulmonary organ failure (14) . in this context, detection of serum s1p level in covid-19 patients may be worth exploring, as it serves as a biomarker for ards associated disease severity.we have earlier reported therapeutic intervention of using s1p (sphingosine-1-phosphate) analogs during infectious diseases (15, 16) . our unpublished study with s1p analogs in mycobacterium tuberculosis (h37ra) infected macrophages showed that treatment with s1p analogs results in blunting too much pro-inflammatory response, but also intriguingly leading to clearance of bacterial load. additionally, s1p signaling was reviewed as a potential target to provide therapeutic benefits in pulmonary disorder (17) . as with h1n1 influenza virus infection intra-tracheal aal-r [(r)-2-amino-4-(4-heptyloxyphenyl)-2methylbutanol], s1p analog, the treatment showed improved survivability of mice challenged with h1n1 as compared to conventional antiviral therapy. walsh et al. provide evidence that intra-tracheal administration with aal-r in infected mice resulted in reduced lung tissue injury as showed by histopathological and enzymatic studies (18) . the bronchoalveolar lavage (bal) fluid of these mice revealed reduced proinflammatory cytokines such as ifn-α, il-6, and ifn-γ, and chemokine including ccl2, ccl3, ccl5, cxcl2, and cxcl10. aal-r treatment doesn't clear the viral load, nevertheless, it doesn't impair host ability to clear viral load, which was supported by the unchanged viral neutralizing antibodies in treated and untreated groups (18) . similarly, rp-002 treatment, functional agonists of s1pr1, reduced mortality of influenza virus-infected mice by reduction in cytokine/chemokines (ifn-α, ccl2, il-6, and ifn-γ) production (19) . the same group later studies the efficacy of rp-002, in a mouse model of the respiratory syncytial virus. oral administration of rp-002 showed enhanced survival of paramyxovirus pmv infection in mice, as displayed by reduced inflammation in lungs with normal morphology of alveolar sacs of infected mice on rp-002 therapy. decrease ifn-γ, tnfα, ccl2, ccl5, cxcl10, il-1α, and il-6 secretion was also observed in bal fluid of rp-002 treated infected mice (20) . the authors further revealed that rp-002 treatment reduced cd8 + t and natural killer (nk) cells in the lung infiltrate of infected mice. lesser number of tnf-α and il-2 producing ifn-γ + cd8 + t cells, after stimulated with immuno-dominant peptides of pmv, was further confirmed in the lymph nodes and lungs of infected mice as compared to mice that received vehicle (20) . the previous study with sars-cov demonstrates the infiltration of cd8 + t cell and nk cells in the lungs of infected mice at the late phase of the infection. surprisingly, instead of cd8 + t cells, cd4 + t cells were required for viral clearance, whereas cd8 + t cells were rather associated with lung pathology during viral infection (21) . hence, here it is suggested that s1p analogs may block the infiltration of immune cells with inflammatory phenotype, particularly cd8 + t cells secreting tnf-α or ifn-γ, which may prevent acute lung injury during covid-19.a more recent study by zhao et al. presented a similar approach of s1pr1 agonist, cym5542, in providing therapeutic benefits in h1n1 infected mice. intra-tracheal delivery of cym5542 results in a marked reduction in lung injury and pro-inflammatory cytokine and chemokines production such as ifn-α, ifn-γ, tnf-α, il-6, ccl2, ccl3, ccl5, cxcl2, and cxcl10 in bal fluid of infected mice. furthermore, the therapeutic efficacy of cym5542 was improved in the presence of an antiviral drug, oseltamivir (22) . as s1p signaling influences myriad of downstream signaling, the role of cym5542 in the regulation of mitogen-activated protein kinase (mapk) and nuclear factor kappa-light-chain-enhancer of activated b cells (nfκb) was studied. cym5542 treatment results in the reduced phosphorylation status of mapk such as erk1/2 and jnk1/2, and p65 subunit of nfκb, resulting in inactivation of the signal and hence cytokine production (22) . cym5542 treatment resulted in the degradation of interferon alpha receptor 1 (ifnar1), and deactivation signal transducer and activator of transcription 1 (stat1), thereby limiting ifnα response (23).before recommending s1p as a potential therapy against covid-19, we must also discuss the possible risk associated with s1p analogs. the common consequence of cytokine storm is acute lung injury that results in ards, which proves to be fatal as seen in severe cases of sars-cov-2 infected patients. hence, it is very critical to maintain cytokine homeostasis in response to pulmonary infection by targeting pro-inflammatory immune cells or activating anti-inflammatory pathways (24) . however, targeting pro-inflammatory immune cells may not be 3.paramyxovirus reduced inflammation in lungs (20) 4.reduced lung injury and pro-inflammatory cytokine (22) an advisable approach as it also limits the capacity of the host to clear the infection. therefore, cautious use of s1p analogs in combination with anti-viral therapy is suggested to ensure clearance of infection without compromising the host defense. it is also worth noting that activation of s1p signaling during m. tuberculosis infection has dual action of host protection or disease progression, which depends on stage of m. tuberculosis infection. s1p treatment during early infection has profound effect on reduction of infection and disease associated histopathology. on the contrary, s1p treatment during acute m. tuberculosis infection exacerbates the disease (25) . therefore, to explore proper therapeutic potential of s1p analogs all these criteria must be taken into consideration. more importantly, s1p analogs have shown therapeutic efficacy in animal model of pulmonary infections, its role in humans has not been studied yet. most of the human trials related to s1p analogs as immunotherapy have been dedicated to diseases such as multiple sclerosis, subacute lupus erythematosus, crohn's disease, etc. (26) . as of now only fingolimod (fty720), s1p analog, has been recently approved for clinical trials to test its efficacy against covid-19. however, due to the broad specificity of fty720 on s1pr1 and s1pr3-5, more specific s1p analogs such as rp-002 or cym5542 must also be investigated to minimize off-target effects.sars-cov-2 induced cytokine storm is a serious immunopathology that could lead to the death of infected patients. s1p analogs have earlier protected from pulmonary infection by dampening the cytokine storm ( table 1) . taken together, these reports emphasize the need to consider s1p analogs as potential immuno-modulators in ameliorating sars-cov-2 induced cytokine storm. several studies correlated cytokine storm with lung pathophysiology and have advocated the use of immuno-modulators for therapeutic intervention (27) . in this regard, a fda approved drug for multiple sclerosis, fty720, which is a s1pr modulator, is recently in the clinical trial to assess its role as an immuno-modulator in covid-19 (28) . as a new vaccine and anti-viral for the treatment of covid-19 may take more time, alternatively, host-directive therapy could be the current weapon of choice against sars-cov-2 (29) . of note, dampening of sars-cov-2 induced cytokine storm with s1p analogs warrants further attention in the form of more robust and randomized clinical trials to prove our hypothesis.all datasets presented in this study are included in the article/supplementary material.in early december 2019, several pneumonia cases of unknown origin were observed in wuhan (china). the pathogen was identified as a novel enveloped rna β coronavirus that was named severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2) [4] . the virus showed phylogenetic similarities to both sars-cov and mers-cov viruses. in view of its similarities to bat coronaviruses, it was postulated that bats could have been the primary hosts of sars-cov-2. this hypothesis suggested that the infection originated via transmission from wild animals illegally sold in the huanan seafood wholesale market. on january, 30 th , 2020, the world health organization (who) declared coronavirus disease 2019 (covid- 19) a public health emergency of international concern, and on march 11 th , who director general referred to covid-19 as a pandemic. as of may 5 th , 2020, the number of confirmed cases of covid-19 has exceeded 3 million worldwide, with more than 250,000 covid-19-related deaths. the epidemic has put public health systems under severe strain both in western countries and in the developing world. sars-cov-2 displays a more efficient transmission pattern when compared with sars-cov and mers-cov [5] , retaining a high transmission rate also in the asymptomatic incubation period [6] . the clinical spectrum of covid-19 syndrome varies remarkably, going from asymptomatic forms to acute bilateral pneumonias requiring hospitalization. common presenting symptoms include fever, fatigue and dry cough, while laboratory tests often show lymphopenia and elevated lactate dehydrogenase levels. chest computed tomographic scans show a typical pattern of bilateral patchy shadows or ground glass opacity. a significant percentage of cases requires admission to intensive-care-units (icu) due to acute respiratory distress syndrome that requires mechanical ventilation support. a subgroup of patients with severe covid-19 can experience the so-called "cytokine storm syndrome", characterized by a fulminant and fatal hyper-cytokinemia associated with multi-organ failure.the term "cytokine storm" has become increasingly used not only by authors of scientific articles but also by popular media. it is likely that the widespread use of this term is related with its rather immediate meaning, which actually recalls the role of the immune system in producing an uncontrolled and generalized inflammatory response [7] . it seems not casual that the term cytokine storm was first employed in describing j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f the events modulating the onset of the graft-versus-host disease [8] , a condition characterized by an impressively powerful activation of the immune system. cytokine storms characterize a wide spectrum of infectious and non-infectious diseases, and since 2005, it was associated to the avian h5n1 influenza virus infection [9] . apart from the immediate significance of the term cytokine storm, the biological and clinical consequences of this immune system hyperactivity are by far less known, making it worthwhile to be briefly overviewed.there are several similarities in the clinical features between covid-19 and previously identified beta-coronavirus infections. shared clinical findings include that most patients present with fever, dry cough, dyspnea, and bilateral ground-glass opacities on chest ct scans [10] . however, the physiopathology of the mechanisms through which sars-cov or mers-cov sustain high pathogenicity are yet to be completely unveiled.since the first reports on covid-19 disease, it appeared clear that acute respiratory distress syndrome (ards) accounted for a significant number of deaths among infected patients and that ards should be regarded as the hallmark immune-mediated clinical consequence in sars-cov-2, similarly to what described for sars-cov and mers-cov infections [11] . acute respiratory distress syndrome (ards) is a devastating event, with an estimated mortality of approximately 40%, defined as the presence of bilateral lung infiltrates and severe hypoxemia. ards can occur in a variety of clinical situations, including pneumonia, sepsis, pancreatitis, blood transfusion. ards pathogenesis involves inflammatory injury to the alveolo-capillary membrane, which results in increased lung permeability and the exudation of protein-rich pulmonary edema fluid into the airspaces, leading in the end to respiratory insufficiency [12] .as shown by previous data in the literature, increased circulating levels of pro-inflammatory cytokines (eg, interferon γ, interleukin (il-) 1b, il-6, il-12) and chemokines (cxcl10, and ccl2) are associated with pulmonary inflammation and extensive lung involvement in sars patients, similarly to what happens in mers-cov infection [13] . as far as covid 19 infection is concerned, huang et al recently reported that infected patients also show high levels of pro-inflammatory cytokines and chemokines [4] . the demonstration of increased levels of il-1b, ifnγ, cxcl10, and ccl2 strongly pointed toward an activation of t-helper-1 (th1) cell function. more importantly, the so called "cytokine storm" emerged as a main factor driving a more j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f severe clinical course. this concept originated from the observation that covid-19 patients requiring icu admission displayed higher concentrations of cxcl10, ccl2 and tnfα as compared to those in which the infection was less severe and did not require an icu admission. to further complicate the issue, it should be highlighted that, in patients with sars-cov-2 infection, at difference from sars-cov infection, there is also an increased secretion th2-immune-oriented cytokines such as il-4 and il-10, whose main effect is to suppress inflammation [14] .taken together, these data clearly indicate that, in sars-cov infection, ards is the ultimate result of a cytokine storm. in this scenario, the release by immune effector cells of large amounts of proinflammatory cytokines (ifnα, ifnγ, il-1β, il-6, il-12, il-18, il-33, tnfα, tgfβ) and chemokines (cxcl10, cxcl8, cxcl9, ccl2, ccl3, ccl5) precipitates and sustains the aberrant systemic inflammatory response [4, 13, 15, 16] . the cytokine storm is readily followed by the immune system "attacking" the body, which in turn will cause ards and multiple organ failure, the final result being death, at least in the most severe cases of sars-cov-2 infection [11] .the cytokine storm, and the consequent ards, results from the effects of a combination of many immune-active molecules. interferons, interleukins, chemokines, colony-stimulating factors and tnf-alpha represent the main components involved in the development of the cytokine storm and will be briefly overviewed.-interferons, a family of cytokines with a central role in virus-directed innate immunity binds specific receptors and result in the expression of genes encoding protein with anti-viral or immunomodulatory properties. this sequence of events supported the therapeutic use of ifns in some viral diseases such as chronic hepatitis, but also in non-viral conditions including leukemia and lymphoma, melanoma and multiple sclerosis [17, 18] .-tumor necrosis factor α (tnfα) is a pyrogen cytokine released from immune cells in the acute phase of inflammation and infection. it is a central cytokine in viral diseases and is associated with a number of chronic inflammatory and autoimmune diseases [19] .j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f 7 -colony-stimulating factors (csf). these proteins are associated with inflammatory conditions and are components of an amplification cascade which ultimately increases cytokine production by macrophages at sites of inflammation, this effect perpetuates the inflammatory reaction [20] .-interleukins are a family of cytokines involved in immune cells differentiation and activation. they mediate the traffic of immune cells to the site of the infection, induce the increase of the acute phase signaling, activate epithelial cells and mediate the production of secondary cytokines [21] . among them, interleukin-6 (il-6) deserves a more extensive discussion in view of its involvement in the coronavirus-induced cytokine storm. il-6 is crucially involved in acute inflammation due to its role in regulating the acute phase response [21] . it is produced by almost all stromal cells and b lymphocytes, t lymphocytes, macrophages, monocytes, dendritic cells, mast cells and other non-lymphocytic cells, such as fibroblasts, endothelial cells, keratinocytes, glomerular mesangial cells and tumor cells [22] . the production of this cytokine is increased by il-1β and tumor necrosis factor (tnf-α) [23] . il-6 may also be responsible for the activation of t helper 17 (th17) cells in the dendritic cell-t cell interaction [24] . in covid-19 affected patients, a high th17 cells activation could result from a virus-driven increased production of il-6 by the immune system. il-6 plays a key role in the pathogenesis of the cytokine storm owing to its pleiotropic properties. several studies showed that the serum levels of il-6 are increased in covid-19 patients and that its circulating levels are positively related to disease severity [14, 25, 26] . for this reason, high serum il-6 levels were suggested as predictors for disease severity [27, 28] . indeed, in animal models of sars-cov infection, the inhibition of the transcription factor of il-6 and, in turn of its production, was associated with reduced mortality [29] .during the present covid-19 pandemic, the use of tocilizumab as a therapeutic agent was proposed.tocilizumab is a humanized anti-il-6 receptor igg1 monoclonal antibody used for the treatment of rheumatoid arthritis and other chronic inflammatory diseases [14] . by blocking the il-6-receptor interaction, tocilizumab inhibits the il-6-mediated signal transduction. although clinical data on the use of tocilizumab in covid-19 patients derive from small series, some authors recommend its use in critically ill covid-19 patients with significantly elevated il-6 levels. [14] -chemokines are a large family of cytokines characterized by a powerful chemotactic effect. chemokines j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f act as chemo-attractants in the migration of the immune system cells, but they are also involved in several other processes including the development and function of innate and adaptive immune system, embryogenesis, and cancer metastasis [30, 31] . they are promptly secreted by a variety of cells in response to viral or microbial infections [32] .chemokines act as powerful chemoattractants which recruit inflammatory cells to migrate from the intravascular space across the endothelium and epithelium into the inflammation site, according to a chemokine gradient [33] . the role of one specific chemokine, cxcl10 (previously referred to as interferon-γ inducible protein of 10 kda, or ip-10), has been highlighted in ards in both experimental models and in patients.indeed, in a mouse model of il-2 -induced ards, an up-regulation of the mouse cxcl10 analogue mob-1 mrna was observed at initiation of lung injury [34] . several studies also showed that the intratracheal injection of mob-1 in mice induced pulmonary migration of leukocytes in the alveolar space, with massive recruitment of neutrophils, especially monocytes. this event was rapidly followed by microvascular injury and pulmonary edema typical of ards [35, 36] . cxcl10 signaling appears to be a critical factor for the onset of ards, as shown in mice models of ards induced by either acid aspiration or by viral infection (with influenza h5n1 virus). briefly, ichikawa et al, demonstrated that wild-type mice developing ards had increased levels of cxcl10 mainly due to an increased secretion by infiltrating neutrophils, which induced an autocrine loop mechanism on the chemotaxis of inflamed neutrophils, leading to fulminant pulmonary inflammation. on the contrary, cxcl10 and/or its receptor cxcr3 knock-out mice showed decreased lung injury severity and increased survival in response to both viral and non-viral lung injury [37] . moreover, cxcl10 expression in the lung was significantly up-regulated after induction of ards with lipopolysaccharide (lps) in a mouse model of lung injury, and the neutralization of cxcl10 with anti-cxcl10 antibody lead to amelioration of lung injury [38] .cxcl8 (also referred at as il-8) is another chemokine considered as a potential prognostic bio-marker for ards clinical course [39] . indeed, cxcl8 levels were found to be elevated both in plasma [40] [41] [42] [43] and in the broncho-alveolar lavage fluid [44] [45] [46] of patients with ards. a direct role of cxcl8 in the progression of ards was proven in rabbit with acid-induced ards lead to a 10-fold increase in cxcl8 levels in the j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f alveolar fluids. of note, pre-treatment with an anti-cxcl8 antibody prevented the development of the typical acute lung injury [47] .although chemokines are crucially involved in the regulation and maintenance of immune responses, their role in the onset of the coronavirus-induced cytokine storm is still poorly investigated.chemokines are a family of low molecular weight proteins expressed, both constitutively and in an inducible manner, by several types of cells. chemokines play an important role in the inflammatory response by attracting leukocytes to sites of infection. these small proteins also contribute to the homeostatic circulation of leukocytes through tissues [31] . at present, 50 chemokines and 20 chemokine receptors have been recognized and classified. chemokines are named according to the most recent nomenclature, which classifies them according to their chemical structure, the c, cc cxc and cx3c families [48] . the binding of chemokines to their receptors is responsible for their chemoattractant ability. the chemokine receptors belong to the seven-transmembrane-spanning, g-protein-coupled receptors, which are expressed primarily on leukocytes but also on other cells, e.g., endothelial cells [49] . the many functions of chemokines include the control of cell proliferation and differentiation, the regulation of angiogenesis and immune and inflammatory responses, tumor growth and metastasis [50] [51] [52] . most recently, several studies investigated the involvement of chemokines in coronavirus-related infective disease. it emerged that specific chemokines could play a crucial role in the development of covid-19-related symptoms, thus confirming what previously known for other types of coronaviruses, such as sars and mers. [13, 53] . these findings could be somehow expected in view of the well-known role of chemokines in viral infections.before addressing the specific relationship between chemokines and coronavirus infections, it is mandatory to briefly overview the general role of chemokines in viral infections and how viruses contrast the actions of chemokines.viruses are infectious agents of small size and simple composition that can multiply only in living cells of animals, plants, or bacteria. all viruses contain a nucleic acid, either -dna (deoxyribonucleic acid) or -rna (ribonucleic acid), and several proteins. viruses should not even be considered organisms since they are not free-living (i.e., they require a host cell), thus viruses need to elude the host immune defense to infect its cells in order to reproduce and survive. [54] .the chemokine/chemokine receptor-related immune defenses are the main obstacles to be by-passed by viruses. some chemokines play a direct anti-viral effect by inducing an array of phenomena that lead cells to determine an "anti-viral "state. these phenomena include activation of apoptosis or direct killing of infected cells by activated immune cells. chemokines also recruit immune cells to the site of infection, which will fight against the intruder [55] . viral infections are associated with enhanced expression of several chemokines, in particular the interferons-inducible ones. interferons, which can be produced by any mammalian cell, are involved in the rapid and efficient host innate response against viruses. a powerful ifn response triggered by the first contact with a virus can slow down viral multiplication and "buy time" for the organism to establish a more efficient adaptive immune response [56] . ifns can stimulate surrounding cells to express potent antiviral proteins including enzymes, transcription factors, cell surface glycoproteins, cytokines and chemokines [57, 58] . moreover, they can inhibit cell proliferation, regulate apoptosis and modulate the immune response [59] . among interferons-induced molecules, the chemokine cxcl10 is currently regarded as a main player in the organism anti-viral response [60] , and particularly in respiratory tract infections.several studies demonstrated that cxcl10 levels, as evaluated in serum, bronchial-alveolar washing fluid or nasal secretions, consistently correlate with the severity and duration of acute respiratory tract infection due to viral infections. [60] [61] [62] also the chemokine cxcl8, is involved in inflammation and immune cell trafficking in the context of viral infections. cxcl8 plays a major role in the initial control of respiratory tract infection due to its chemotactic activity for neutrophils and monocytes [63] . cxcl8 levels in the nasal washing fluid correlate with symptoms severity during acute respiratory tract infections [64] . although in the majority of cases a strong chemokine action can efficiently contrast viral infections, some viruses acquire the capacity of escaping j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f this surveillance system. furthermore, viruses can use the chemokine system network for their own favor by several strategies: -some viruses "mimic" the components of the chemokine system by producing molecules that are very similar to chemokines and can interact with their receptor. these molecules generate an incongruous signal leading to a disorganized immune response to viruses [65] .-inhibition of the interferon-induced anti-viral response. several viruses do impair the intracellular receptors devoted to pathogen recognition, such as toll like receptors and intracellular rna sensors. [66] taken together, the above data indicate that viruses can interfere with the chemokine/chemokine-receptors system using their own properties to modify intracellular signaling with the final result to further disseminate the infection.the strict relationship between conaviruses infection and chemokines has been thoroughly investigated during both the sars-cov and the mers-cov epidemics, while some initial data are available regarding sars-cov-2 and its related syndrome, covid-19.since the first reports of sars, it seemed clear that the severe clinical manifestations of the disease could not be ascribed only to the viral activity per se, but that an immune-mediated mechanism rather than a direct virus-induced damage would drive the clinical progression [67] . indeed from the physio-pathology point of view, the most interesting observation was the demonstration that viral titers seemed to paradoxically diminish during the most severe phase of the disease both in humans and in several animal models [1] . data in vivo studies showed that several circulating chemokines (cxcl8, ccl2 and cxcl10) and inflammatory cytokines (il-1, il-6 and il-12) were elevated in patients with sars-cov [68, 69] . cxcl10 was also considered an excellent prognostic marker for sars disease progression [70, 71] . in particular, jiang et al showed that cxcl 10 serum levels were significantly increased during the early stage of sars, and remained elevated until resolution. moreover, persistently elevated cxcl10 serum levels during follow-up were predictive of a worse outcome of the infection [71] these findings prompted further in vitro studies aimed at investigating the relationship between sars and the chemokine system. spiegel et al, demonstrated that, in addition to its direct effect on epithelial lung cells, sars-cov could also enter macrophages and dendritic cells [72] . this appeared crucial as viral entrance in these cells lead to an abortive infection (e.g. the virus enters the host-cell but cannot successfully complete replication). yet the virus elicited the secretion of pro-inflammatory chemokines by dendritic and macrophages cells [73] . this finding was confirmed in vivo because the serum levels of a wide spectrum of cytokines and chemokines produced by dendritic cells and macrophages were elevated in sars-cov infected patients [74] . furthermore, the infection with sars-cov of human primary myeloid-derived dendritic cells was followed by an impaired defensive ifnβ response, which was paralleled by a moderate up-regulation of pro inflammatory cytokines (such as tnf-α and il-6) and a much more significant up-regulation of inflammatory chemokines (such as cxcl10, ccl3, ccl5, and ccl2) [75] . the authors suggested that the lack of response to antiviral interferons in the presence of chemokine up-regulation could represent a further mechanism of immune evasion by sars-cov [73] . in line with this hypothesis, the direct exposure of lung epithelial cells [76] or peripheral blood mononuclear cells (pbmcs) [75] coming from sars infected patients to viral proteins (such as s-protein and n-protein) induced a prompt release of several chemokines, including cxcl8 and cxcl10. in vitro gene-expression studies also reported that pbmc from normal healthy donors inoculated with sars-cov showed an early enhancement in the expression of several chemokines belonging both to the cc family (ccl4, ccl20, ccl22, ccl25, ccl27, and their receptors j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f ccr4, ccr7) and of the cxcl family (cxcl8 and il-17) [77] . additional data came from animal models of sars-cov infection. in mice infected with sars-cov, the clinical features of the syndrome showed an age-dependent increase in severity (similarly to what observed in humans), which was related to an increased level of pro-inflammatory cytokines and chemokines, paralleled by a reduction in t-cell responses [78] .another study showed that in mice infected with sars-cov, robust virus replication accompanied by delayed type i interferon secretion caused a rapidly fatal pneumonia. this delayed type i-interferon signaling promoted the accumulation of pathogenic inflammatory monocyte-macrophages, with resulting increase in cytokine (il-6) and chemokine (ccl2) lung levels, vascular leakage, and impaired virus-specific t cell responses. [79] .these data suggest that coronaviruses, and in particular sars-cov, have a peculiar ability to counteract the antiviral ifn response, pointing toward the fact that the severity of disease might be due to immune dysregulation, rather than to the level of viremia. this dysregulation would be characterized by an insufficient type i interferon response (too little and too late), paralleled by an aberrant pro-inflammatory chemokine secretion by alveolar macrophages, dendritic cells and pneumocytes [66, 80] .in vitro data suggest that this class of viruses, and in particular sars-cov, uses several strategies to avoid type i ifn response, both passive and active [56, 59] .-passive mechanisms include the induction of double membrane vesicles (dmv) at perinuclear sites within the cytoplasm where rna synthesis takes place. this strategy may help to hide and protect rna replication intermediates from being sensed by intracellular rna-sensors, thus avoiding the activation of the ifn cascade [81, 82] .-active mechanisms include a direct action of viral proteins on transcription factors and intracellular signaling molecules that regulate the ifn cascade. in particular, the sars-cov protein orf6 is able to inhibit the action of interferon regulatory transcription factor-3 (irf-3), a transcription factor of the ifn genes [83, 84] .the fact that sars-cov infection would upregulate the transcription of cxcl10, while significantly down-regulating ifns signaling, could seem paradoxical. however, transcriptional enhancement of cxcl10 could be due to a direct effect on the nuclear factor kappa-light-chain-enhancer of activated b cells (nf-kb) [85] triggered by sars-cov [86] , even if other authors did not confirm this early observation [87] . similarly, the up-regulation of the cxcl8 gene expression, could be due to a direct effect of the virus at the cellular level. indeed, intestinal and lung cells lines infected by sars-cov, promptly increase their secretion of cxcl8 [88] . this observation would fit with the notion that the expression of cxcl8 is dependent on the transcription factor activator protein 1 (ap-1), which was shown to be strongly upregulated by sars-cov [86, 89] .during the mers-cov epidemics, several studies were aimed at understanding the pathogenic mechanisms underlying the severe and often fatal pneumonia were performed. available data suggest that mers-cov infection shares some immunological aspects of sars-cov infection, in terms of involvement of the chemokine system. first, an increase in the serum levels of cxcl10 when compared to controls was observed also in mers-cov patients. more importantly, a persistent cxcl10 increase was associated with disease severity [90] .in this regard, the case of two paradigmatic patients diagnosed with mers-cov is worth noting. one had a fatal outcome and experienced an impaired ifn response together with a relevant increase in serum cxcl10 levels. the other one, with a favorable outcome, displayed an up-regulation of ifns and irf3 and a less pronounced increase of serum cxcl10 levels [91] .in vitro studies also support the relevance of chemokines in mers-cov patients. a 2013 study evaluated the expression of several chemokines and cytokines in cell lysates of polarized airway epithelial cells infected with mers-cov or sars-cov. the results showed that cxcl8 was up-regulated to a greater extent by mers-cov infection as compared with sars-cov. at difference, ccl2 and cxcl10 were more strongly up-regulated by sars-cov than mers-cov [92] . in addition, in dendritic cells infected with mers-cov, a significant down-regulation of ifn response paralleled by a striking elevation of cxcl10 was observed [93] . a strong induction of cxcl10 secretion was observed also in monocyte-derived macrophages infected with mers-cov [94, 95] . interesting data come also from an experimental mouse model of mers-cov infection, in which a significant increase in cxcl8 expression was observed in lung and brain tissue after infection with mers-cov [96] . briefly, the inoculation of the two viruses in ex vivo human lung tissue explants showed that sars-cov-2 was more capable, as compared with sars-cov, in both infecting and replicating in human lung.furthermore, sars-cov-2 infection was less able to trigger the expression of any ifns, suggesting that sars-cov and sars-cov-2 might differ in their ability to modulate the production of pro-inflammatory cytokines and chemokines. as an example, it could be worth highlighting that sars-cov infection upregulated 11 out of the 13 pro-inflammatory factors evaluated, while sars-cov-2 upregulated only five of them, (namely, cxcl10, il6, ccl2, cxcl1, cxcl5). interestingly, cxcl8 transcription was upregulated only by sars-cov, but not sars-cov-2 infection, while the opposite was observed for cxcl10 [97] .the potential involvement of the chemokine system during sars-cov-2 infection was already evident from the first covid-19 series described by chinese physicians in early january 2020. it was reported that several pro-inflammatory cytochines and chemokines, including cxcl10, cxcl8, ccl2, tnfα and ifnγ j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f were higher in the plasma of covid-19 patients as compared to healthy controls. more importantly, among infected patients, cxcl10, ccl2 and tnfα circulating concentrations (but not those of ifnγ) were found to be significantly higher in patients requiring admission to intensive care units as compared to patients experiencing a less severe clinical course [4] . j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f sars-cov-2, and its related syndrome covid-19, have been known to the scientific community since less than 5 months. clearly much is yet to be understood, and the challenge for the next future will be to increase our understanding the physiopathology of this novel infectious disease. hopefully, the advances in our comprehension of the mechanisms sustaining the clinical course and patients-related factors driving the final outcome will be helpful in developing effective preventive strategies and/or therapeutical options. based on current knowledge, the "cytokine storm" appears as one of the most dangerous and potentially lifethreatening event related to covid-19 sustaining its major clinical consequences. the immune mediated events related to the response to sars-cov-2 infection, and the role of the chemokine/chemokine receptor system, will be further and more extensively characterized with the final goal to identify targeted therapeutic strategies. although lessons from the previous sars and mers epidemics can be drawn, there is still much to do in order to conclude whether sars-cov-2 virus behaves in the same way of its predecessors or if it is characterized by peculiar specificities. clearly, the hide-and-seek challenge between the virus and our immune defenses will also help us understanding the extremely variable spectrum of clinical manifestations of covid-19, which appears to range between asymptomatic cases to possibly lethal bilateral pneumonia with multi-organ failure. particularly the older people, severe cases of the disease are characterized by acute lung injury and ards, the latter of which is typically treated by positive airway pressure with oxygen and pronation or invasive ventilation. this stage is characterized by neutrophilia, lymphocytopenia, lung consolidation, and bilateral nodular and peripheral ground glass opacities on chest x-rays. the ace2 protein is widely expressed on the surface of both epithelial and microvascular pericytes, that traverse multiple organs, allowing both cell types to be infected by the virus [11, 12] . the recruitment of immune cells to sites of infection results in widespread inflammation and endothelial dysfunction in the lung, heart, kidney, and liver and brain, with prominent endotheliitis of the submucosal vessels and apoptotic bodies [11] .even if viral loads decline in the patient,, a type of cytokine release syndrome can rapidly develop, characterized by disseminated intravascular coagulation (dic), causing liver damage, renal dysfunction, cardiovascular inflammation, coagulopathy and death [13, 14] . there are very few studies that definitely connect the known mechanisms of aging to the pathogenesis of viruses. in this perspective, we offer potential mechanistic explanations as to why covid-19 advances in some people and not others, and especially in older patients, including differences in the immune system, glycation, the epigenome, inflammasome activity, and biological age. we also discuss therapies that may improve immunity against viral infection while enhancing the ability of older people to recover from severe covid-19. enzymes on airway epithelial cells in the upper respiratory tract where they are endocytosed and replicated (top left), alerting the immune system. viruses then travel to the alveoli and infect type 2 pneumocytes which, in the youthful system (lower left), are recognized by alveolar macrophages (ams) or dendritic cells (not pictured) that release cytokines and present antigens to t cells and other adaptive immune cells. t cells with the appropriate receptors activate other lymphocytes or directly kill infected cells, preventing the spread of the virus. neutrophils migrate to the sites of infection to clear infected cell debris. in the aged system (top right), viral alert signals are initially slow, resulting in greater viral replication. defective macrophages and t cells with a limited repertoire of receptors are less effective (lower right). more cells are infected, inducing high levels of inflammatory cytokine signaling. the endothelial cell lining of the capillary becomes inflamed, fibroblasts are activated, and sars-cov-2 viral components and cytokines enter the bloodstream. fluid fills the alveolus, reducing lung capacity and the virus infects microvascular pericytes in other organs. a cytokine storm initiates microvasculature clotting, causing severe hypoxia, coagulopathy and organ failure. created with biorender.the ability to control viral load is one of the best prognostics of whether a patient will have mild or severe covid-19 symptoms [15] . for the immune system to effectively suppress then eliminate sars-cov-2, it must perform four main tasks: (1) recognize, (2) alert, (3) destroy and (4) clear. each of these mechanisms are known to be dysfunctional and increasingly heterogeneous in older people [16, 17] . but which tasks are most relevant to covid-19 progression in older people is not yet clear [18] .during aging, the immune system changes in two major ways. one is a gradual decline in immune function called immunosenescence, which hampers pathogen recognition, alert signaling and clearance. this is not to be confused with cellular senescence, an aging-related phenomenon whereby old or dysfunctional cells arrest their cell cycle and can become epigenetically locked into a pro-inflammatory state in which they secrete cytokines and chemokines. the other classic immune system change during aging is a chronic increase in systemic inflammation called inflammaging, which arises from an overactive, yet ineffective alert system [19] .an abundance of recent data describing the pathology and molecular changes in covid-19 patients points to both immunosenescence and inflammaging as major drivers of the high mortality rates in older patients. within immunosenescence, there are defects in both the innate and adaptive immune systems. innate immunosenescence is characterized by ineffective pathogen recognition and macrophage activation, and a reduction in natural killer (nk) cell cytotoxicity, whereas adaptive immunosenescence is characterized by thymic atrophy and accumulation of anergic memory lymphocytes. in both cases, these age-related changes are thought to be due to pathogenic, genetic, and lifestyle factors that affect the cells' epigenetic status and the diversity of immune cells.the innate immune system is the body's first line of defense against coronaviruses. sentinel cells, such as macrophages and dendritic cells, recognize structurally conserved viral proteins via single-pass membrane-spanning receptors called toll-like receptors (tlrs) expressed on their cell surfaces. defects in tlr function in innate immune cells are known to increase the severity of pneumonia in mice, especially in the context of aging and chronic inflammaging [20] . alveolar macrophages (ams) are mononuclear phagocytes that surveil the lungs for dust, allergens and the remnants of pathogens. when their tlrs detect an invader, ams respond by producing type i interferons, which attract immune cells to the site of infection and present antigens to lymphocytes [21, 22] . although ams increase in number during aging, their plasticity to convert between pro-and anti-inflammatory states is greatly reduced [23] , exemplified by a weak cytokine response after tlr activation [24] (figure 1 ).the inability of ams in older individuals to recognize viral particles and convert to a pro-inflammatory state likely accelerates covid-19 in its early stages, whereas in its advanced stages, ams are likely to be responsible for the excessive lung damage. a recent study comparing immune cell composition of bronchoalveolar lavage fluid from moderate and severe covid-19 patients showed in severe cases, macrophages were phenotypically more proinflammatory, expressing higher levels of ccr1 and cxcr2 that recruit other innate immune cells, compared to macrophages from moderate covid-19 cases that expressed more t-cell attracting chemokines [25] . prolonged monocyte activation is a well-known cause of severe lung injury in rhesus monkeys [26] and in cases of sars (caused by sars-cov-1), higher numbers of pulmonary neutrophils and macrophages correlated with the development of ards and greater lung damage [27] . a decline in neutrophil activity might also be partly responsible because, during aging, these cells progressively lose their ability to migrate to sites of infection and kill infected cells [28, 29] . nk cells, a major component in innate immunity with potent cytotoxic activity, are an unlikely cause of covid-19 severity. their numbers are relatively stable during aging [30] and in a mouse model of sars, they were not necessary for normal viral clearance [31] . to discern which of these cell types play the most destructive roles, more detailed analyses of covid-19 patient autopsy tissue will be needed.additionally, the production and diversity of mucins, protective glycoproteins found in mucosal barriers throughout the body, also change in aging [32, 33] , although their role in immunity against coronaviruses in humans is understudied.immunosenescence of the adaptive immune system is also a likely factor that determines whether a patient progresses to severe covid-19 ( figure 2 ). situated just above the heart, the thymusa primary lymphoid organ and the site of t cell development and maturation of early thymic progenitors from the bone marrowis one of the first tissues to experience aging. by age 65, the thymus is on average ~40% its original size [34] , coincident with activation of the inflammasome component nlrp3 and caspase-1, a pro-apoptotic protease [35, 36] . a build-up of intrathymic adipocytes further reduces thymic cellularity and deteriorates the thymic microenvironment. thymic atrophy also contributes to a reduction of naïve t cells and an accumulation of memory lymphocytes, resulting in defective immunosurveillance and an exhaustion of b cells, cytotoxic t cells, and helper t cells [37] . other common effects of aging on the adaptive immune system include a decline in the production of fresh naïve t cells, a less expansive t cell receptor (tcr) repertoire, t cell metabolic dysfunction, and weaker activation of t cells [38, 39] . clonal populations of cd8 + t cells expand during aging, limiting their diversity, whereas cd4 + t cells retain fairly diverse tcrs [40] and, instead, suffer activation deficits [39] .interestingly, one study found that supercentenariansdefined as adults over 110 years oldtend to have an unusual population of cytotoxic cd4 + t cells whose activation doesn't decline with age and can take on the effector functions usually performed by cd8 + t cells [41] . this t cell behavior may explain why some older people, even some people over 100, are able to survive covid-19. measuring the repertoire and frequency of tcrs in patients from a spectrum of ages and disease severity should be performed to determine if a loss of t cell diversity is a reason why sars-cov-2 viral loads tend to spike in older people but not the young. other factors increase the risk of cytokine storm and covid-19 fatality. tightly controlled activation of the innate immune system is essential for viral recognition and clearance. cytokine storm is the result of sustained activation of the inflammatory signaling cascade and can result in hypercoagulation in small blood vessels, which leads to tissue damage, dic and multi-organ failure. inflammaging and immunosenescence contribute to the development of cytokine storm. d-dimer, a fibrin degradation product and prognostic of disseminated intravascular coagulation (dic), and elevated levels of the cytokine, il-6, are associated in the clinic with increased fatality. epigenetic dysregulation of the immune system and of the renin-angiotensin system (ras) may increase fatality risk. a variety of biological clocks have been shown to predict human health and longevity more accurately that chronological age. an individual with a biological age greater than their chronological age is thought to be undergoing accelerated aging, which may increase the risk of covid-19 fatality. individuals with comorbidities such as cardiovascular disease, diabetes, obesity and copd, are at greater risk for covid-19 fatality. conversely, individuals who live healthy lifestyles and consume geroprotectors such as metformin, resveratrol and nad + boosters may have a decreased risk of fatality. created with biorender. aging not only does the repertoire of t cells decline in aging, so do their numbers. those over 60 years old increasingly have low t cell numbers, a condition known as lymphopenia [42] . because t cells express very low levels of ace2, the lymphopenia in covid-19 patients is unlikely to be caused by direct sars-cov-2 infection [43] , as in the case for hiv. one proposed cause of the t cell paucity is an exhaustion of the immune system driven by repeated exposures to viruses over one's lifetime [42, 44, 45] . this hypothesis is based on several studies that tracked the morbidity and mortality of people over 60 who had been chronically infected with human cytomegalovirus (cmv) [46, 47] . cycles of cmv reemergence were associated with vast immune system remodeling, including a pronounced exhaustion of cd8 + t cells that was more predictive of all-cause mortality than chronological age. other studies indicate that t cell depletion is due to the cumulative exposure to many different pathogens and lifestyle factors, not cmv alone [46, 48] . at the chromosomal level, a major cause of immune exhaustion is telomere shortening in viralspecific memory cd8 + t cells, which induces cellular senescence, a state of cell cycle arrest and hyperinflammation that prevents expansion upon re-infection [49] . the fact that in the most severe covid-19 cases bronchoalveolar cd8 + t cells appear to have reduced expansion capability [25] and peripheral blood t cells express high levels of the immune-exhaustion marker pd-1 [42] make this theory plausible.b cellsadaptive immune cells which produce antibodies in response to coronavirus antigens [21] are also less diverse and less responsive in aging [50, 51] . while total b cells numbers do not decrease in aging, memory b cells accumulate and naïve b cells are depleted, which may lead to loss of diversity of the b cell repertoire, although this has not yet been definitively demonstrated in humans [51] . changes in igg glycosylation patterns, however, have been shown to strongly associate with age and inflammation, and predict age-associated disease development [52] . in particular, igg n-glycans appear to be the most predictive of biological aging, however b-cell intrinsic and extrinsic regulation of glycosylation in aging require further study.due to a lack of sun exposure and decreased production of vitamin d, about half of all older people have a deficiency in this vitamin [53] , which reduces the efficacy of both adaptive and innate immune responses and increases the risk of infection [54] . vitamin d levels in older people are correlated with preserved features of immunity such as the cd4 + /cd8 + ratio and lower levels of pro-inflammatory cytokines after stimulus [54, 55] . although not all studies see a benefit of vitamin d supplementation on the risk or duration of lower respiratory infections [56] , the majority have, especially in those with an antibody deficiency or increased susceptibility to respiratory tract infections [57, 58] . a recent meta-analysis of 25 randomized, placebo-controlled trials concluded that vitamin d supplementation prevented about 20% of acute respiratory infections [59] . as such, some health professionals have recommended vitamin d supplementation for older people in general and especially for aged-care residents and critically ill patients as a strategy for improving chances of covid-19 survival.during the course of covid-19, older patients can reduce their viral titers, only to rapidly descend into a state of shock involving hyperactivation of the immune system and hypercoagulation in small blood vessels [42, 60] . this rapid and uncontrolled inflammatory signaling cascade typically occurs in the later stages of infection. known as a "cytokine storm," it exacerbates the dyspnea and hypoxemia, and triggers inflammation in major tissues such as the lungs, kidneys, heart, liver and brain. cytokine storm syndrome is defined as life-threatening organ dysfunction caused by a maladaptive host response to an infectious trigger [61] . the resulting vascular inflammation is emerging as the cause of complementassociated microvascular injury and thrombosis in severe covid-19 cases [62] . the initial trigger for cytokine storm is not yet known but it likely involves the immune system's detection of a large quantity of viral antigens released by dying cells. why older people are particularly prone to cytokine storms is also unclear.the cytokine profiles of late-stage covid-19 patients are similar to patients with secondary haemophagocytic lymphohistocytosis, a type of cytokine storm that can be triggered by systemic viral infection, including increased levels of interleukin (il)-2, il-6, il-7, c-reactive protein (crp), granulocyte-colony stimulating factor (gcsf), interferon-γ inducible protein 10 (ip-10), monocyte chemoattractant protein-1 (mcp-1), macrophage inflammatory protein 1-α (mip1-α) and tumor necrosis factor-α (tnf-α) [45, 63, 64] .even more predictive of death than serum cytokine profiles is an increase in the fibrin degradation product d-dimer, released from blood clots in the microvasculature, and a prognostic for dic [9] . as such, ddimer is now widely regarded as a key indicator of the severity of late-stage covid-19. d-dimer levels naturally increase with age, most likely reflecting a aging higher basal level of vascular inflammation [65] , which could predispose patients to severe covid-19. it would, therefore, be informative to know if precytokine storm levels of d-dimer levels could predict who is likely to develop a cytokine storm.in cytokine storms, high levels of il-6 cause vascular endothelial cells to secrete fibrin, which causes dic. in the lung, this may underlie the hypoxemia seen in patients with seemingly functional lungs. if left untreated, clots leach additional clotting factors from the bloodstream, increasing the risk of bleeding (coagulopathy) and multi-organ failure. drugs such as tocilizumab (actemra), which block il-6 receptor activity, are currently being used in patients in advanced stages [66] .one in two fatal cases of covid-19 experience a cytokine storm, 82% of whom are over the age of 60 [67] . though there may be many simultaneous triggers of the storm, abundant evidence indicates that inflammaging is a major driver, exacerbated by obesity, poor diets and oral health, microbial dysbiosis, and sedentary lifestyles [68, 69] . for example, in rodents, inflammaging increases the risk of cytokine storm syndrome [70] and, in humans, age correlates with higher basal circulating levels of pro-inflammatory cytokines including il-6, tnf-α, il-1α and crp [71, 72] .a central player that could help explain the predisposition to cytokine storms is nlrp3, the major protein component of the inflammasome. during aging, there is a steady increase in the abundance and activity of nlrp3 in immune cells, including ams of the lung which, upon chronic stimulation, contribute to pulmonary fibrosis [73] . nlrp3 inflammasome activation requires two steps, the first of which is the priming step, induced by tlrs or tumor necrosis factor receptor activation. this leads to the activation of nf-κb and promotes the expression of nlrp3, pro-il-1β, and pro-il-18. the second step, also called the activation step, is triggered by a range of stimuli that emerge during infections, such as tissue damage, nucleic acids, and invading pathogen proteins [74] .in older individuals, nlrp3 may be poised for hyperactivation by sars-cov-2 antigens. nlrp3 activity is under the direct control of sirtuin 2 (sirt2), a member of the nad + -dependent sirtuin family of deacetylases (sirt1-7) [75] . during aging, nad + levels decline, reducing the activity of the sirtuins [76] . old mice, especially those deficient in sirt2, have decreased glucose tolerance and increased insulin resistance [77] . this decline, exacerbated by covid-19, might promote hyperactivation of nlrp3 and the trigger cytokine storms in covid-19 patients [14] . maintaining nad + levels may therefore alleviate covid-19 symptoms, a possibility supported by recent data showing that sars-cov-2 proteins hyperactivate poly-adp-ribose polymerases parp9, -10, -12, and -14 and deplete cellular nad + [78] . additionally, nad + precursors lower inflammation in human subjects [79, 80] .mechanisms of infection in other coronaviruses support the hypothesis that nlrp3 activation is a trigger of cytokine storms in the aged. the sars-cov-1 orf3a protein, for example, is a potent activator of pro-il-1β gene transcription and protein maturation, the two main signals required for activation of nlrp3 [81] . in macrophages, sars-cov-1 orf8b robustly activates the nlrp3 inflammasome by interacting directly with the leucine rich repeat domain of nlrp3 in cytosolic dot-like structures [82] , suggesting another two-step model, in which inflammaging and the nlrp3 basal overactivation is the first step and sars-cov-2 antigen-mediated hyperactivation is the second step that triggers a cytokine storm.in chronic diseases, hyperactivity of the inflammasome plays a dominant role in the development of type 2 diabetes and other age-related diseases [83] . indeed, in older adults, the upregulation of two inflammasomerelated gene sets correlate with increased risk of hypertension, metabolic dysfunction, oxidative stress and mortality [84] . individuals over the age of 85 that expressed lower levels of these inflammasome modules were less likely to die within seven years [84] . taking together, the known effects of coronavirus proteins on nad + , nlrp3, and the two stages of inflammasome activation, these data provide a plausible explanation as to why co-morbidities positively correlate with cytokine storms and fatality in covid-19 patients.after age and hematological cancers, obesity is the next major risk factor for covid-19 fatality, similar to type 2 diabetes [85] . obesity is well known to increase the activity of nlrp3 and stimulate low grade inflammation in mice, including higher levels of serum chemokines, and lower neutralizing antibodies and effector memory t cells during a viral infection [86] . accordingly, this may help explain why obesity is associated with lower survival in covid-19, sars-cov-1 and mers-cov infections, and why obesityrelated human diseases such as cardiovascular disease, chronic kidney disease, and diabetes, predispose patients to cytokine storms (table 1) [87] [88] [89] . in addition, by causing the endothelium of the microvasculature to become leaky, obesity and type 2 diabetes, may increase the ability of sars-cov-2 to infect surrounding pericytes that appear to express ace2 at levels far greater than surrounding cells [12] . the dysregulation of the epigenome and resulting changes in gene expression during aging are strongly implicated as biomarkers, and potentially underlying causes, of chronic disease states and of aging itself. the "relocalization of chromatin modifiers" theory of aging postulates that symptoms of aging and the loss of resilience are a result of a lifetime accumulation of epigenetic changes [90, 91] . these changes may be caused, in part, by the redistribution of chromatin factors, such as the nuclear proteins sirt1/6/7, hdac1 and parp1 away from regular loci to sites of dsdna break repair, then back again, causing epigenetic "noise" to accumulate, which may iteratively erase cellular identity [90] [91] [92] [93] [94] . this process is thought to manifest as dna methylation changes that set the pace of the biological clock in tissues and in hematopoietic cells [95, 96] .there is an abundance of evidence indicating that agerelated changes to the host's epigenome compromise immune cell composition and function [97] and negatively impact viral defenses [98, 99] , including adaptive immune memory [100, 101] . coronaviruses are known to mediate epigenetic alterations, potentially accelerating the rate that the immune system ages. mers-cov, for example, antagonizes host antigen presentation by altering dna methylation, a mark that silences genes encoding major histocompatibility complexes [102] . similarly, sars-cov-1 changes histone methylation and long non-coding rnas, which is accompanied by the activation of interferon-response genes [103] . measuring the dna methylation age of immune cells and other blood cell types before, during, and after infection could help elucidate both how the aged epigenome impacts disease severity and how the virus alters the aged epigenome.the vulnerability of the aged to sars-cov-2 may also have to do with the effects of the epigenome on viral entry, which is initiated by physical interaction between the viral spike glycoprotein receptor and the ace2 cell surface protein [104] . while genetic differences in ace2 are being pursued as a cause of covid-19 severity [105] , there is little attention being paid to epigenetic differences. in humans, ace2 is ubiquitously expressed in epithelial tissues of the body, most highly in alveolar epithelial cells and enterocytes of the small intestine [106] . ace2 is regulated in the body transcriptionally, post-transcriptionally, and posttranslationally [107] , although its role and regulation in covid-19 is still poorly understood.in both mice and rats, ace2 expression decreases with age and is associated with an increase in aortic fibrosis and inflammation [108, 109] . in healthy human lungs, ace2 expression does not appear to change with age, [110] . even though ace2 is more highly expressed in the lungs of cigarette smokers [111] . a meta-analysis of covid-19 deaths, however, did not identify smoking as a significant risk factor [4] . ace2 promoter hypomethylation in lymphocytes correlates with transcriptional activation in patients with lupus [112] , implying that transcription of ace2 is controlled by methylation, although this mechanism has not been systematically investigated. it is known, however, that methylation at one of seven cpgs in the ace2 promoter decreases with age and these cpgs are bordered by long-range promoter-enhancer contacts that may change over time [113] . bisulfite sequencing of the ace2 gene paired with transcriptomic and four-dimensional chromatin analyses will be necessary to understand if there is a causal relationship between promoter methylation, ace2 expression, and disease outcome.the elucidation of sars pathogenesis is complicated by the fact that ace2 is also part of the reninangiotensin system (ras) that regulates immunity, fibrosis, blood pressure, and metabolism. ace2 counteracts vasoconstriction caused by angiotensin aging converting enzyme (ace) by cleaving its product, angiotensin ii. most likely due to its role in vasodilation and reducing inflammation, ace2 partially protects against sepsis-induced-and sars-induced severe acute lung injury in mice [114, 115] and asthma-induced airway inflammation in rats [116] . changes in dna methylation during aging are known to affect the ras [14, 117, 118] . analysis of ace2 gene expression in the lungs of covid-19 patients with pulmonary arterial hypertension and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease found a correlation between ace2 expression and covid-19 severity [111] . thus, age-related dysregulation of ace2 could explain why age is such a risk factor for covid-19 complications and why cardiovascular disease and hypertension predispose patients to develop a more aggressive form of covid-19.the effects of ace inhibitors, used commonly beyond middle age to control blood pressure, are generally believed to be neutral in covid-19 [119, 120] . due to their opposing roles in the ras, ace2 expression appears to increase when ace is inhibited, likely providing a yet unknown protective function [121] . inhibiting ace2 expression or blocking ace2 accessibility could prevent viral entry but may lead to vasoconstriction and hypertension. instead, the most promising ace2-targeted therapeutic strategy is to infuse human recombinant soluble ace2 into the airway or bloodstream to bind the sars-cov-2 spike glycoprotein receptor, preventing it from binding ace2 on host cell surfaces [122] and slowing cell infection rates.the sirtuins are a family of nad + -dependent lysine deacylases that control numerous aspects of stress resistance and pathogen defenses. sirt1 is a nuclear histone deacetylase that suppresses viral replication and chronic inflammation [123] . by binding to the promoter region of ace2, sirt1 upregulates transcription under conditions of cell stress [124] . during aging, and perhaps particularly during the course of covid-19, levels of nad + decline. this is likely due to increased nad + consumption by the cd38 + glycohydrolase [125] and increased transcription of the poly-adp-ribosyl transferases, parp9, parp10, parp 12 and parp14 in mice and humans infected with sars-cov-2 [78] . coronaviruses also possess an adp-ribosylhydrolase that further depletes nad + , apparently to disrupt cell signaling, dna repair, gene regulation and apoptosis [14, 126, 127] .by negatively regulating activity of nlrp3, sirt1 and the related protein sirt2, seem to play key roles in suppressing acute lung inflammation during sepsis [75] . mice lacking sirt1, for example, display aggravated inflammasome activation, with increased production of lung proinflammatory mediators, including intercellular adhesion molecule 1 (icam-1) and high-mobility group box 1 (hmgb1), and a dramatic reduction of lung claudin-1 and vascular endothelial-cadherin expression [128] . further, as a result of nad + depletion in mouse models of uncontrolled diabetes, dna repair is blunted leading to pulmonary inflammation, senescence and fibrosis [129] , which could explain why diabetics are more susceptible to covid-19. sirt1 also attenuates the acute inflammatory response through deacetylation of h4k16 in the tnf-α promoter [130] . another nuclear sirtuin, sirt6 attenuates nf-kb signaling by deacetylating h3k9 [131] . thus, a decline in nad + and the known mis-localization of sirt1 and sirt6 across the genome during aging [90, 132] , could be major contributors to the age-dependency of covid-19 symptoms. as such, nad + precursors, such as nmn and nr [133] , have been suggested as possible treatments for covid-19, especially in older people [78] . clinical studies are needed to determine if nad + supplementation would benefit in the early stages of sars-cov-2 to reduce replication or if nad + treatment during acute covid-19 can hasten recovery.over the past decade, a variety of biological clocks have been developed to predict human health and longevity more accurately than chronological age, including those based on dna methylation patterns [95, [134] [135] [136] , inflammaging [137] , gene expression patterns [138] , frailty [139, 140] , serum proteins [141] , and igg glycosylation [142] [143] [144] . given that these clocks provide a quantitative measure of the rate of aging of an individual and their overall resilience, biological clocks may be useful for identifying at-risk populations and for predicting, within those populations, who will most likely progress to severe covid-19.estimates based on twin studies place the contribution of non-genetic factors on predicted covid-19 phenotype at 50% [145] and on total disease burden in old age at approximately 80% [146] . indeed, lifestyle factors that affect the epigenome such as calorie intake may increase the susceptibility to covid-19. epigenetic age is greater than chronological age in various disease contexts and lower in long-lived humans, providing strong evidence that epigenetic age reflects biological age [134, 147] . age-associated changes to the epigenome have profound effects on aging the immune system, including t cell function, cytokine production and macrophage pattern recognition. dna methylation is believed to set the pace of the aging clock in several mammalian tissues, including hematopoietic cells of the immune system [95, 96] . epigenetic clocks that measure dna methylation at specific cpg sites are the most widely used measure of biological age and disease susceptibility [134, 147] . restoration of the thymus using a drug cocktail of metformin, growth hormone and dehydroepiandrosterone led to the reversal of features of immunosenescence, specifically increasing naïve t cells and a decreasing senescent pd-1 + t cells, along with the reversal of the epigenetic clock by about 1.5 years [96] . epigenetic age may be a better biomarker than chronological age in predicting how variation in lifestyle factors and age-associated comorbidities increase susceptibility to covid-19 and may also help determine if covid-19 infection accelerates epigenetic age. we hope to test both by measuring the dna methylation ages of peripheral blood samples from thousands of covid-19 patients and correlating methylation age measurements with clinical outcomes.changes in glycosylation during aging may also predispose older individuals to severe covid-19 [148] . glycosylation is the enzymatic process by which carbohydrates called glycans, such as sialic acid, mannose and fucose, are covalently attached to proteins or lipids, typically on the cell surface or in the bloodstream. an individual's repertoire of glycans a notable example being the type of n-glycans attached to immunoglobulins [149] changes with age and environmental factors, such as smoking and poor diet [148] . the type of glycans attached to iggs affects their pro-and anti-inflammatory properties [150] . decreased galactosylation of iggs is associated with central adiposity [151] and inflammaging in the context of diabetes [152] . biological clocks based on igg glycosylation are able to predict chronological age within 10 years, and can be improved by inclusion of clinical parameters [144] . thus, changes to the glycome with age could serve both as an indicator of biological age and could potentially predict covid-19 severity.aging also changes the glycome via non-enzymatic glycation, by which reducing sugars circulating in extracellular compartments covalently bind to proteins and lipids to form advanced glycation end products (ages). ages are present in large quantities in the western diet, and greater consumption of dietary ages increases serum tnf-α [153] . ages tend to accumulate under hyperglycemic conditions and contribute to the pathology of many age-related disease such as type 2 diabetes and obesity [154] . ages may increase covid-19 severity in the aged by inhibiting the nlrp3 inflammasome during the early stages of viral infection [155] when the inflammatory program is activated by the sars-cov-1 3a protein [156] . ages also play a role in activating pro-coagulation pathways [154] , potentially contributing to the dic observed in covid-19 patients.glycosylation patterns specific to older people may also impact viral entry. the sars-cov-2 spike protein is heavily glycosylated [157] , modifications that are highly conserved between coronaviruses. sars-cov-2 shares 20 out of 22 of glycosylated nlinkages with sars-cov-1 [157] . in the case of the human influenza virus, variation in sialic acid structures on the surface of cells lining the upper and lower respiratory tracts dictates tropism and agedependent binding efficiency of the virus [158] but how changes in the coronavirus spike protein during aging might affect viral transmission and pathogenesis is not yet known. if we are to use glycation as a prognostic marker for covid-19, it will be necessary to map the glycome in hundreds of patient samples with varying degrees of covid-19 severity, including asymptomatic individuals.between individuals, heterogeneity of the immune system increases during aging [18] and may explain differences in susceptibility to infectious diseases. a biological clock based on the immune system called imm-age was recently developed that predicts allcause mortality in older adults more accurately than even dna methylation clocks [137] . imm-age overcomes the limitation of inter-human immune heterogeneity by tracking immune cell frequencies and gene expression changes longitudinally within individuals and then computationally predicting how an individual's homeostatic immune state changes over time. though individuals exhibit variation in immune cell-type composition, these changes fall into three stages that converge on a common "attractor point" that correlates with age and is indicative of overall physiological resilience [137] . in this way, imm-age measures the entropic relationship between age and immune system remodeling, the rate of which can predict survival. because imm-age is even able to capture and predict the effect of inflammaging on the cardiovascular system, and because covid-19 fatality is so closely tied to cardiovascular disease and inflammaging, this clock may prove to be the most accurate at identifying covid-19-susceptible individuals. more aging studies are still needed to determine if and how viral infections alter these and other biological clocks, and whether variation in biological age predicts covid-19 severity.advanced age is by far the greatest risk factor for covid-19 fatality independent of underlying comorbidities [4] . this striking fact has led many researchers to speculate whether molecules that target aging itself, called geroprotectors, could be used to combat infections in older people [5, 159] . primarily via its regulation of cellular metabolism, the mammalian target of rapamycin (mtor) signaling pathway controls several immune functions such as antigen presentation, immune activation, differentiation, and cytokine production [160, 161] . low dose mtor inhibitors exhibit a hormetic effect in older people, seemingly improving immunity and reducing rates of infection [162, 163] . people over 65 years old who took mtor inhibitors for six weeks responded more robustly when challenged with an influenza vaccine and showed reduced levels of the t-cell exhaustion marker pd-1 [162] . in a similar clinical trial, protection from infection and an increase in anti-viral gene expression was observed even a year after the 6-week course of mtor complex 1 (mtorc1) inhibitors [163] , though the result was not reproduced in a phase 3 trial.metformin, a blood glucose lowering geroprotector that activates 5'amp-activated protein kinase (ampk) and inhibits the mtor pathway, has also been suggested as a possible drug to combat severe sars-cov-2 infection in older people. in addition to its potential insulin-sensitizing antiviral effect [164] , metformin confers a myriad of anti-aging benefits including improving mitochondrial metabolism, decreasing inflammatory cytokines, protecting against genomic instability and decreasing cellular senescence [165] , which may bolster the aging body's resistance to covid-19. results from the ongoing targeting aging with metformin (tame) clinical trials and others should reveal whether these anti-aging drugs are protective against sars-cov-2 infection [165, 166] .why sars-cov-2 infections are more severe and fatal in the aged is not known, but viable hypotheses are emerging that include changes to the immune cell repertoire, the epigenome, nad + levels, inflammasome activity, biological clocks, and covalent modifications of human and viral proteins (figure 3 ). much figure 3 . age-related changes that increase covid-19 susceptibility. the aging immune system undergoes immunosenescence, tcell diversity alterations and chronic activation of the innate immune system known as inflammaging. these hallmarks of the aging immune system cripple the body's ability to clear the sars-cov-2 virus, initiate and sustain cytokine storms that cause acute organ injury, dic and multi-organ failure. an age-associated decline in nad + results in derepression of nlrp3 and inflammasome in older people, further exacerbating the cytokine storm. coronaviruses also possess an adp-ribosylhydrolase that further depletes already-low nad + levels in older people. leveling of the epigenetic landscape during aging results in changes in immune cell composition and function that decrease the immune system's ability to mount a response to infection. epigenetic dysregulation of ace2 may also impact increased viral loads in older people. dysregulation of the ras during aging and in the context of age-associated disease, such as cardiovascular disease, hypertension, copd and obesity, contributes to severity of covid-19 infection. the glycome which controls a variety of immune signaling pathways changes during aging and in the context of metabolic diseases. for example, decreases in igg galactosylation contribute to chronic inflammation. biological clocks that measure different biomarkers of biological age may explain increased covid-19 susceptibility more accurately than advanced chronological age. created with biorender.aging remains to be elucidated, still. besides understanding the basis of the cytokine storms and coagulopathy, it is not known why sars-cov-2 so easily damages such a broad array of tissues in older people but rarely in the young. nor is it clear whether older people develop stronger or weaker functional immunity during seroconversion, or how long their protection will last compared to younger people. in the aged, immune responses to vaccination are also often weak or defective [18, 167, 168] , whereas autoimmunity increases [169] . therefore, in designing vaccines against sars-cov-2, it will be important to consider that older people may not respond as well to vaccines as young people. studies that follow the long-term consequences of sars-cov-2 infection in older people will also be critical to understand the long-term health consequences of covid-19 pathology, such as fibrosis and scaring of the lungs, micro-ischemic events, cardiopulmonary dysfunction, and neuropsychological disability [170] . these could significantly reduce viral resistance and lifespan in older and middle-aged people who recover from severe cases of covid-19. the most exciting and potentially impactful technologies to combat covid-19 and other viral pandemics are those that activate the body's defenses against aging [5, 166] . eventually, with advances in the field, it may even be possible to reverse the age of cells and tissues [171] [172] [173] [174] so that high-risk older individuals can respond to viral infections as though they were young. we thank the first responders, essential employees, public health leaders, physicians and scientists who are continuing to work tirelessly to treat covid-19 patients, protect vulnerable populations, and prevent the spread of this virus. t n march 2020, an elderly married couple living on long island, n.y., presented to our emergency department with symptoms suspicious for covid-19 infection.the wife, a-76-year-old woman, presented with complaints of subjective fevers, minimal dry cough and headaches of oneweek duration. she denied having any chills, rhinorrhea, diarrhea, abdominal pain or shortness of breath. two days earlier, she had presented with similar symptoms, but was discharged home.her past medical history was significant for seronegative rheumatoid arthritis, diagnosed in 2006; hypertension; coronary artery disease; hyperlipidemia; and gastroesophageal reflux. she had previously had hand surgery and cataract surgery. she had been on etanercept 50 mg weekly, methotrexate 10 mg weekly for more than 10 years, olmesartan, metoprolol, omeprazole and nortriptyline. she had no recent travel history.on admission, she had a temperature of 37.6º c, with a pulse of 88 beats/minute, a respiratory rate of 24 breaths/minute and a blood pressure of 184/74 mmhg. her body mass index (bmi) was 28.1 kg/ m 2 . her lungs were clear to auscultation and no murmur was appreciated; there were no signs of synovitis or joint deformities; the remainder of her physical exam was reported to be without abnormalities.abnormal laboratories included sodium 125 mmol/l (reference range [rr]: 135-146), chloride 83 mmol/l (rr: 96-107), glucose 136 mg/dl (rr: 70-99), alanine transaminase 35 ui/l (rr: 0-33), aspartate transaminase 51 ui/l (rr: 0-32), white blood cell count of 4,550 cells/mm 3 (rr: 4,800-10,800), with a lymphocyte count of 250 cells/mm 3 (rr: 900-4,800) and a procalcitonin of 0.05 ng/ml (rr: <0.10). her c-reactive protein (crp) was 1.2 mg/dl (rr: 0-0.5) on day 3 of hospitalization, and her erythrocyte sedimentation rate (esr) (rr: 0-30 mm/h) and d-dimer were within normal limits. her interleukin 6 (il-6) was 12.8 pg/ml (rr: <14.8). she had a negative quantiferon tb test (mitogen 10 iu/ml).her chest x-ray and chest computed tomography (ct) were clear, without any infiltrates. other than an elevated temperature of 38.1° c on hospital day 3, her symptoms quickly abated.a nasopharyngeal swab obtained on admission was positive for sars-cov-2 by polymerase chain reaction (pcr) (viracor eurofins, lee's summit, mo.). she did not require any supplemental oxygen, hydroxychloroquine, azithromycin, nor any antiviral agents; she did receive acetaminophen, but did not receive methotrexate or etanercept during the hospitalization.her husband, a 78-year-old man, presented to the emergency department complaining of high fevers (38.9º c) and severe dry cough for the previous 24 hours, along with fatigue, myalgias, shortness of breath, frontal headaches and lightheadedness.his medical history was significant for ankylosing spondylitis, hypertension, hypothyroidism, benign prostatic hypertrophy, supraventricular tachycardia with ablation, neuropathy and hyperlipidemia. his medications included secukinumab 150 mg subcutaneous every four weeks for the previous 16 months, amlodipine, hydrochlorothiazide, losartan, nortriptyline, levothyroxine, rosuvastatin and tamsulosin.on admission, the patient's vital signs were: temperature 38.2° c, respiration rate 22 breaths/minute, blood pressure 179/78 mmhg, pulse oximeter 98% on room air. his weight was 152 kg. on physical exam, he had clear breath sounds on auscultation and no evidence of a his complete blood count showed thrombocytopenia 141,000/mm 3 (rr: 150,000-450,000). his lymphocyte count was normal at 1,150/mm 3 (rr: 900-4,800). his crp was 1.9 mg/dl (rr: 0-0.5).his chest x-ray on admission was clear and free of infiltrates.over the next three days, the patient continued to have fevers and became progressively dyspneic, requiring supplemental oxygen. a chest ct performed on day 2 showed several small areas of groundglass opacities (see figure 1 , p. 33). on day 3 his lactate dehydrogenase was 611 iu/l, ferritin 843 ng/ml, d-dimer 246 ng/ml and crp 11.7 mg/dl (all higher than normal ranges). a nasopharyngeal swab obtained on admission was positive for sars-cov-2 by pcr.on day 4, the patient's condition worsened. he became more hypoxemic due to interval development of diffuse patchy airspace opacities bilaterally on chest x ray (see figure 2 , above) requiring intubation and mechanical ventilation. on day 7, the patient remained on mechanical ventilation. he completed a five-day course of hydroxychloroquine, azithromycin and steroids. secukinumab was not administered during the hospitalization.severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2) is an rna virus first reported in wuhan, hubei province, china, in december 2019. 1 as of april 7, more than 1.2 million people worldwide had been confirmed with covid19 infection, and more than 72,000 deaths had occurred. 2 mortality is higher in the elderly, but little is known about covid-19 infection in immunocompromised patients, particularly those with rheumatic diseases on biologics.we report two cases of a husband and wife, both receiving different disease-modifying anti-rheumatic drugs (dmards), with markedly different clinical presentations and hospital courses. the wife, a patient with rheumatoid arthritis who received etanercept and methotrexate prior to hospitalization, had a very mild clinical course that required no major therapeutic intervention. her husband, with ankylosing spondylitis, had received secukinumab and progressed to critical covid-19 disease requiring mechanical ventilation.these cases present some intriguing considerations regarding the immunological underpinning of covid.the clinical course of covid-19 varies from mild to critical, possibly progressing to death. cytokine storm, macrophage activation syndrome (mas) and secondary hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis (shlh) are disease processes triggered by infections, autoimmune diseases, drugs or malignancy. clinically, cytokine storm presents with a syndrome of excessive immune activation that causes fever, pancytopenia, hyperferritinemia, splenomegaly, hepatitis, encephalopathy and coagulopathy. the etiology is thought to be caused by excessive activation and proliferation of t lymphocytes and macrophages with massive hypersecretion of proinflammatory cytokines, including interleukin 1 beta (il-1β), il-6, interferon-γ (ifn-γ), and tumor necrosis factor α (tnfα). 3, 4 huang et al. described a cytokine profile similar to that in shlh, which is associated with covid-19 disease severity. it is characterized by increased il-2, il-7, granulocyte-colony stimulating factor, ifn-γ inducible protein 10, monocyte chemoattractant protein 1, macrophage inflammatory protein 1-α and tnfα. it is well known that il-6 and il-1β blockade has been successfully used in treating mas secondary to systemic juvenile idiopathic arthritis (sjia). 5, 6 that success has led to clinical trials where more than one-third of patients achieved clinical remission. 7, 8 additionally, the il-1 receptor inhibitor, anakinra, has been associated with improved survival in sepsis with mas-like features. 9 similarly, the il-6 antagonist, tocilizumab, could suppress the cytokine storm, as suggested by early promising results in a small cohort of covid-19 patients. 10 therefore, it is worthwhile exploring whether blocking other cytokines involved in mas or shlh may be beneficial in cases of cytokine storm from covid-19 infection.tnfα may play a key role in the cytokine storm. tnfα is a 26 kd homotrimeric transmembrane protein expressed on the surface of macrophages, t lymphocytes, natural killer cells, smooth muscle cells and fibroblasts. tnfα, along with ifn-γ, plays a significant role in the immune response against viral infections. tnfα and ifn-γ exhibit a cross-talk at the level of tnf receptor 1 (tnfr1) to induce activation of macrophages. ifn-γ signaling causes nuclear localization of stat1α that precludes it from being recruited at tnfr1, leading to an enhanced tnfα-induced nfκb activation. [11] [12] [13] blocking ifn-γ with emapalumab has been described in successfully treating secondary hlh due to multiple viral infections. 14 emapalumab is a human monoclonal antibody to ifn-γ that acts to block its binding to cell surface receptors and activation of inflammatory signals. emapalumab is used to treat severe hlh in which serum ifn-γ levels are elevated. 15, 16 similarly, tnfα inhibition may theoretically increase the risk of viral infections, but could potentially be beneficial in cases of cytokine storm. 17 from the literature on the 2003 sars-cov infection, it is suggested the viral infection is associated with decreased angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ace2) expression, leading to an increased activity of the renin-angiotensin system responsible for lung injury. 18 the spike protein of sars-cov (sars-s) induces ace2 shedding via a process tightly linked with tnfα production. 19 in an in vitro study, il-6 and tnfα were up-regulated by the recombinant s protein of sars-cov, suggesting that tnf inhibitors and il-6 antagonists may potentially reduce the inflammatory storm on sars-cov-2 and lung damage. 20 in our cases, it is possible that pretreatment with etanercept for rheumatoid arthritis in our female patient could have resulted in a blunted il-6 response indirectly, which may have contributed to her mild case of covid-19. in support of this hypothesis is the patient's normal plasma il-6 level and a minimally elevated crp, while other inflammatory markers remained within normal limits. sha et al. demonstrated in a cohort of hiv patients pretreated with etanercept, tnfα and il-6 levels were blunted after stimulation with il-2.6 our case also suggests the possibility that a tnfα inhibitor, such as etanercept, could minimize or abort the potential cytokine storm.in contrast, covid-19 infection in the husband was critical. the drug, secukinumab, he was receiving may have aggravated the viral infection. secukinumab is a human igg1κ monoclonal antibody that binds to the protein, il-17a. in host defense, il-17a has been shown to be mostly beneficial against infection caused by extracellular bacteria and fungi. 21 the primary function of t helper (th) 17 cells appears to be control of the gut microbiota, as well as the clearance of extracellular bacteria and fungi. 22, 23 il-17a and il-17 receptor signaling has been shown to play a protective role in host defenses against many bacterial and fungal pathogens, including klebsiella pneumoniae, mycoplasma pneumoniae, candida albicans, coccidioides posadasii, histoplasma capsulatum and blastomyces dermatitidis. 24 however, il-17a seems detrimental in viral infection, such as influenza, by promoting neutrophilic inflammation. 25 it appears the clinical picture of covid19 is characterized by a strong immune response in the lung parenchyma with mononuclear cells, mainly lymphocytes, more than the direct effect of viral replication. 26 an autopsy study of these cases suggested that over-activation of t cells, manifest by an increase of th17 and high cytotoxicity of cd8 t cells, accounts in part for the severe immune injury. although the study suggested involvement of th17, no th17-associated cytokines were measured in our case. th17 cells and il-17 are involved in cytokine storm response. both il-1β and tnfα promote th17 responses, leading to vascular permeability and leakage. wu et al. proposed that inhibiting th17 response may be beneficial. 27these two cases highlight the disparate clinical courses that may be experienced by patients with rheumatic disease who are infected by sars-cov2. the immunologic mechanisms underpinning the more severe manifestations of covid- 19 have not yet been elucidated, and observations such as these may begin to provide some clarity.it is important, however, to acknowledge limitations in interpreting these cases. in particular, the clinical course of covid -19 may be highly heterogeneous, even among patients with otherwise similar characteristics. the relative contribution of other potential risk-factors (e.g., gender, genetic milieu and concomitant medications) is impossible to differentiate from the impact of the biologic agents used for each patient.that said, these cases raise intriguing questions regarding the pathogenesis of covid-19. the potential risks and benefits of specific immunosuppressive agents for patients with covid-19 and the potential role of biologic agents for the management of severe covid-19 warrant further study. rcoronavirus 2019 (covid-19) caused by severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars cov-2) has been declared a global pandemic since march 2020. this viral outbreak has raised serious concerns among the public and patients with health conditions. in the medical community, rheumatologists are particularly concerned because their patients represent a population of autoimmune rheumatic disorders who are mostly on immunosuppressive agents and are susceptible to infection. while much has been learnt on covid-19 in general, little is known of covid-19 severity and outcomes in patients with rheumatic diseases (rd). herein, in conjunction with the literature review, we report a case series of patients with rd, who were infected with covid-19a retrospective chart review was conducted in 4 hospitalized patients at stony brook university hospital between early march 2020 and the end of april 2020, including 2 cases that we previously published in the rheumatologist. these patients had underlying rd on disease modifying anti-rheumatic drugs (dmards) prior to developing covid-19. in our patients, a diagnosis of covid-19 was made based on clinical grounds and by polymerase chain reaction of samples from nasopharyngeal swabs. in addition, a literature search of pubmed, scopus, and web of science databases was conducted between december 2019 and may 2, 2020 using the terms: "covid-19" and "rheumatic disease" or "biologic". the search process and result are depicted in prisma (figure 1 ). english language articles that reported single case or case series of covid-19 in rd were reviewed. relevant information covid-19 and rheumatic disease 4 such as demographic, clinical, therapeutic data, and outcomes of these patients were gathered from the literature. other relevant literature regarding the virus (sars), immune response, and cytokine storm, were also searched between 1990 and may 2, 2020. descriptive statistics was used.the demographic, clinical, and therapeutic data of 4 cases from our hospital are summarized (table 1) . of the 4 covid-19 hospitalized patients with rd, there were 2 men and 2 women with mean age of 57 ± 21 years. the most common symptoms among all 4 patients were fever and cough. of the 4 patients, 2 patients had a mild infection, and the other 2 developed severe covid-19 related respiratory complications, including 1 ankylosing spondylitis (as) patient on secukinumab requiring mechanical ventilation and 1 granulomatous with polyangiitis (gpa) patient with underlying lung involvement on rituximab, who developed superimposed viral pneumonia requiring supplemental oxygenation. all 4 patients had elevated acute phase reactants, 2 patients had mild covid-19 with lymphopenia, and 2 patients had severe infection with normal lymphocyte counts and high levels of interleukin (il)-6. none of the patients exhibited an exacerbation of their underlying rds. the lupus patient had normal complement levels and negative anti-double stranded dna antibodies. in this case, acute worsening on chronic renal insufficiency was thought to be secondary to dehydration from diarrhea. the gpa patient did not show disease flare as evidenced by stable renal function and negative antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibody. days of watery diarrhea associated with nausea, vomiting, and decreased oral intake without abdominal pain. he also had low-grade fevers, chills, and generalized myalgias three weeks ago. his vital signs were temperature 36.6 0 c, blood pressure 147/89 mmhg, heart rate 133/min, and breathing rate 17/min, with so2 100% on room air. physical examination showed tachycardia but was otherwise normal. he tested positive for sars-cov-2 and did not receive special treatment except hemodialysis. he was discharged home after 11 days of hospitalization.a 27-year-old hispanic woman with a diagnosis of gpa two months ago presented with fevers, severe dry cough, and shortness of breath in april 2020. she was treated with high dose steroids and four weekly infusions of rituximab 2 months ago. her gpa had been stabilized and she was on prednisone 30mg daily. on presentation, she was tachycardic and tachypneic with respiration rate 44/min and oxygen saturation of 75% on room air, with improvement upon being placed on 100% non-rebreather. physical exam demonstrated bilateral decreased breath sounds that correlated with chest radiography findings of bilateral multifocal opacities. laboratory evaluation revealed elevated inflammatory markers (table   1 ). she tested positive for sars-cov-2 and received 5-day course of hcq. however, due to poor clinical improvement, she subsequently received one dose of tocilizumab 400 mg before her inflammatory markers and oxygen requirement improved. she did not require mechanical ventilation.literature data of covid-19 in rdthe clinical data and outcomes of published cases are summarized ( antagonists may potentially reduce the cytokine storm in covid-19 and its related lung damage (46) . these data together suggest that tnfα antagonist may be considered as a treatment strategy for severe covid-19 in the future.in case 2, the as patient developed severe virus-related complications. it is unclear whether secukinumab, a monoclonal antibody to il-17a, could play a negative role in the case. this is contrasting to an autopsy study of covid-19 infected cases, which suggested a pathogenic role of th17 and potential benefit of blocking th17 (25) . in addition, 5 out of the covid-19, and 1 was hospitalized. these data indicate that il-17a inhibitors influence the viral disease course.our patient with sle had minimal viral symptoms without worsening of his underlying ild. in an in vitro study, hcq has been shown to inhibit endosome-lysosome system acidification and to suppress proinflammatory cytokines (47) . hcq is currently being studied in multiple clinical trials(48-60). however, the therapeutic efficacy of hcq in covid-19 remains controversial. while some studies showed benefit (47) records identified through database searching (n = 46)additional records identified through other sources (n = 0)records after duplicates removed (n = 0)records excluded based on title and abstract content (n = 36)full-text articles assessed for eligibility (n = 10)full-text articles without cases excluded (n = 1) studies included in qualitative synthesis (n = 9)studies included in quantitative synthesis (meta-analysis) (n = 9)tocilizumab can be used to treat cytokine storm of the covid-19 patients that targets il-6r 9 . it is a humanized monoclonal antibody (hmab) and also is an antagonist il-6r. il-6 level is significantly increased in serum in covid-19 infected severe patients. il-6 is a one of the major cytokines, which can create inflammatory storm. this may consequence of impair oxygen diffusion. due to this, respiratory muscles become fatigued and that may finally leads to respiratory failure. in this case, tocilizumab may be the right therapeutic choice to treat critical patients.a clinical trial study in china found hmab to be a useful treatment of severely affected covid-19 patients with augmented il-6 levels. in this study, the initial dose was used as this article is protected by copyright. all rights reserved. similarly, sarilumab can also be applied for the therapeutic purpose of cytokine storm of the covid-19 patients. it is also a humanized monoclonal antibody and also is an antagonist il-6r. clinical trials of sarilumab have been initiated for the therapy of the cytokine storm syndrome in sars-cov-2 infected victims 13,14 .therapeutic molecules with the il6 receptor antagonist property can be applied for the cure of the cytokine storm syndrome in sars-cov-2 infected patients. il6r antagonist may be one of the best choices to treat severe covid-19 patients. however, there are some open questions needs to be answered: what is the molecular mechanism of thesea number of published studies have implicated nrf2 as a regulator of susceptibility to respiratory viral infections. a recent review by lee [8] points out that virus-induced modulation of the host antioxidative response has turned out to be a crucial determinant for the progression of several viral diseases. a virus needs to keep oxidative stress at a level optimal for viral reproduction, which is higher than normal, to support the viral metabolism but should not be so high as to kill off the host cell. viruses have evolved mechanisms for manipulating the nrf2 pathway in both directions, depending on the needs of the virus, but importantly taking control away from the host cell. among the types of virus studied are influenza virus, respiratory syncytial virus (rsv), and human metapneumovirus (hmpv) [9] [10] [11] [12] [13] . the phenomenon is also seen in non-respiratory viruses including dengue virus (denv) [14] , rotavirus [15] , herpes simplex virus [16] , zika virus [17] , and hiv [18] , suggesting that regulation of oxidative stress may be a need common to most, if not all viruses, and that nrf2 activators may offer multiple ways to regain control of important pathways to increase resistance and slow viral replication. we recently described a phytochemical composition, pb125, that potently activates nrf2 by controlling multiple steps involved in the process, especially via the akt1/pi3k/gsk3/fyn pathway [19] .the purpose of this study is to evaluate the effects of nrf2 activation via pb125 on human liver-derived hepg2 cells as well as on primary human pulmonary artery endothelial cells in culture regarding the expression of genes known to be important for antiviral activity in general, as well as those genes with specific relevance to sars-cov-2 and covid-19.plant extracts: rosemary extract from rosmarinus officinalis (standardized to 6% carnosol; 15% carnosic acid) was obtained from flavex (rehlingen, germany), ashwagandha extract from withania somnifera (standardized to 2% withaferin a) was obtained from verdure sciences (noblesville, in, usa), and luteolin (standardized to 98% luteolin, from sophora japonica) was obtained from jiaherb (pine brook, nj, usa). for making pb125 solutions, the rosemary, ashwagandha, and luteolin powders were mixed at a 15:5:2 ratio by mass, then extracted at 50 mg of mixed powder per ml in ethanol overnight and the supernatant isolated [19] . cell culture: media and antibiotics were purchased from thermo fisher scientific (waltham, ma, usa). lps (lipopolysaccharides from escherichia coli o55:b5) was from sigma-aldrich (st. louis, mo, usa).we utilized the human hepg2 cell line (hepatocellular carcinoma) and primary human pulmonary artery endothelial cells (hpaec) for genomic assays. hepg2 and hpaec cells are suitable models in the present work because they each have a nrf2 pathway that responds in a normal manner to nrf2 activators [20, 21] , and do not have reported mutations in nrf2/keap1. the cells were cultured and maintained by standard methods, using opti-mem medium with 4% fetal bovine serum (fbs) and geneticin/penicillin/streptomycin for hepg2 cells, and using egm2-mv medium for hpaec cells, from lonza (morristown, nj). hpaec subculturing was limited to six passages in order to prevent senescence and de-differentiation.we used the human il-6 quantiglo elisa (r&d systems, minneapolis, mn) according to the manufacturer's instructions to determine the concentration of il-6 protein released from hpaec that were pretreated overnight (16 h) with 5 ug/ml pb125 or vehicle control and then exposed for 5 h to 20 ng/ml lps or vehicle control, to evaluate whether il-6 protein levels increase upon lps exposure and whether pb125 attenuates that lps-induced il-6 protein increase. briefly, the hpaec cells were seeded using egm2-mv medium, then after 24 h the hpaec cells were treated with 5 ug/ml of pb125 extract or with the corresponding amounts of vehicle control. after an additional 16 h of incubation, the cells were treated with 20 ng/ml lps or vehicle control. each treatment group was run in triplicate. after 5 hours of lps treatment, aliquots of cell culture medium were removed from each well for il-6 measurement by elisa.to examine the effects of pb125 on gene expression in hepg2 cells, the cells were cultured overnight in 24-well plates with control vs. 16 μg/ml pb125 (as an extract of 50 mg/ml in 100% ethanol) treatment. to examine the effects of pb125 on genes that are induced by endotoxin exposure and which may contribute to the cytokine storm (as is observed in covid-19 illness), we examined a model of pro-inflammatory lipopolysaccharide (lps) treated human pulmonary arterial endothelial cells, with and without treatment with pb125. hpaec cells were cultured overnight in 24-well plates under four conditions: control (untreated); pb125-treated (at 5 µg/ml); lps-treated (at 20 ng/ml); and pb125 + lps treated. briefly, the cultured cells were washed two times with pbs in the wells, then treated with trizol, then total rna was isolated. total rna was further purified by using the qiagen rneasy clean-up columns (qiagen inc., valencia, ca, usa).the rna concentration of each sample derived from hpaec was determined based on the absorbance at 260 nm (a260) using a nanodrop spectrophotometer (thermo fisher scientific, waltham, ma, usa). the integrity of total rna samples was examined by agilent tapestation 2200 (agilent, santa clara, ca, usa). transcriptional analysis was done at the university of colorado amc genomics and microarray core facility (aurora, co, usa). per standard protocol, 150 ng of starting total rna was converted to cdna with the genechip 3' ivt plus reagent kit (affymetrix/thermo fisher scientific, waltham, ma, usa), following the manufacturer's protocol. after standard sample labeling, each sample was hybridized to the affymetrix primeview human gene expression assay followed by examination with an affymetrix genechip scanner 3000 (affymetrix/thermo fisher scientific, waltham, ma, usa).briefly, each transcript and variants are represented by the use of 9-11 perfectly matched (pm) probes. the affymetrix genechip software program (affymetrix/thermo fisher scientific, waltham, ma, usa) determines the intensity of expression for all genes on the array and provides pair-wise comparison between chips.a total of 200-500 ng of total rna from hepg2 cells was used to prepare the illumina hiseq libraries (4 assays based on 4 biological replicates in each treatment group) according to manufacturer's instructions for the truseq rna kit (illumina, san diego, ca, usa). this kit first isolates mrna from total rna using polya selection, then fragments and primes the mrna for creation of double-stranded cdna fragments which are subsequently amplified, size selected, and purified for cluster generation.the mrna template libraries were then sequenced as single pass 50 bp reads on the illumina hiseq 4000 platform (illumina, san diego, ca, usa) at the university of colorado amc genomics and microarray core facility (aurora, co, usa). we sequenced at a depth that provides ~40m single-read 50 bases reads per sample.. cc-by 4.0 international license (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. it is made available under a the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 17, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.16.099788 doi: biorxiv preprint mrna-seq profiling derived sequences were analyzed by applying a custom computational pipeline consisting of the open-source gsnap [22] cufflinks [23] and r for sequence alignment and ascertainment of differential gene expression [24] . in short, reads generated were mapped to the human genome (grch38) by gsnap [22] , expression (fpkm) derived by cufflinks [23] , and differential expression analyzed with anova in r.the data are presented as mean ± standard error of the mean (sem). significant differences were determined by one-way anova and post hoc tukey multiple comparisons testing, or by student's t test for unpaired data using prism software (version 6.0, graphpad software, san diego, ca, usa). a p value < 0.05 was considered statistically significant.using the elisa assay, we determined that pretreatment of hpaec with pb125 decreased the lps-induced release of il-6 protein from the hpaec cells. in this study, we treated hpaec cells for 16 h with 5 ug/ml pb125 or vehicle as a negative control, then stimulated the pretreated hpaec cells for 5 h with 20 ng/ml bacterial lipopolysaccharide (lps) or vehicle as a negative control. lps stimulation of the vehicle-pretreated hpaec significantly increased the release of il-6 protein in to the culture media, but this lps-induced il-6 release was significantly attenuated (p<0.05) by pretreatment of the hpaec cells with pb125 ( figure 1 ).because sars-cov-2 entry into a human cell depends on ace2 for binding and on tmprss2 for proteolytic activation of the spike protein [25] , we examined the effects of pb125 on the expression of these two genes. because inhibition of the protease activity of tmprss2 has been . cc-by 4.0 international license (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. it is made available under a the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 17, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.16.099788 doi: biorxiv preprint shown to block viral entry [25] , we also examined the expression of plasminogen activator inhibitor-1 (pai-1, encoded by the serpine1 gene), a normal plasma component and known potent inhibitor of tmprss2 [26] . ace2 mrna was down regulated -3.5-fold and tmprss2 was down-regulated -2.8-fold by pb125 in human liver-derived hepg2 cells, as seen in figure 2 . while these impediments may not completely block viral entry, they may significantly impair it, slowing the rate of viral progression. furthermore, pb125 strongly up regulated serpine1/pai-1 by 17.8-fold. pb125 down-regulates hdac5 in human liver cells by -2.8-fold, also shown in figure 2 . in humans, hdac5 appears to be responsible for the deacetylation and attenuation of nrf2 activity [27] . the cytokine lif, an important antiviral cellular response to viral infection [28, 29] , was up regulated 6.6-fold by pb125. because of recent evidence that plasmin can trigger substantial proinflammatory release of cytokines [30] , we examined the effect of pb125 on plasminogen (plg) mrna expression, finding it to be down regulated by -1.9-fold. thus, all six of these gene regulatory effects of pb125 would appear to counter viral attempts to enter the cell and to usurp control of oxidative stress response.to examine the effects of pb125 on genes that may contribute to the covid-19-induced cytokine storm, we examined a model of lipopolysaccharide (lps) treated hpaec, with and without treatment with pb125. the results are seen in figure 3 . all 36 genes were significantly upregulated by lps and normalized to 100% indicated by the red bar (no pb125). sixteen cytokines, including two colony stimulating factors, are shown in green, with mrnas downregulated by pb125 as indicated. the average percent inhibition for the group of cytokines was 70%. two proinflammatory interleukins, il-1b and il-6, showed mrnas inhibited 61% and 44%, respectively. three proinflammatory cytokine-induced adhesion molecules, intercellular adhesion molecule 1 (icam1), vascular cell adhesion molecule 1 (vcam1), and endothelial cell selectin (sele) were suppressed an average of 78%. tumor necrosis factor, tnf, mrna was reduced by 33%, but a group of five tnf-induced proteins (tnfaips) were repressed even more, averaging 70%. four other genes representing the tnf family were downregulated an average of 65%. also, a family of five interferon-inducible genes are shown to be downregulated an average of all six genes differed from control by p < 0.04.. cc-by 4.0 international license (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. it is made available under a the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 17, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.16.099788 doi: biorxiv preprint 63%. this across-the-board reduction of genes that contribute to the "cytokine storm" is noteworthy as it is the intensity of this storm that predicts icu fatalities from covid-19. transforming this storm into a manageable "shower" is therefore a major therapeutic objective in the clinical management of covid-19 patients.the last decade has seen more than 10,000 publications on nrf2 and its involvement in redox homeostasis, inflammation and immunity, neurodegeneration, aging and diseases associated with aging, ischemia-reperfusion injury, and many other areas, but relatively little has been published regarding its roles in viral infectivity and resistance, despite some rather tantalizing studies. kesic et al. showed that sirna knockdown of nrf2 expression in human nasal epithelial cells effectively decreased both nrf2 mrna and nrf2 protein expression in these cells, which correlated with significantly increased entry of influenza a/bangkok/1/79 (h3n2 serotype) and replication in the transduced human cells [9] . importantly, they also demonstrated that enhancing nrf2 activation via supplementation with sulforaphane (sfn) and epigallocatechin gallate (egcg) increased antiviral mediators in the absence of viral infection and also abrogated viral entry. yegeta et al. took a different approach and increased oxidative stress, not just by manipulating nrf2 expression genetically, but by alternatively exposing mice to an exogenous oxidative stress-cigarette smoke [10] . cigarette smoke-exposed nrf2-deficient mice showed higher rates of mortality than did wild-type mice after influenza virus infection, with enhanced peribronchial inflammation, lung . cc-by 4.0 international license (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. it is made available under a the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 17, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.16.099788 doi: biorxiv preprint permeability damage, and mucus hypersecretion. cho et al. [31] have similarly studied respiratory syncytial virus (rsv) infection, the single most important virus causing acute respiratory tract infections in children. they found that nrf2 -/-mice infected with rsv showed significantly increased bronchopulmonary inflammation, epithelial injury, and mucus cell metaplasia as well as nasal epithelial injury when compared to similarly infected nrf2 +/+ wt mice. the nrf2 -/-mice also showed significantly attenuated viral clearance and ifn-γ, and greater weight loss. importantly, pretreatment with oral sulforaphane significantly limited lung rsv replication and virus-induced inflammation in nrf2 +/+ wt mice. komaravelli et al. [11] [12] [13] have noted that rsv not only causes increased production of ros but actively lowers expression of antioxidant enzymes by increasing the rate of proteasomal degradation of nrf2. at 6 h post-infection nrf2-dependent gene transcription was increased, indicating that the cell is in control and responding to the insult of viral infection and the increase in oxidative stress. by 15 h post-infection, however, the concentration of nrf2 had dropped significantly to about half its pre-infection level reflecting a change-of-control to favor the virus. to accomplish this rsv had increased nrf2 ubiquitination, triggering its proteasomal degradation, representing one example by which viruses subvert cellular antioxidant defenses. taken together, these studies demonstrate the ability of nrf2 to impede viral entry, slow viral replication, reduce inflammation, weight loss, and mortality, but without providing much detailed insight as to which genes and pathways are involved.the first challenge facing a virus, and particularly a virus that is jumping from one host species to another, is gaining entry to the cell. there are some fairly common ports of entry such as ldlr and icam-1 that lead to endosomal entry and which are shared among various viral families [32] . sars-cov-2, however, seems to be largely if not totally restricted to a very specific mode of entry. the unique mode of entry may be the greatest vulnerability for the virus, opening the door to some potentially effective therapies. substantial evidence suggests that a transmembrane protease encoded by the tmprss2 gene plays a critical role in the entry for sars and mers coronavirus, for 2013 asian h7n9 influenza virus, and for several h1n1 subtype influenza a virus infections [25, [33] [34] [35] [36] , suggesting that targeting tmprss2 could be a novel antiviral strategy to treat coronavirus [33] . hoffmann and coworkers found that infection by sars-cov-2, the virus responsible for covid-19, may depend almost exclusively on the host cell factors ace2 and tmprss2 [25] . the spike (s) protein of coronaviruses facilitates viral entry into target cells. entry depends on binding of the s protein to a cellular receptor, ace2, which facilitates viral attachment to the surface of target cells. in addition, entry requires s protein "priming" by the cellular protease tmprss2, which entails s protein cleavage and allows fusion of viral and cellular membranes ( figure 4 ). this priming can be blocked by clinically proven protease inhibitors of the tmprss2, camostat mesylate [25, 37] and nafamostat mesylate [38] . nafamostat is remarkably potent with an ic50 in the nanomolar range for blocking cellular entry of mers-cov in vitro, but has not been clinically tested as an antiviral in humans. the drug appears not to be available at present in an oral formulation, and because of its lack of specificity there is concern over possible side effects [38] . it may prove suitable for treatment of severe covid-19 cases.tmprss2 can also be blocked by the human anti-protease plasminogen activator inhibitor-1, or pai-1 [34] , as shown in figure 4 . iwata-yoshikawa et al. [34] found that knockout of tmprss2 improved both pathology and immunopathology in the bronchi and/or alveoli after infection of the mice by sars-cov and completely prevented loss of body weight. this is especially noteworthy in sars-cov infection where tmprss2 is not the sole mechanism for entry, as is the case with sars-cov-2. thus, our data showing that pb125 down regulated ace2 by -3.5-fold, down regulated tmprss2 by -2.8-fold, and up regulated pai-1, the potent tmprss2 inhibitor, by 17.8-fold ( figure 2 ) strongly suggest that pb125 treatment might diminish the ability of sars-cov-2 to bind to a host cell and to obtain spike protein activation as a result of less ace2 and tmprss2 on the cell surface, and as a result of a 17.8-fold increase in plasma pai-1, which would inhibit the remaining tmprss2. dittmann et al. [26] have found that influenza a virus (iav) infection provokes a host response that is both necessary and sufficient for viral inhibition-increased production of pai-1. they found that for iav, proteolytic cleavage of the viral coat protein hemagglutinin by host . cc-by 4.0 international license (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. it is made available under a the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 17, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.16.099788 doi: biorxiv preprint proteases (such as plasmin) was a requirement for maturation and infectivity of progeny particles. addition of recombinant pai to the apical side of haec significantly reduced iav growth compared to carrier control, with about 90% inhibition of infectivity at 48 h post infection. in contrast, addition of -pai-1 antibody dramatically enhanced iav growth. thus, many viruses rely on both host endo-and exo-proteases for various entry and maturation functions. moreover, they found that tmprss2 is among the trypsin-like proteases effectively inhibited by pai-1 [26] .quite apart from direct involvement with viral entry mechanisms, pb125 down-regulates hdac5 in human liver-derived hepg2 cells by -2.8-fold, also shown in figure 2 . acetylation of nrf2 increases binding of nrf2 to its cognate response element in a target gene promoter, and increases nrf2-dependent transcription of target genes [39] . in humans, hdac5 appears to be the isozyme responsible for the deacetylation and attenuation of nrf2 activity [27] , and is likely the gene up-regulated by rsv infection described above by komaravelli et al. [13] . thus pb125, by inhibiting the deacetylation and subsequent degradation of nrf2, maintains more active acetylated nrf2 in the nucleus for a longer time, counteracting one of the mechanisms enumerated above by which viruses attempt to commandeer control of the cell's redox status and, indirectly, amplifying all nrf2-dependent actions.the upregulation of the cytokine lif, an important antiviral cellular response to viral infection, is shown to be strongly up-regulated by pb125 in figure 2 , again countering potential attempts by a virus to down-regulate it. lif gene expression was downregulated by h7n9 infection, and knock-down of lif increased virus titers for three influenza a strains investigated, indicating an important role of lif in virus defense [29] . in vivo studies were performed with lif knock-out mice that were infected with rsv. lif knock-out mice yielded higher virus titers compared to control mice, and lif signaling was shown to be critical for the protection of the lung from injury during [28] .while we have discussed the role of pai-1 in preventing tmprss2 from activating the sars-cov-2 spike protein, mention should also be made of what many would consider its "real . cc-by 4.0 international license (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. it is made available under a the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 17, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.16.099788 doi: biorxiv preprint job", the blocking of the conversion of plasminogen (encoded by the plg gene) to plasmin by both urokinase-type plasminogen activator (upa) and tissue plasminogen activator (tpa). fibrinolysis was the first recognized function for plasmin, so one might expect that high expression of pai-1 would cause low plasmin levels which might be a risk factor for venous thrombosis. genetic plasminogen deficiency, however, is not strongly associated with risk of thrombosis [40] . in a study of 23 subjects with homozygous mutations in the plg gene and little or no detectable plasmin, 96% had clinical inflammation of the conjunctivae (ligneous conjunctivitis) but 0% had experienced venous thrombosis [41] . new roles, however, have been recognized for plasmin regarding cytokine release [30, [42] [43] [44] [45] . a "cytokine storm syndrome" is a form of systemic inflammatory response that can be triggered by a variety of factors such as severe infections. it occurs when large numbers of leukocytes are activated and release inflammatory cytokines, which in turn activate yet more leukocytes. sato et al. found that pharmacological inhibition of plasmin significantly prevented mortality in a mouse model of acute graft-versus-host disease, proposing that plasmin inhibition could offer a novel therapeutic strategy to control the deadly cytokine storm that results from graft-versus-host disease, preventing tissue destruction [43] . macrophage activation syndrome (mas) is a life-threatening disorder characterized by a cytokine storm and multiorgan dysfunction due to excessive immune activation. in a mouse model of mas, shimazu et al. saw a similar prevention in lethality, concluding that plasmin regulates the influx of inflammatory cells and the production of inflammatory cytokines/chemokines [30] . plasminogen has also been implicated in activation of astrocytes to produce an array of proinflammatory cytokines [45] . in figure 2 we report that pb125 downregulates plasminogen mrna by -1.9-fold in liver cells. thus, in vivo we speculate that the combined downregulation of plasminogen and 17.8-fold increase of pai-1 (which covalently reacts with and deactivates both tissue-and urokinase-type plasminogen activators) may significantly attenuate the plasmin-induced cytokine storm phenomenon.hyper-inflammation in covid-19 is associated with such an elevation of proinflammatory cytokines, interleukins, and tumor necrosis factor-α (tnf) and a large number of tnf-induced proteins, and granulocyte colony stimulating factor (gcsf or csf3). among 41 hospitalized covid-19 patients in wuhan, china, all had elevated il1b, ip10/cxcl10, and mcp1/ccl2. sixteen of the patients were subsequently admitted to the icu and had even higher plasma levels of gcsf/cf3, ip10/cxcl10, mcp1/ccl2, mip1a/ccl3, and tnfα, and the intensity of the cytokine storm was a strong prognosticator of mortality [46] . all of these genes encoding these covid-19-related cytokines appear in figure 3 as they were significantly up regulated by lps-treated hpaec, and significantly down regulated by pb125 treatment.we speculate that the well-documented age-related loss of nrf2 expression [4, 5] is a potential contributor to the occurrence of a cytokine storm. a longitudinal study of 40 confirmed covid-19 patients [47] showed that the 13 severe cases, compared to the 27 milder cases, were older (mean age 59.7 vs 43.2), had significantly elevated c-reactive protein (mean 62.9 vs 7.6 mg/l), and showed consistently higher neutrophil counts and lower lymphocyte counts throughout the two week observation period. these observations [46, 47] document a clear predilection for severity of covid-19 infection directly associated with age and intensity of inflammatory response, and presumably inversely associated with nrf2 expression. the production and self-amplifying nature of an acute inflammatory response demands a prompt subsequent "survival response" from the host tissue to break the self-sustaining attraction of neutrophils to inflamed tissues. we propose that it is a robust oxidative stress-induced activation of nrf2 in young healthy individuals that follows the gathering storm and rescues host tissues from irretrievable self-inflicted damage. in older individuals, or in the presence of comorbidities that may involve chronic inflammation, the nrf2-activation response may be insufficient to break the self-perpetuating cycle of events. figure 5 illustrates this proposed sequence of events. we propose that activating a larger fraction of the limited nrf2 available in the elderly or otherwise compromised patients might allow them, like their younger counterparts, to shut down cytokine production to stop the escalating cytokine storm, and to begin the recovery and repair phase of the inflammatory episode. this activation boost to . cc-by 4.0 international license (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. it is made available under a the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 17, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.16.099788 doi: biorxiv preprint suboptimal levels of nrf2 can be provided by several pharmacological agents, and as well or better by a number of phytochemical activators, as we show here with pb125.it is worth noting that the longitudinal study of covid-19 patients [47] reported a remarkably higher concentration of serum ferritin in the severe cases (averaging 835.5 g/l, with a range of 635.4 to 1538.8) versus the milder cases (averaging 367.8 g/l, with a range of 174.7 to 522.0). ferritin has long been recognized as a source of iron released under inflammatory conditions by the superoxide radical [48] [49] [50] [51] . under the intense oxidative stress precipitated by a cytokine storm, the release of iron would catalyze lipid peroxidation and greatly amplify host tissue injury. covid-19 has already been added to the short list of known "hyperferritinemic" diseases, all of which are characterized by high serum ferritin and life threatening hyper-inflammation sustained by a cytokines storm which eventually leads to multi-organ failure [52] . ferroptosis is a newly described form of regulated cell death that is iron-dependent and causes cell death by mitochondrial dysfunction and toxic lipid peroxidation. nrf2 has been implicated as a "key deterministic component modulating the onset and outcomes of ferroptotic stress" [53] .an obvious weakness of our study is that we did not directly study either sars-cov-2, or the cells that most likely provide the virus its point of entry (lung epithelial cells). however, we studied three different phenomena that may be involved in vulnerability, but these interactive phenomena are not all present in any single cell type. the first objective, to study the effects of pb125 on expression of ace2 and tmprss2, should be studied in the presumed point-of-entry cells, and the objective is most specific for sars-cov-2. we plan to examine multiple lung cell types using . cc-by 4.0 international license (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. it is made available under a the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 17, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.16.099788 doi: biorxiv preprint single-cell rnaseq analysis. there are both clinical and laboratory suggestions that the virus may invade many organs in the body, including liver where we showed down regulation of both ace2 and tmprss2. a second objective was to examine whether pb125 could limit systemic plasmin activity by down regulation of plg and/or upregulation of pai-1, both plasma proteins not produced by the cells entered by the virus. in this case, the liver is the source of plg, so we did look at the appropriate cell type. the source of pai-1 in plasma isn't known, but may be liver or muscle. for the third objective of whether pb125 could down regulate the cytokines identified as participating in the cytokine storm phenomenon, we believe the focus on primary hpaec is appropriate, although a more complete picture would include study of the inflammatory cell types themselves. hpaec get a local alarm signal from the infected epithelial lung cells, but it is the hpaec that actually generate the 36 cytokines we examined, sounding the systemic alarm that brings the inflammatory cells to the infected organ. for studying how an intervention can break the inflammatory cycle, we believe vascular endothelial cells may be the most important players.a substantial literature documents the ability of increasing cellular nrf2 levels, either by genetic manipulations or by treatment with nrf2 activators, to inhibit viral entry and proliferation for a broad range of viruses. in addition, several specific mechanisms whereby viruses are able to wrest control of the nrf2 pathway away from the host cell by controlling synthesis, post-translational modification, and proteasomal degradation of nrf2 have been demonstrated and are being pursued as therapeutic opportunities.importantly, the point-of-entry host protein tmprss2, a membrane-bound serine protease, appears to be an essential requirement for sars-cov-2 (covid- 19) virus. tmprss2 appears amenable to inhibition by pai-1, encoded by the serpine1 gene which is upregulated by pb125. the tmprss2 gene itself appears to be down-regulated by pb125 which would serve to decrease its activity further. the downregulation of hdac5 by pb125 would lead to an increase in acetylation of nrf2, and an increase in its activity. the upregulation of lif by pb125 would be expected protect the lung from viral-induced pathology during infection, as lif knock-down increased virus titers. finally, and perhaps most importantly, pb125 substantially suppresses production of multiple major contributors to the cytokine storm syndrome, now known to be the direct cause of death in most covid-19 fatalities. it seems possible that the sum total of these multiple antiviral effects may attenuate symptoms, and perhaps allow successful navigation through the "cytokine storm." even though the never-ending evolutionary war-of-wits continues, and the viruses occasionally win a battle, this scenario of the complex and multi-faceted antiviral mechanisms regulated by nrf2 serves to underscore the importance of this very central transcription factor in keeping us protected and functional.nrf2, is a transcription factor encoded in humans by the nfe2l2 gene. it has been called by 30 many the "master regulator of cellular redox homeostasis" [1], as well as the "guardian of 31 healthspan" and "gatekeeper of species longevity" [2] . nrf2 regulates most of the genes that defends 32 us against oxidative stress, including superoxide dismutases, catalase, numerous peroxidases, and 33 glutathione metabolism, as well as hundreds of genes involved in scores of important metabolic 34 pathways [3] . the individual vulnerabilities of various structural and catalytic gene products to 35 damage or inactivation by reactive oxygen species (ros) may lead to degenerative diseases and 36 metabolic dysfunctions. importantly, nrf2 declines with age [4, 5] and contributes greatly to the 37 "frailty" associated with aging [6] [7] [8] . because nrf2 transcriptionally upregulates genes that combat 38 oxidative stress, its loss allows oxidative stress to go unmitigated and drive the aging phenotype 39 [1, 8, 9] . oxidative stress is therefore a common theme among the key features associated with the 40 aging process, collectively referred to as the "hallmarks of aging", as it disrupts proteostasis [10], 41 alters genomic stability [11] , alters susceptibility to viral and microbial infections [12] , and leads to 42 cell death. it is this age-related frailty [8] that often defines the most vulnerable population in 43 situations such as the one we currently face with the coronavirus pandemic [13] . 44 . cc-by 4.0 international license (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. it is made available under a the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted june 10, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.16.099788 doi: biorxiv preprint 2 of 16 a number of published studies have implicated nrf2 as a regulator of susceptibility to 45 respiratory viral infections. a recent review by lee [14] points out that virus-induced modulation 46 of the host antioxidative response has turned out to be a crucial determinant for the progression of 47 several viral diseases. a virus needs to keep oxidative stress at a level optimal for viral 48 reproduction, which is higher than normal, to support the viral metabolism but should not be so high 49 as to kill off the host cell. viruses have evolved mechanisms for manipulating the nrf2 pathway in 50 both directions, depending on the needs of the virus, but importantly taking control away from the 51 host cell. among the types of virus studied are influenza virus, respiratory syncytial virus (rsv), 52 and human metapneumovirus (hmpv) [12, [15] [16] [17] [18] . the phenomenon is also seen in non-respiratory 53 viruses including dengue virus (denv) [19] , rotavirus [20] , herpes simplex virus [21] , zika virus 54 [22] , and hiv [23] , suggesting that regulation of oxidative stress may be a need common to most, if 55 not all viruses, and that nrf2 activators may offer multiple ways to regain control of important 56 pathways to increase resistance and slow viral replication. we recently described a phytochemical 57 composition, pb125, that potently activates nrf2 by controlling multiple steps involved in the process, 58 especially via the akt1/pi3k/gsk3/fyn pathway [24] . 59 the purpose of this study was to evaluate the effects of nrf2 activation via pb125 on human 60 liver-derived hepg2 cells as well as on primary human pulmonary artery endothelial cells ( to prevent senescence and de-differentiation. hpaec were seeded at a density of 5 x 10 5 cells per 104 100 mm tissue culture dishes and incubated at 37 o c and 6.5% co2 to 80-90% confluence. all 105 experiments were performed with hpaec at 80-90% confluence. the data are presented as mean ± standard error of the mean (sem). one-way anova with 153 tukey multiple comparisons testing or student's t test for unpaired data were performed using prism 154 software (version 6.0, graphpad software, san diego, ca, usa). statistical significance was set at 155 p value < 0.05.using the elisa assay for il-6, we determined that pretreatment of hpaec with pb125 159 decreased the lps-induced release of il-6 protein from the hpaec cells. in this study, the hpaec 160 cells were plated as described above, then after 24 h they were treated with 5 ug/ml of pb125 extract all six genes differed from control by p < 0.04.. cc-by 4.0 international license (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. it is made available under a the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted june 10, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.16.099788 doi: biorxiv preprint 6 of 16 suppressed an average of 78%. tumor necrosis factor, tnf, mrna was reduced by 33%, but a 197 group of five tnf-induced proteins (tnfaips) were repressed even more, averaging 70%. four 198 other genes representing the tnf family were downregulated an average of 65%. also, a family of 199 five interferon-inducible genes are shown to be downregulated an average of 63%. this across-the-200 board reduction of genes that contribute to the "cytokine storm" is noteworthy as it is the intensity 201 of this storm that predicts icu fatalities from . transforming this storm into a 202 manageable "shower" is therefore a major therapeutic objective in the clinical management of 203 covid-19 patients. the last decade has seen more than 10,000 publications on nrf2 and its involvement in redox 206 homeostasis, inflammation and immunity, neurodegeneration, aging and diseases associated with 207 aging, ischemia-reperfusion injury, and many other areas, but relatively little has been published 208 regarding its roles in viral infectivity and resistance, despite some rather tantalizing studies. kesic . cc-by 4.0 international license (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. it is made available under a the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted june 10, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.16.099788 doi: biorxiv preprint 7 of 16 [15] . cigarette smoke-exposed nrf2-deficient mice showed higher rates of mortality than did wild- these studies demonstrate the ability of nrf2 to impede viral entry, slow viral replication, reduce 235 inflammation, weight loss, and mortality, but without providing much detailed insight as to which 236 genes and pathways are involved.the first challenge facing a virus, and particularly a virus that is jumping from one host species 238 to another, is gaining entry to the cell. there are some fairly common ports of entry such as ldlr 239 and icam-1 that lead to endosomal entry and which are shared among various viral families [41] .sars-cov-2, however, seems to be largely if not totally restricted to a very specific mode of entry.the unique mode of entry may be the greatest vulnerability for the virus, opening the door to some . cc-by 4.0 international license (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. it is made available under a the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted june 10, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.16.099788 doi: biorxiv preprint attempt to commandeer control of the cell's redox status and, indirectly, amplifying all nrf2-294 dependent actions.the upregulation of the cytokine lif, an important antiviral cellular response to viral infection, 296 is shown to be strongly up-regulated by pb125 in figure 2 , again countering potential attempts by a 297 virus to down-regulate it. lif gene expression was downregulated by h7n9 infection, and knock-298 down of lif increased virus titers for three influenza a strains investigated, indicating an important 299 role of lif in virus defense [39] . in vivo studies were performed with lif knock-out mice that were 300 infected with rsv. lif knock-out mice yielded higher virus titers compared to control mice, and lif 301 signaling was shown to be critical for the protection of the lung from injury during [38] .while we have discussed the role of pai-1 in preventing tmprss2 from activating the sars-cov-2 spike protein, mention should also be made of what many would consider its "real job", the 304 blocking of the conversion of plasminogen (encoded by the plg gene) to plasmin by both urokinase-305 type plasminogen activator (upa) and tissue plasminogen activator (tpa). fibrinolysis was the first 306 recognized function for plasmin, so one might expect that high expression of pai-1 would cause low 307 plasmin levels which might be a risk factor for venous thrombosis. genetic plasminogen deficiency, 308 however, is not strongly associated with risk of thrombosis [50] . in a study of 23 subjects with cc-by 4.0 international license (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. it is made available under a the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted june 10, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.16.099788 doi: biorxiv preprint 10 of 16 19 infection directly associated with age and intensity of inflammatory response, and presumably 346 inversely associated with nrf2 expression [8] . the production and self-amplifying nature of an 347 acute inflammatory response demands a prompt subsequent "survival response" from the host tissue 348 to break the self-sustaining attraction of neutrophils to inflamed tissues. we propose that it is a 349 robust oxidative stress-induced activation of nrf2 in young healthy individuals that follows the 350 gathering storm and rescues host tissues from irretrievable self-inflicted damage. in older 351 individuals, or in the presence of comorbidities that may involve chronic inflammation, the nrf2-352 activation response may be insufficient to break the self-perpetuating cycle of events. figure 5 inhibiting further tissue cytokine production, rescuing host cells from further damage and permitting 5) repair, cleanup, and recovery. alternatively, in 4a) older cells deficient in nrf2 may be unable to mount nrf2 activation sufficient to break the self-sustaining chain reaction, resulting in an uncontrolled cytokine storm that ultimately destroys the host tissue and leads to death. a more robust activation of the limited nrf2 available in older cells may be provided by pharmacological or phytochemical nrf2 activators.. cc-by 4.0 international license (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. it is made available under a the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted june 10, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.16.099788 doi: biorxiv preprint already been added to the short list of known "hyperferritinemic" diseases, all of which are 366 characterized by high serum ferritin and life threatening hyper-inflammation sustained by a 367 cytokines storm which eventually leads to multi-organ failure [64] . ferroptosis is a newly described 368 form of regulated cell death that is iron-dependent and causes cell death by mitochondrial 369 dysfunction and toxic lipid peroxidation. nrf2 has been implicated as a "key deterministic 370 component modulating the onset and outcomes of ferroptotic stress" [65] . 371 we studied three different phenomena that may be involved in vulnerability to the sars-cov-372 2, and these interactive phenomena are not all present in any single cell type. the first objective, to 373 study the effects of pb125 on expression of ace2 and tmprss2, could be studied in presumed point-374 of-entry cells, including alveolar type ii cells [27] and hpaec [25, 26] . there are both clinical and 375 laboratory suggestions that the virus may invade many organs containing cell types that co-express 376 ace2 and tmprss2 (heart, gut, kidney, eye), including liver, where we showed down regulation of 377 both ace2 and tmprss2. thus, liver is also a relevant cell in which to study these entry genes. a 378 second objective was to examine whether pb125 could limit systemic plasmin activity by down 379 regulation of plg and/or upregulation of pai-1, both plasma proteins not produced by the cells of 380 the lung. in this case, the liver is the source of plg, and is the appropriate cell type to examine. the 381 source of pai-1 in plasma isn't known, but may be liver or muscle. for the third objective of whether 382 pb125 could down regulate the cytokines identified as participating in the cytokine storm 383 phenomenon, we believe the focus on primary hpaec is appropriate, although a more complete 384 picture would include study of the inflammatory cell types themselves. hpaec generate the 36 385 cytokines we examined, sounding the systemic alarm that recruits inflammatory cells to the infected 386 organ. the type ii alveolar cell has very little capacity for producing cytokines [66] . for studying 387 how an intervention can break the inflammatory cycle leading to a cytokine storm, we believe 388 vascular endothelial cells may be the single most important players. a potential limitation of the 389 study is the use of lps as a surrogate for sars-cov-2 to induce the inflammatory response. 390 we propose that one evolutionary driving force for the nrf2 pathway may have been to provide 391 a failsafe brake for out-of-control inflammatory events. the increase in oxidative stress at the site of 392 an intense inflammatory locus may have been the intended trigger for a system to activate nrf2, 393 allowing it to end the assault at a point where the invader has likely been vanquished but from which 394 the host may be able to survive. in fact, the cadre of genes induced by nrf2 have long been referred 395 to as "survival genes" [3].we have shown that a group of 42 genes linked to respiratory virus infectivity and resistance, or 398 to the associated immune response, are responsive to pharmacological nrf2 activation. it seems 399 possible that the sum total of these multiple antiviral effects may confer a degree of resistance, may 400 attenuate viral replication rate, may alleviate symptoms by limiting microvascular injury, and 401 perhaps allow successful navigation through the "cytokine storm" that is a particular problem with cc-by 4.0 international license (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. it is made available under a the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted june 10, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.16.099788 doi: biorxiv preprintnrf2, is a transcription factor encoded in humans by the nfe2l2 gene. it has been called by 30 many the "master regulator of cellular redox homeostasis" [1], as well as the "guardian of 31 healthspan" and "gatekeeper of species longevity" [2] . nrf2 regulates most of the genes that defends 32 us against oxidative stress, including superoxide dismutases, catalase, numerous peroxidases, and 33 glutathione metabolism, as well as hundreds of genes involved in scores of important metabolic 34 pathways [3] . the individual vulnerabilities of various structural and catalytic gene products to 35 damage or inactivation by reactive oxygen species (ros) may lead to degenerative diseases and 36 metabolic dysfunctions. importantly, nrf2 declines with age [4, 5] and contributes greatly to the 37 "frailty" associated with aging [6] [7] [8] . because nrf2 transcriptionally upregulates genes that combat 38 oxidative stress, its loss allows oxidative stress to go unmitigated and drive the aging phenotype 39 [1, 8, 9] . oxidative stress is therefore a common theme among the key features associated with the 40 aging process, collectively referred to as the "hallmarks of aging", as it disrupts proteostasis [10], 41 alters genomic stability [11] , alters susceptibility to viral and microbial infections [12] , and leads to 42 cell death. it is this age-related frailty [8] that often defines the most vulnerable population in 43 situations such as the one we currently face with the coronavirus pandemic [13] . lee [14] points out that virus-induced modulation 46 of the host antioxidative response has turned out to be a crucial determinant for the progression of 47 several viral diseases. a virus needs to keep oxidative stress at a level optimal for viral 48 reproduction, which is higher than normal, to support the viral metabolism but should not be so high 49 as to kill off the host cell. viruses have evolved mechanisms for manipulating the nrf2 pathway in 50 both directions, depending on the needs of the virus, but importantly taking control away from the 51 host cell. among the types of virus studied are influenza virus, respiratory syncytial virus (rsv), 52 and human metapneumovirus (hmpv) [12, [15] [16] [17] [18] . the phenomenon is also seen in non-respiratory 53 viruses including dengue virus (denv) [19] , rotavirus [20] , herpes simplex virus [21] , zika virus 54 [22] , and hiv [23] , suggesting that regulation of oxidative stress may be a need common to most, if 55 not all viruses, and that nrf2 activators may offer multiple ways to regain control of important 56 pathways to increase resistance and slow viral replication. we recently described a phytochemical 57 composition, pb125, that potently activates nrf2 by controlling multiple steps involved in the process, 58 especially via the akt1/pi3k/gsk3/fyn pathway [24] . 59 the purpose of this study was to evaluate the effects of nrf2 activation via pb125 on human 60 liver-derived hepg2 cells as well as on primary human pulmonary artery endothelial cells (hpaec) 61 in culture. the endothelial cell has been recently implicated as a major player in the tissue 62 destruction caused by covid-19. varga to prevent senescence and de-differentiation. hpaec were seeded at a density of 5 x 10 5 cells per 104 100 mm tissue culture dishes and incubated at 37 o c and 6.5% co2 to 80-90% confluence. all 105 experiments were performed with hpaec at 80-90% confluence. the data are presented as mean ± standard error of the mean (sem). one-way anova with 153 tukey multiple comparisons testing or student's t test for unpaired data were performed using prism 154 software (version 6.0, graphpad software, san diego, ca, usa). statistical significance was set at 155 p value < 0.05.using the elisa assay for il-6, we determined that pretreatment of hpaec with pb125 159 decreased the lps-induced release of il-6 protein from the hpaec cells. in this study, the hpaec 160 cells were plated as described above, then after 24 h they were treated with 5 ug/ml of pb125 extract all six genes differed from control by p < 0.04. the last decade has seen more than 10,000 publications on nrf2 and its involvement in redox 206 homeostasis, inflammation and immunity, neurodegeneration, aging and diseases associated with 207 aging, ischemia-reperfusion injury, and many other areas, but relatively little has been published 208 regarding its roles in viral infectivity and resistance, despite some rather tantalizing studies. kesic [15]. cigarette smoke-exposed nrf2-deficient mice showed higher rates of mortality than did wild- these studies demonstrate the ability of nrf2 to impede viral entry, slow viral replication, reduce 235 inflammation, weight loss, and mortality, but without providing much detailed insight as to which 236 genes and pathways are involved.the first challenge facing a virus, and particularly a virus that is jumping from one host species 238 to another, is gaining entry to the cell. there are some fairly common ports of entry such as ldlr 239 and icam-1 that lead to endosomal entry and which are shared among various viral families [41] .sars-cov-2, however, seems to be largely if not totally restricted to a very specific mode of entry.the unique mode of entry may be the greatest vulnerability for the virus, opening the door to some the upregulation of the cytokine lif, an important antiviral cellular response to viral infection, 296 is shown to be strongly up-regulated by pb125 in figure 2, signaling was shown to be critical for the protection of the lung from injury during [38] .while we have discussed the role of pai-1 in preventing tmprss2 from activating the sars-cov-2 spike protein, mention should also be made of what many would consider its "real job", the how an intervention can break the inflammatory cycle leading to a cytokine storm, we believe 388 vascular endothelial cells may be the single most important players. a potential limitation of the 389 study is the use of lps as a surrogate for sars-cov-2 to induce the inflammatory response. 390 we propose that one evolutionary driving force for the nrf2 pathway may have been to provide 391 a failsafe brake for out-of-control inflammatory events. the increase in oxidative stress at the site of 392 an intense inflammatory locus may have been the intended trigger for a system to activate nrf2, 393 allowing it to end the assault at a point where the invader has likely been vanquished but from which 394 the host may be able to survive. in fact, the cadre of genes induced by nrf2 have long been referred 395 to as "survival genes" [3].we have shown that a group of 42 genes linked to respiratory virus infectivity and resistance, or 398 to the associated immune response, are responsive to pharmacological nrf2 activation. it seems 399 possible that the sum total of these multiple antiviral effects may confer a degree of resistance, may 400 attenuate viral replication rate, may alleviate symptoms by limiting microvascular injury, and 401 perhaps allow successful navigation through the "cytokine storm" that is a particular problem with in late december 2019, a severe coronavirus outbreak emerged in china. it was caused by a novel virus, sars-cov-2 (severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2) from coronoviridae family [1, 2] . the infection quickly spread over the world. the world health organization (who) officially named this infection as covid-19 (coronavirus disease 2019) on february 11th, 2020, and declared covid-19 a pandemic on march 11th, 2020. there are 4,088,848 confirmed cases and 283,153 deaths ascribed to covid-19 worldwide as of may 12th, 2020 (source: who situation report 113). it has a mortality rate around 7%; however, this could be an overestimation since not everyone is being tested for covid-19. the main route of transmission is person-to-person via respiratory droplets [3, 4] . primary prevention strategies such as quarantine, social distancing, and hand hygiene are the main methods to prevent the infection since there has been no vaccine or specific antiviral treatment yet.sars-cov-2 has considerable genetic resemblance (around 80%) with sars-cov virus, which was the causative organism of the 2002 sars (severe acute respiratory syndrome) epidemic [5, 6] . sars-cov-2 has spike proteins on its surface, and using these proteins, it binds to target human cells. the receptor for sars-cov-2 is angiotensinconverting enzyme 2 (ace2) mainly expressed on epithelial cells, renal proximal tubular cells, enterocytes, and endothelial cells [5, 7] . after attachment to ace2, the virus is endocytosed into the cell and interacts with tall-like receptors (tlrs) inside the endosome. this interaction promotes a type i interferon (ifn) response and increases the expression of other proinflammatory cytokines through nuclear factor ĸb (nf-ĸb) [8, 9] .there are two main reactions of the immune system to this virus: an initial innate immune response through type i ifns (described above) and a secondary adaptive immune response, which may lead to cytokine storm. the initial ifn response aims to contain and clear the virus effectively, and an early peak seems crucial for this effective control [10] . the resolution of ifn activity generated during an innate immune response is required for recovery [11] . after the initial ifn response, macrophages are activated through their ifn-α/β receptors and produce chemoattractants and proinflammatory cytokines [12] . another reaction to the virus is the presentation of spike protein antigens to t cells by antigen-presenting cells, which results in the activation of b cells and the production of anti-spike immunoglobulins. when these immunoglobulins bind to spike proteins of the viruses, coated viruses could be internalized into macrophages through fc receptors [13] . these macrophages release proinflammatory cytokines, which may contribute to the cytokine storm in the adaptive phase [13, 14] . the cellular/tissue damage in covid-19 probably occurs in two ways: (1) direct damage by the virus through viral replication and (2) the harmful effects of the exaggerated immune response resulting in a cytokine storm, which means the uncontrolled and excessive release of proinflammatory cytokines [15] . mice and non-human primate studies showed that a disproportionate immune response rather than the virus titer was related to death in sars-cov infection [16, 17] . the infection is mild in most of the affected individuals while it could cause a severe clinical situation, mainly characterized by acute respiratory distress syndrome (ards) and cytokine storm that can lead to mortality [18] . cytokine storm is the result of uncontrolled immune activation which leads to hyperinflammation and multi-organ disease [19] . although everyone is susceptible to being infected by this novel virus, covid-19 affects a specific group of individuals with more severe disease. the main risk groups are elderly patients, smokers, and individuals with chronic diseases such as diabetes mellitus or hypertension [20] [21] [22] .as the pandemic ensues, we observe that children are affected less and most experience a mild form of the disease in case of infection [4, 23] . in the cohort study, including 72,314 covid-19 patients, wu et al. reported that only 2% of the cases were below 19 years of age [24] . we assume that the immunosuppressant patients constituted a primary risk group for covid-19. however, the current data have not conferred immunosuppression as a specific risk factor for severe or fatal disease consistent with the epidemiologic data from the previous coronavirus epidemics, namely sars and mers (middle east respiratory syndrome) [25] .the drugs that are currently being used and tested in covid-19 treatment are mostly the ones used by patients with rheumatic diseases. thus, the rheumatologists participate in the multidisciplinary management of covid-19 patients, as well. on the other hand, immunosuppressants put patients with rheumatic diseases in a vulnerable group in this pandemic. thus, making effective and accurate decisions about management strategies regarding these patients is critical, and these should be based on the currently available scientific evidence as much as possible.this review aims to provide an overview of covid-19 pandemic from pediatric rheumatologist's perspective. the aspects of covid-19 resembling rheumatic diseases, the possible reasons for why children are affected less severely, the hypothetic role of other available vaccines in preventing covid-19, the unique position of patients with rheumatic diseases in this pandemic, the covid-19 patients with rheumatic diseases in the literature, and covid-19 treatment with the drugs used for rheumatic diseases are discussed. also, a systematic literature search was conducted to identify covid-19 patients with rheumatic diseases.the scopus and medline/pubmed databases were searched (from november 1st, 2019 to may 11th, 2020) by entering the following keywords; "coronavirus disease 2019", "covid-19", "sars-cov-2", "rheumatology", and "rheumatic disease" according to the published guidance on narrative reviews [26] . the complete list of the search terms used for determining articles, including covid-19 patients with rheumatic diseases, has been provided in the supplementary table 1 . case reports, original research articles, editorials, and review articles with a focus on covid-19 were analyzed. the following parameters were noted from the studies including covid-19 patients with an underlying rheumatic disease: age, sex, underlying rheumatic disease, age at diagnosis of the rheumatic disease, features associated with rheumatic disease, other comorbidities, the previous and current treatment of rheumatic disease, covid-19-related symptoms, the method for covid-19 diagnosis, covid-19 treatment and outcome, and features regarding cessation and re-initiation of immunosuppressive therapies. the search was restricted to english articles.seventeen articles describing 231 covid-19 patients with rheumatic diseases were found during the literature search ( fig. 1 ) [27] [28] [29] [30] [31] [32] [33] [34] [35] [36] [37] [38] [39] [40] [41] [42] [43] . among these patients, there was only one pediatric patient who was a 6-month-old infant with kawasaki disease and covid-19 [31] . the characteristics of the patients are presented in table 1 . 77.5% of the patients were female (n = 179). the most common underlying rheumatic diseases were systemic lupus erythematosus (sle) (n = 117) and rheumatoid arthritis (ra) (n = 45). nine out of 231 (3.9%) patients died. of note, konig et al. did not report outcomes with regard to mortality in their covid-19 cohort, including 80 sle patients [41] .in addition to these articles presented in the table, four articles reported covid-19 patients with rheumatic diseases [44] [45] [46] [47] . these articles were not included since there were no details about these reported patients. garg et al. presented age-stratified covid-19-associated hospitalization rates of u.s. patients [44] . and in their report, there were three (out of 180) patients who were mentioned to have "rheumatic/autoimmune disease". one of these patients was in the age range of 18-49 years, while two were ≥ 65 years of age. xu et al. mentioned that there were gout patients in their covid-19 cohort, including 187 patients [47] . in their patient experience survey study, sirotich et al. reported that 465 patients with rheumatic diseases had a diagnosis of covid-19 based on symptoms or physician diagnosis with positive laboratory tests [46] . however, no further details were provided about these patients, including their underlying rheumatic diseases. in the cohort of 1317 sars-cov-2 positive patients, gendelman et al. reported that three were on chronic hydroxychloroquine (hcq) and seven were on chronic colchicine treatment [45] . but they did not mention the underlying diseases in these patients.currently, the exact reason why children experience a milder disease remains unknown. several factors could contribute to this situation; however, the specific effects of these factors with regard to covid-19 have not been studied yet:1. children travel less than adults which may be protective [48] . 2. smoking is not an issue in childhood, and the respiratory tracts of children have been exposed to air pollution for a shorter time compared to adults [48] . 3. common comorbidities of adulthood, like type 2 diabetes mellitus or hypertension, are not so frequent among children [9] . 4. the upper respiratory tracts of children are usually colonized with a variety of microorganisms which may compete with sars-cov-2 [49] [50] [51] . 5. in children, the innate immune response is more robust while the adaptive immune system is less educated and immature compared to adults [9, 52] . this may result in a sufficient clearance of the virus and a lack of an exaggerated adaptive response. duret [23] moutsopoulos [27] tomelleri [28] emmi [24] favalli [25] # of cases duret [23] moutsopoulos [27] tomelleri [28] emmi [24] favalli [25] other comorbidities duret [23] moutsopoulos [27] tomelleri [28] emmi [24] favalli [25] covid duret [23] moutsopoulos [27] tomelleri [28] emmi [24] favalli [25] time 6. ace2 expression patterns in children could be different than adults [53] . 7. last, some childhood vaccines may provide a protective effect against covid-19 (discussed in detail below).all of these factors could have a combined overall effect. however, we should keep in mind that children are not immune to covid-19, and although rarely, the disease could be severe and complicated in children, as well [54] . and although the pandemic itself seems to affect children less severely, it endangers the mass vaccination programs of who against polio and measles [55] . this could result in epidemics of preventable infectious diseases, especially among children.another point that deserves mention here is neonates of covid-19-positive mothers. although anecdotal reports exist, there is no direct evidence about the vertical transmission of sars-cov-2 from mother to child [56] . chen et al. detected no virus in amniotic fluid, umbilical cord blood, and breast milk samples from mothers with covid-19 and pharynx swabs of neonates born to mothers with covid-19 [57] .analyzing differences between different risk groups may provide critical clues about the disease pathogenesis. and, we may develop new strategies to fight against this novel foe.covid-19 seems to affect different countries with varying severity. several epidemiological and observational studies are performed, and the results show that differences in childhood vaccination policies may partially describe the difference in covid-19 severity. however, nearly all of these articles are non-peer reviewed, and the results were derived from indirect analyzes of epidemiologic data. thus, these studies are vulnerable to selection bias, and uncontrolled confounding factors might have significantly deviated the results. some of these confounding factors are population age, ethnicity, testing rates for covid-19 infection, the stage of the pandemic in each country, income levels, and major policy decisions (such as quarantine and providing self-protecting equipment like masks). another limiting factor is that it is not possible to dissect the effect of one specific vaccine such as bcg (bacillus calmette-guerin) with these kinds of studies since the associations may also be caused by another vaccine mediating the protective effect. thus, the results of these observational and epidemiologic studies should be evaluated with caution considering all the mentioned points.these studies mainly put forward two vaccines as candidates for reducing the damage caused by covid-19: bcg and mmr (measles, mumps, rubella). it is noteworthy that the below discussed protective effects of childhood vaccines against covid-19 are currently hypothetical, and no scientific proof has been published yet.bacillus calmette-guerin (bcg) is a live attenuated vaccine. it is derived from an isolate of mycobacterium bovis and used as a vaccine for tuberculosis [58] . the epidemiologic analyzes showed that the incidence of covid-19 and the death rate were significantly lower in countries with bcg vaccination programs compared to those without such a program [59] . it is not possible to draw reliable conclusions as of yet. however, previous studies, including randomized controlled trials, have suggested a "nonspecific protection against infections" induced by the bcg vaccine [60] . since mycobacterium is a bacterium while sars-cov-2 is a virus, it is unlikely that a protective effect comes from cross-protection based on similar molecular structures. previous studies have shown two possible mechanisms that explain the nonspecific protection provided by the bcg vaccine [61] : heterologous immunity and trained immunity. heterologous immunity means that cd4 and cd8 memory cells (produced by the bcg vaccine in this situation) could be activated in an antigen-independent manner [62] [63] [64] [65] . this activation could be caused by cytokine stimulation by a secondary infection. it is known that the bcg vaccine induces histone modifications and epigenetic changes in human monocytes at the promoter sites of genes encoding for proinflammatory cytokines such as interleukin 6 (il-6) and tnf-α (tumor necrosis factor) [66] . this causes a more active innate immune response after re-stimulation (trained immunity) [58, 61, 66] , which may contribute to the effective clearance of the virus in case of covid-19. arts et al. have recently shown that bcg vaccination reduced the level of viremia after yellow fever vaccination, and this effect was correlated with the induction of cytokine response [61] . another possible pathway may be through the activation of the ifn-gamma pathway. two studies (nct04328441, nct04327206) are underway to test the nonspecific protective effect of bcg vaccine in covid-19.indirect epidemiologic analyses also suggest a protective role for the mmr vaccine against covid-19 [67] . bianchi et al. demonstrated that a considerable proportion of individuals did not show a protective immunoglobulin g (igg) titer against measles in the 10 years after vaccination [68] . shanker et al. hypothesized that age-related decline in immunogenicity of the measles vaccine could be an explanation for covid-19 being mainly an adult disease if the measles vaccine provides cross-resistance to covid-19 [69] . franklin et al. demonstrated that igg titers against rubella increased in sars-cov-2 infection in some cases, which might suggest a structural homology between rubella and sars-cov-2 [67] . they reported that there was 29% amino acid sequence homology existing between macro-domains of sars-cov-2 and rubella virus and 20% homology between fusion protein of measles virus and spike protein of sars-cov-2. this report is the only evidence supporting these data; however, this is a not-peer reviewed article, and it remains unknown whether this resemblance is enough to cause a cross-reactive immune defense.it will take time for researchers to develop an effective vaccine against covid-19. thus, it is wise to analyze the cross-resistance from other vaccines that are already being used. however, these studies should be designed carefully to control confounding factors. considering all available data, it is too early to conclude on a protective effect from any vaccine at the moment. another point is that it is not possible to predict how fast the immune system will develop a response that will protect against covid-19 (if this exists) after another vaccine such as bcg or mmr vaccines. at the moment, childhood vaccinations should be applied according to the routine vaccination schedules of each country. the recommendations about new vaccination plans could arise with accumulating evidence on cross-protectiveness of other vaccines for covid-19.the main characteristics of covid-19, such as leukopenia, thrombocytopenia, myocarditis, and interstitial pneumonia, could also be observed in rheumatic diseases such as sle and systemic sclerosis [18, 70, 71] . however, the clinically significant features are mainly from the inflammatory characteristics that mimic our diseases in both clinical features and pathogenesis. having common pathways in the pathogenesis highlights some of the drugs that rheumatologists use as candidates for covid-19 treatment.pediatric rheumatologists are very familiar with this entity since a significant portion of some common rheumatic diseases such as systemic juvenile idiopathic arthritis (jia), sle, and kawasaki disease present this complication [72] . this secondary hemophagocytosis is called macrophage activation syndrome (mas) in pediatric rheumatology practice. thus, the experience of rheumatologists was important when we realized that the severe end of the covid-19 clinical spectrum was a multisystem hyperinflammatory syndrome progressing to a cytokine storm with shock. this situation resembles secondary hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis (hlh) or mas. having said that, we should be aware that covid-19-associated cytokine storm is not identical to mas. it shares certain common features such as high ferritin, c-reactive protein (crp), lactate dehydrogenase (ldh), low platelet, and lymphocyte counts [73] . but they also differ in some aspects. for instance, a decrease in the erythrocyte sedimentation rate (esr) is commonly observed in mas [74] . however, this does not seem to be a mandatory feature of covid-19-associated cytokine storm [73, 75] .moreover, zhang et al. reported that patients with severe covid-19 had persistently very high esr [15] . other interesting data come from autopsy findings of sars-covinfected patients, demonstrating that secondary lymphoid tissues were destroyed [76] . this may explain the absence of splenomegaly as a significant feature of covid-19-associated cytokine storm, although it is included as a criterion for diagnosing hlh [77] . there are scarce autopsy data regarding covid-19. in one report of autopsy findings in two patients, barton et al. reported that there was splenomegaly in one patient while they detected remote splenectomy in the other [78] . menter et al. shared the autopsy findings of 21 covid-19 patients, and they mentioned that they did not observe extensive depletion of lymphoid cells [79] . increasing reports about the laboratory values and histopathological features of critically ill covid-19 patients will provide more clues about the similarities and differences between covid-19-associated cytokine storm and secondary hlh/ mas. however, we believe that the experience of pediatric rheumatologists contributed to the management of these severe covid-19 patients: anti-il-1 and anti-il-6 strategies have been employed in the cytokine storm of covid-19 patients in most intensive care units [19] .another similar feature to rheumatic diseases is immune complex vasculitis, which could be observed secondary to occlusion of blood vessels with immune complexes, including spike proteins and anti-spike immunoglobulins [9, 15] . this may represent yet another form of immune complex vasculitis, such as the hepatitis b-related polyarteritis nodosa (pan) with immune complexes containing the hbsag.skin lesions are increasingly reported features of covid-19, and some of these are very similar to the findings of rheumatic diseases. bouaziz et al. reported violaceous macules, livedoid rash, purpura (necrotic and non-necrotic), which are similar to skin manifestations of systemic vasculitis such as severe iga vasculitis (henoch-schönlein purpura) and pan [80] . they also mentioned chill blainlike lesions in their patients similar to the ones observed in interferonopathies like aicardi-goutieres syndrome and savi (sting-associated vasculitis with onset in infancy) [81] . interestingly, chill-blain-like lesions were also found in children and adolescents who were otherwise asymptomatic with regard to covid-19 [82] . this may well be because of the high ifn levels induced by the virus. on the other hand, one wonders whether background levels of high ifn would protect against covid-19 in the children with autoinflammatory interferonopathies such as savi or aicardi goutières syndrome. acro-ischemia was reported in covid-19 patients, as well [83, 84] . this feature is also observed in severe vasculopathies such as deficiency of adenosine deaminase 2 [85, 86] . these vascular lesions could be due to immune complex vasculitis or disseminated intravascular coagulation. positive antiphospholipid antibodies may also contribute to the pathogenesis as recently reported [87] . we need more histopathologic data to understand the exact pathogenesis of these features.another surprising feature of covid-19 was the development of a kawasaki-like disease in children. very recently, riphagen et al. have reported hyperinflammatory shock in eight children with similar features to atypical kawasaki disease, kawasaki disease shock syndrome, or toxic shock syndrome [88] . seven of these patients required mechanical ventilation for cardiovascular stabilization, although no significant respiratory involvement was observed. the initial tests for covid-19 were negative in all. one of these children died after 6 days, and sars-cov-2 was detected postmortem. another child was tested positive for sars-cov-2 after discharge. and, the authors mentioned that positive antibodies were detected afterward in seven children. the coronary arteries were severely dilated in one. c-reactive protein, procalcitonin, ferritin, triglycerides, and d-dimers were elevated in all. of note, the ferritin level was highest in the child who died (4220 ϻg/l while the range was 277-1023 ϻg/l in the rest of the series). the laboratory features observed in this clinical situation are very similar to those seen in kawasaki disease shock syndrome. li et al. previously demonstrated higher levels of crp, procalcitonin, triglycerides, and d-dimers in patients with kawasaki disease shock syndrome compared to patients with only kawasaki disease [89] .finally, covid-19 has been reported to present with large vessel stroke in young patients [90] .there are still no data about the infection rate and course of covid-19 in patients with rheumatic diseases, as mentioned above. although the rheumatology practice mainly focuses on the immunosuppression caused by the disease itself or treatment of the disease, a variety of immune dysregulation besides immune suppression exists in different rheumatic diseases.one group is autoinflammatory recurrent fever syndromes such as familial mediterranean fever (fmf) or cryopyrinassociated periodic syndrome (caps). as we know, pyrin and nlrp3 inflammasomes are overactivated in fmf and caps, respectively [91, 92] . mefv mutations (associated with fmf) were thought to provide an advantage against some infections such as tuberculosis or plague in the mediterranean basin in the past [93] . the findings of the nih (national institute of health) group suggested the idea that individuals carrying an mefv mutation might have a selective advantage against the plague [94] . what will be the effect in covid-19? will these patients eliminate sars-cov-2 more efficiently? or will the overactive inflammasome contribute further to the exaggerated immune response that complicate the disease? we do not know the answers at the moment.caps also raises interesting questions. activation of the nlrp3 inflammasome by sars-cov was observed previously [95, 96] . another microorganism that activates nlrp3 is streptococcus pneumonia [97] . previously, walker et al. observed that pneumococcal vaccines could trigger a severe local and systemic inflammatory reaction in caps patients [98] . they hypothesized that further trigger by pneumococcal polysaccharides to an already over-activated nlrp3 inflammasome might have caused these reactions. this raised concern about the use of these vaccines in caps patients. could the same concern be valid in case of covid-19? since caps is a rare disease, the current data do not let us answer this question either. another confounding factor is that fmf and caps patients are mainly on colchicine and anti-il-1 therapies, which are currently being tested in covid-19 treatment. to date, there is only one report of covid-19 in a patient with caps (who was on anti-il-1 treatment) who experienced a mild disease course and recovered in a couple of days without any treatment [42] .previous data suggest that mutations in the main causative genes of primary hlh (such as gene encoding for perforin) were also associated with secondary hlh/mas [99] . there are also other mutations in other genes such as nlrc4 associated with rare monogenic autoinflammatory diseases causing a tendency to recurrent mas. nlrc4related disease is characterized by early-onset recurrent fever, enterocolitis, and repeated episodes of mas [100] . patients carrying variants of these genes may also be more prone to cytokine storm associated with covid- 19 . future data about the course of covid-19 in the setting of rare monogenic autoinflammatory diseases will provide further insights about the disease pathogenesis.sle is the prototype of the autoimmune diseases. and, the main risk factor seems like the immunosuppressive therapies we use in sle treatment. however, sawalha et al. reported that epigenetic dysregulation in sle resulted in ace2 overexpression, and this might cause a specific tendency to covid-19 in this patient group [101] . another debate in the literature focused on the hypothetical prophylactic effect of hcq, which is used by a majority of sle patients (discussed below).another issue is that most of the debate is on the patients we are already treating with an established diagnosis of a rheumatic disease. in a considerable amount of these patients, there is some degree of disease control, which means a balance between immune dysregulation (autoimmunity/autoinflammation) and immunosuppression/immune modulation (the therapies). the patients with rheumatic diseases who are not diagnosed/treated yet could form another specific vulnerable group for covid-19.last, immunosuppression is a known risk factor for infections. although it did not emerge as a risk factor during the previous coronavirus epidemics (sars and mers) and the situation remains unknown in the current covid-19 pandemic [102] , we still do not have enough evidence. it would be safe to consider these patients risky while taking precautions but not discontinuing immunosuppressive therapies since these are important for disease control. moreover, active disease is a significant risk factor for an increased rate of infections [103, 104] .data gathering through international rheumatology covid-19 registries will provide answers to some questions in our minds. but it is essential not to make any early conclusions about resistance or tendency to covid-19 regarding a specific rheumatic disease or treatment before solid scientific evidence is obtained.the hallmarks of covid-19 treatment are currently antiviral drugs, drugs interfering with viral entry, and immunosuppressive drugs (mainly the ones targeting cytokines). here, we will primarily focus on drugs that are used in rheumatology practice. since an early strong immune response is required for the effective clearance of the virus while the following exaggerated adaptive immune response should be tuned, the timing and the duration of immunosuppressive therapies are very critical.currently, there is no specific antiviral drug against sars-cov-2. however, several broad-spectrum antivirals such as remdesivir and lopinavir/ritonavir have been proposed to be tested in covid-19 treatment.remdesivir is a nucleotide analog and was effective against sars-cov, mers-cov, and bat cov strains [105] . grein et al. reported clinical improvement in 36 (68%) out of 53 patients with severe covid-19 who received at least one dose of remdesivir [106] . and, the mortality rate in this group was lower than the general mortality rate in severe covid-19 (13% versus > 50%, respectively). however, in a recent, randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled study (158 patients in remdesivir group versus 79 in the placebo group), wang et al. reported that remdesivir was not associated with statistically significant clinical benefits although adequately tolerated by the patients [107] . there are ongoing clinical trials on remdesivir use in covid-19 (e.g., nct04280705, nct04315948).lopinavir, a protease inhibitor, has also been tested in covid-19 treatment. it is used combined with ritonavir, which inhibits cyp-3a-mediated metabolism of lopinavir. previous reports showed that lopinavir/ritonavir had improved clinical outcomes in sars and mers patients [108] . in a recent, randomized-controlled trial in hospitalized adult covid-19 patients (99 patients in lopinavir/ ritonavir group versus 100 in standard care group), cao et al. reported that no benefit was associated with lopinavir/ ritonavir treatment beyond standard care [109] . ongoing trials will provide further data regarding the efficacy and safety of lopinavir/ritonavir in covid-19 treatment (e.g., chictr2000029609; nct04261907).nsaids (nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs) are commonly used in rheumatology practice. actually, they may be of benefit to the musculoskeletal symptoms of covid-19 [110] . in pediatric rheumatology practice, nsaids are the primary therapeutic options, especially in the treatment of oligoarticular jia. ibuprofen has been reported to increase ace2 expression [111] . and anecdotal reports exist on a severe disease course in patients using nsaids [112] . however, there is no current evidence for a specific causal association between nsaid use and a more severe disease course in covid-19 [110, 113] . previous studies have also suggested an association between nsaid use and higher rates of complications after respiratory tract infections [114, 115] . currently it is not possible to draw solid, evidencebased conclusion on nsaid use over all.glucocorticoids repress the transcription of proinflammatory genes [116] . they may be used in the management of sepsis and septic shock at small doses and short term [117] . some studies show beneficial effects of glucocorticoids in the treatment of coronavirus (sars and mers) pneumonia [118] [119] [120] . on the other hand, some studies reported more adverse effects with the use of corticosteroids in coronavirus infection [121] . and most recently, tsai et al. have demonstrated that an early corticosteroid treatment was associated with significantly increased hospital mortality in adult patients with influenza-associated ards [122] . regarding covid-19, wu et al. demonstrated that methylprednisolone treatment appeared to decrease the risk of death among patients with acute respiratory distress syndrome [123] . in their retrospective cohort study including 46 covid-19 patients, wang et al. observed that early, lowdose, and short-term application of methylprednisolone was associated with better clinical outcomes while they did not show any significant difference with regard to mortality rate [124] . however, it is not possible to conclude on a positive effect since the data are scarce. at the moment, who recommends against routine glucocorticoid use in covid-19 treatment. randomized controlled trials planned to analyze the effectiveness/safety of glucocorticoid therapy in covid-19 patients (chictr2000029386, nct042273321, nct042244591) will provide better evidence and may enlighten the role of glucocorticoids in covid-19.hydroxychloroquine (hcq), an antimalarial agent, is the mainstay of treatment, especially in sle [125] . being a weak base, hcq accumulates in acidic environments such as lysosomes and endosomes. and, by increasing the ph in endosomes, hcq interferes with tlr-virus interaction [126] . it also interferes with glycosylation of ace2 and maturation process of viral proteins [15, 126] . as a result, it may prevent viral entry and subsequent stimulation of proinflammatory pathways. considering these mechanisms, it appeared as a candidate for both prophylaxis and treatment in covid-19. to assess its prophylactic use, shah et al. systematically reviewed the literature and determined five studies (three in-vitro studies and two clinical opinions) [127] . unfortunately, it is not possible to conclude on a prophylactic effect of hcq based on these data. in the same lines, gendelman et al. did not observe a protective effect of chronic hcq use in their retrospective study, including 1317 covid-19 patients [45] . thus, there is no enough evidence supporting prophylactic use of hcq, and further studies with a randomized controlled design are required.in an open-label non-randomized clinical trial in a small patient group (20 patients and 16 controls), gautret et al. showed that hcq treatment was significantly associated with viral load reduction with more efficient results when azithromycin was added [128] . studies are underway to obtain a better level of evidence (e.g., nct04307693, nct04323631).currently, hcq is used in the treatment of covid-19 in most countries and for prophylaxis in some. however, considering the lack of evidence supporting its prophylactic use and the risk of short supplies for patients who need this drug, prophylactic treatment should not be recommended at this stage. monti et al. reported that 51 out of 80 (64%) covid-19 patients with sle were taking hcq/chloroquine (cq) before infection with sars-cov-2 [34] . moreover, the frequency of hospitalization did not differ with regard to hcq/cq use [34] .hcq is also associated with certain side-effects. retinal toxicity is not a significant concern since it is mainly associated with its long-term use [129] . however, hcq use has previously been associated with qt interval prolongation [130] . besides, azithromycin, which has been used in combination with hcq in covid-19 treatment, is also a drug that can cause qt prolongation [131] . thus, these drugs should be used with caution in the treatment of covid-19. of note, saleh et al. reported that they did not observe torsade de pointes or arrhythmogenic death in their large cohort of covid-19 patients treated with cq (n = 10) or hcq (n = 191) [132] . but they mentioned that qtc interval was significantly longer in the combination group (cq/ hcq + azithromycin) compared to the monotherapy group (cq/hcq only).jak (janus kinase) inhibitors are not used in pediatric rheumatology patients as extensively as they are used in adult rheumatology. but these drugs are currently used in the treatment of jia and autoinflammatory interferonopathies [133, 134] . jak inhibitors have been suggested to interfere with viral entry by inhibiting aak1, which is a key regulator of sars-cov-2 endocytosis (detailed above) [5] . they may also be beneficial by inhibiting the proinflammatory effects of ifns in the exaggerated immune response phase. baricitinib is a selective jak1 and jak2 inhibitor [135] , and it may exert an antiviral effect at the doses used for treatment in ra [136] , emerging as a potential treatment option in covid-19. jak inhibitors may be beneficial at the severe end of the spectrum, where ifn response contributes to the cytokine storm. cameron et al. demonstrated a prominent ifn-α and ifn-γ signaling in deceased sars patients compared to a low ifn-α/γ signaling in patients discharged from hospital [11] . however, the window of opportunity at the early phase is very narrow and difficult to determine since the patient will be asymptomatic at this phase, and the viral entry will be shortly followed with a strong ifn response which is critical for viral clearance.ifns act through jak/stat pathway to increase the expression of ifn response genes, and type i ifns are the primary defense against viral infections [137] . jak inhibitors interfere with antiviral immune response, and increased risk of herpes zoster and simplex infections were previously reported with jak inhibitor use [138] . since the effective containment and clearance of the virus depends on an effective and abrupt type i ifn response, initiation of jak inhibitors at the early phase of covid-19 could interfere with the immune defense. thus, the jury is out for the benefit of these drugs in covid-19.a cytokine storm similar to secondary hlh/mas occurs in some patients with covid-19. huang et al. have demonstrated that serum levels of several proinflammatory cytokines, including il-1, il-6, and tnf-α increased in the hyperinflammatory phase of covid-19 [2] . these data called for the use of drugs targeting cytokines (mainly anti-il-6, anti-il-1, and anti-tnf) as candidates for severe covid-19 treatment.zhou et al. observed that il-6 levels were higher in deceased covid-19 patients than the survivors [21] . other studies also reported elevation of il-6 levels in patients with severe covid-19 [123, 139] . tocilizumab (il-6 receptor monoclonal antibody) use was associated with significant clinical improvement in several observational studies [140] [141] [142] ; however, there were no matched controls treated without tocilizumab in these studies. in their retrospective case-control study (20 patients treated with tocilizumab versus 25 patients treated without tocilizumab), klopfenstein et al. reported that death and/or intensive care unit admissions were higher among patients treated without tocilizumab than those treated with tocilizumab (72% versus 25%, respectively) [143] . sciascia et al. performed a pilot, prospective single-arm study (n = 100), and they reported an improvement in respiratory and laboratory parameters with tocilizumab treatment [144] . moreover, there are a few case reports on the successful use of tocilizumab in the treatment of severe childhood covid-19 [145, 146] . based on these data, anti-il-6 treatment is currently the most studied drug in the treatment of covid-19-associated cytokine storm (nct04322773, nct04317092, nct04320615, nct04306705, nct04324073, nct04315298, chictr2000029765, chictr2000030796).anti-il-1 drugs are also among the most promising therapies in cytokine storm associated with covid-19. in a recent retrospective cohort study, cavalli et al. evaluated anakinra treatment in covid-19 [147] . they compared the outcome between 16 patients who were on only standard treatment (hcq and lopinavir/ritonavir) in addition to mechanic ventilation and 29 patients who were taking highdose intravenous (iv) anakinra in addition to the standard treatment and mechanic ventilation. both overall survival and mechanic ventilation-free survival were more frequent in the high-dose anakinra group than the standard treatment group (90% versus 56% and 72% versus 56%, respectively). there are ongoing trials of anakinra in covid-19 that will probably provide a higher level of evidence for the efficacy of this treatment (nct04324021, nct04330638). anti-il-1 treatment has indeed been suggested by some pediatric rheumatologists to be the first-line treatment [73] .there are also ongoing trials for anti-tnf use in covid-19 (chictr2000030089, chictr2000030580). a combination of different biologic agents may also be considered in selected, very severe cases.in severe cases of secondary hlh/mas, anti-ifn-γ treatment is a critical therapeutic option. there is also an ongoing trial of omapalumab (anti-ifn-γ monoclonal antibody) and anakinra in covid-19 (nct04324021).there are also other registered trials planned to test the efficacy of leflunomid, ecluzimab, and ruxolitinib [148] . the readers are referred to the review by lythgoe et al. summarizing all ongoing trials for the management of covid-19 pandemic [148] .in addition to this trial, it is worth mentioning an openlabel, phase ii trial for colchicine use in covid-19 treatment [149] .convalescent plasma treatment has emerged as a promising option for the control of severe covid-19 in the absence of specific antivirals. it is a strategy of passive immunization based on utilizing the hyperimmune igg antibodies produced by individuals after recovering from covid-19 [150] . in several case series, clinical improvement and reduction in the viral load have been reported [151] [152] [153] [154] [155] . however, there were no matched controls in these studies. thus, the ongoing clinical trials will probably provide a higher level of evidence and data about the efficacy and safety of convalescent plasma therapy in covid-19. we should also be cautious considering the potential severe reactions associated with convalescent plasma use such as anaphylactic reactions or transfusion-related acute lung injury [150] .at the moment, all international rheumatology societies, including acr (american college of rheumatology), eular (european league against rheumatism), and pres (pediatric rheumatology european society) recommend continuation of immunosuppressive treatment in patients with rheumatic diseases. previous studies on sle and ra patients provided data on the increased rate of infections in cases of high disease activity [103, 104] . thus, the primary aim should be an effective disease control in our patients with rheumatic diseases.a considerable amount of rheumatology patients are on drugs that are currently being tested for prophylaxis or treatment of covid-19. and it is difficult to predict the effects of being already on these treatments on infection rate and severity.as discussed above, there is a concern for more severe disease in patients using nsaids. to be on the safe site, nsaids may not be proposed as a primary treatment of rheumatic diseases or may be discontinued if they are not the primary drugs for disease control during covid-19 pandemic. and for pain control, acetaminophen could be selected over nsaids.since hcq is an immunomodulatory rather than immunosuppressive drug, and it probably interferes with viral entry, it might have a protective effect for patients treated with hcq. however, sle patients should not be considered resistant to covid-19. recently, there are increasing reports of covid-19 patients with sle [28, 30, 32, 41] . mathian et al. have reported the clinical picture of the course of covid-19 in sle patients treated with hcq [32] . the authors concluded that hcq does not seem to prevent covid-19, at least its severe forms, in patients with sle since most of the sle patients in this study received long-term treatment with hcq, having blood concentrations of the drug within the therapeutic range. the findings of konig et al. were in the same lines, as mentioned above [41] .the data about glucocorticoid use are also complex and challenging to interpret. as pediatric rheumatologists, we are always aiming to decrease glucocorticoid use and to keep the glucocorticoid dose as low as possible to control disease activity. probably, following the same principle will be logical until we get more evidence.most of the other drugs such as jak inhibitors, anti-il-1, anti-il-6, and anti-tnf agents are immunosuppressives, and these might interfere with the effective clearance of the virus at early phases of the disease. thus, being on these drugs at the early phase of infection could be a disadvantage for rheumatology patients. on the other hand, these drugs might prevent the development of a cytokine storm, making a milder disease course possible. currently, there is not enough data about covid-19 disease course in patients with rheumatic diseases that are treated with biologic drugs (table 1 ). in a survey study from italy, filocamo et al. reported that there was no confirmed covid-19 case among 123 pediatric patients on biologic dmards for chronic rheumatic diseases [156] . current guidelines recommend continuing all immunosuppressive therapies providing disease control, and proper patient education against the virus.during active covid-19, the immunosuppressive therapy was discontinued in most rheumatology patients [29, [32] [33] [34] [35] . another important topic is when to re-initiate these therapies. in the case reports song et al. [35] and mihai et al. [33] , the immunosuppressive therapies were re-initiated 2-4 days after a negative test result for covid-19. in their expert opinion article, sarzi-puttini et al. suggested that these drugs should be re-initiated only after two negative swabs [157] .last but not least, how will our decisions be affected while initiating treatment for the patients that are newly diagnosed with a rheumatic disease during covid-19 pandemic? if possible, it may be recommended to test for sars-cov-2 before initiating biologics as we do for tuberculosis. however, the exact response to this question remains unknown currently. this issue will also be a hot topic when the pandemic is over since we currently do not know about the possibility of latent disease in covid-19.gupta et al. performed a survey among rheumatologists in india to assess the attitudes of physicians while initiating anti-rheumatic therapies during covid-19 pandemic [158] . they observed that almost 60% of the respondents preferred an earlier taper of glucocorticoids during inactive disease. 66.5% of the respondents were more inclined to initiate hq in patients with borderline indications. and, almost half reduced the usage of biologic drugs.covid-19 pandemic has a high mortality rate and a poorer outcome, particularly in elderly patients and individuals with comorbidities. there are very limited data about the infection rate and disease course in patients with rheumatic diseases and almost no data regarding pediatric rheumatology patients. we should continue the medicines that control the disease activity in pediatric rheumatology patients since uncontrolled disease and high disease activity place patients to a higher risk group with regard to infections. having said that one needs to decide on treatment on an individual basis, considering personal risk factors. it is critical not to reach early conclusions about the prophylactic effects of the drugs we currently use in pediatric rheumatology practice. and although the disease mostly has a mild course in children, children are not immune to covid-19, and different clinical manifestations such as kawasaki-like disease are being related to sars-cov-2 infection. we should use the accumulating current scientific evidence and common sense while making decisions about the treatment of our patients and follow the primary prevention principles such as hand hygiene and social distancing.e20_704 2 presently, we need more therapeutic molecules for this covid-19 outbreak. the severity and mortality of the disease is associated with a high level of release of cytokine in the patients which is known as crs (cytokine release syndrome) or cytokine storm syndrome. il-6 is a type of proinflammatory cytokine which release in the severe covid-19 patients. this cytokine initiates crs the jak-stat pathway. tocilizumab, a humanized monoclonal antibody, is designed to bind both mil-6r (membrane bound receptor for il-6) and sil-6r (soluble receptor for il-6) and inhibit the jak-stat signaling pathway. it finally stops the cytokine storm syndrome. however, we need to understand that how tocilizumab is bound with mil-6r or sil-6r. similarly, we also need to understand more about the real molecular mechanism of activity of tocilizumab.key words: tocilizumab, therapeutic option, cytokine storm syndrome, covid-19.since december 2019, a deadly viral disease grasps almost the entire world under its pathogenic effect and threatens its civilization with an impact never seen before. the main cause of this disease has been recognized as a new member of the coronavirus family, namely sars-cov-2 and the disease is popularly known as covid-19. the disease was first reported in wuhan, china and the primary and well-known symptoms of the disease include fever, respiratory distress and inability to breathe spontaneously which ultimately leads to pneumonia (1-3). however, some other symptoms, including different kinds of neurological symptoms (4) and diarrhea could also be considered as clinical signs associated with this disease. moreover, it has been found that the severity and mortality of the disease is closely associated with high levels of cytokine release in the critical patients which ultimately results in crs (cytokine release syndrome) or more popularly known as cytokine storm (5) . there is a strong correlation between theprogress of the disease from severe to very critical and (6) . surprisingly, the association of crs or cytokine storm and high morbidity is not something which is unique to sars-cov-2, it has also been reported in the previous viral infection caused by other coronaviruses, like sars-cov and mers-cov (7). it has also been reported from various previous scientific information's that interleukin-6 (il-6) plays a pivotal role in this kind of elicit immunogenic response. it has been observed that there is a strong involvement of this particular interleukin in inducing crs which correspond to a higher rate of morbidity associated with different viral infections (sars cov and mers cov) and also in some other diseases (8) . the concentrations of serum il-6 in normal condition is very less and tends to increases if there is an infection or injury in the human body. il-6 is a kind of pro-inflammatory cytokine and there are two types of signaling pathways (classical and trans signaling pathway) have been employed by this interleukin molecule to initiate immune response. in the classical pathway, il-6 bind to its receptor i.e. mil-6r (membrane bound receptor for il-6) present in the cell surface of mainly immunogenic cells, and then this complex bind with anther signaling transducer molecule, glycoprotein 130 (gp-130) and this complex in turn transduce the signaling pathway through jak-stat (janus kinases-signal transducer and activator of transcription) pathway (9) , which in turn activate different kinds of inflammatory effects in innate immune system (natural killer (nk) cells, neutrophils and macrophages) and as well as acquired immune system (b and t cells) (10) . but this classical cis signaling pathway is only confined to immunogenic cells, whereas, the il-6 can also activate a huge pro-inflammatory effect via its other alternative signaling pathway, i.e. trans signaling pathway. in this pathway, the interleukin bind with a receptor which is not present in the cell surface, rather it a kind of soluble arch med res e20_704 4 form of the receptor, sil-6r, and forming a complex with gp-130 dimer, possibly present on all the cell surface, specifically different kinds of endothelial cells (11) . so, by this trans signaling pathway il-6 potentially can induce a pro-inflammatory response possibly in every type of cells present in our system and moreover, it has also been reported previously that il-6 is almost secreted by all kind of immune and stromal cells (11) .so, it is imperative to note that, the signaling of il-6 plays an important role in inducing this cytokine storm (both by its classical and trans signaling pathway) in seriously affected covid patients and in order to check or control the deadly effect of this particular interleukin, some molecules should be present or applied to block both of its signaling pathway. one of this molecule, which can act as an effective antagonist to il-6 signaling, is tocilizumab, a humanized monoclonal antibody, specifically designed to bind both mil-6r and sil-6r (soluble receptor for il-6) and can inhibit both classical and trans signaling pathway (figure 1 ). though the underlying molecular mechanism of action of this humanized antibody is still not clear, but it has been reported that this drug plays an important role in betterment of serious covid patients. currently, the efficacy of this particular drug has been tested globally in different laboratories and has also been approved by us-fda for its stage iii clinical trials, but still a lot of scientific exploration is needed to confirm the real molecular mechanism of its activity.no potential conflict of interest was declared by authors. coronavirus, including sars and mers, has caused two large-scale pandemics in the last two decades 1, 2 . although viral evasion of host immune responses and virus-induced cytopathic effects are believed to be critical in disease severity, studies from humans who died of sars and animal models suggested that an excessive and aberrant host cytokine storm resulting in an exuberant immunopathology and lethal disease 9, 10, 11 . inflammatory cytokine storm refers to the immune system gone awry and an excessive inflammatory response flaring out of control. cytokine storms are associated with a wide variety of infectious and noninfectious diseases including graft-versus-host disease, autoimmune disease, severe virus infection, multiple organ dysfunction syndromes and chimeric antigen receptor (car)-t cell therapy 12, 13 . it has been reported that following sars-cov infection, dysregulated cytokine/chemokine responses and higher virus titers cause an inflammatory cytokine storm with lung immunopathological injury 12, 14 . such inflammation associated with the cytokine storm may begin at one local site but further spread throughout the body via the systemic circulation 12, 14 . similarly, patients infected with sars-cov-2, that have been reported recently, have increased plasma concentrations of inflammation related cytokines, including interleukins (il) 2, 7, and 10, granulocyte-colony stimulating factor (g-csf), interferon--inducible protein 10 (ip10), monocyte chemoattractant protein 1 (mcp1), macrophage inflammatory protein 1 alpha (mip1a), and tumour necrosis factor  (tnf-), especially in moribund patients 15 . importantly, covid-19 patients have developed characteristic pulmonary ground glass changes on imaging and peripheral lymphocytes decreasing 14, 16, 17 . more importantly, a large number of inflammatory immune cell infiltrations were also found in a covid-19 patient with pulmonary pathology 7, 8 . these phenomena suggest severe pulmonary inflammation and cytokine storm also exist in sars-cov-2 infection. at present, symptomatic treatments with organ support to moribund patients are the mainstays of clinical managements 17 . it is urgent to identify the immunopathology mechanism to delay the pulmonary immune injury.in patients infected with sars-cov, it has been reported that the severity of pulmonary immune injury correlated with extensive infiltration of neutrophils and macrophages in the lungs 18, 19 , accompanied with increased numbers of neutrophils and monocytes and lower cd8 + and cd4 + t cell counts in the peripheral blood samples 20, 21, 22 . to identify the immune characteristic of patients infected with sars-cov-2, peripheral blood samples from patients with severe pneumonia were collected for immune analysis. consistent with previous clinical characteristics reports 23 2d , e). 41bb (cd137; tnfrs9) is an activation-induced co-stimulatory molecule, which is important to prime immune responses of cytotoxic cd8 + t cells 25 . in icu patients infected with sars-cov-2, the expression of 41bb increased significantly compared to healthy controls ( supplementary fig. 2d, e) . it has been reported that co-expression of tim-3 and pd-1 may represent a subset of t cells with more severe exhaustion in virus infections 26, 27 . it is worth noting that much higher percentage of co-expression tim3 + pd-1 + t subset exist both in cd4 + and cd8 + t cells from covid-19 patients ( supplementary fig. 2f -i), especially in icu patients, suggesting the exhausted status in t cells in these patients infectedto further identify the key pathogenic cytokines and the main source of these cytokines, interferon- (ifn-), tnf-, granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor (gm-csf) and il-6 have been selected to be analyzed through intracellular cytokine staining, for these inflammatory mediators have been proven to be critical as the primary cause of inflammatory cytokine storm in patients infected with sars-cov or mers-cov 28, 29 . without re-stimulation with pma or incubation with monensin, high percentage of gm-csf + and il-6 + expressions could be found in cd4 + t cells from covid-19 patients in both icu and non-icu patients compared to healthy controls (fig. 1a, c) . icu patients with more severe pneumonia showed correlated higher percentage of gm-csf + and il-6 + cd4 + t cells (fig. 1a , c). pathogenic th1 cells with both ifn-γ and gm-csf expression have been reported in central nervous system inflammation 30 . importantly, aberrant pathogenic th1 cells with co-expressing ifn- and gm-csf exist only in icu patients infected sars-cov-2, whereas little was found in non-icu patients and healthy controls, indicating this pathogenic th1 cells which have correlative evidence from patients with severe disease, play a critical role for hyper-inflammatory responses in sars-cov-2 pathogenesis (fig. 1b, d) . meanwhile, tnf- was not significantly up-regulated in cd4 + t cells from covid-19 patients ( supplementary fig. 3a, b) . cd8 + t cells from icu patients also showed higher expression of gm-csf compared to those from non-icu patients and healthy controls. il-6 and tnf- were not found in cd8 + t cells ( supplementary fig. 3c, d) . neither nk cells nor b cells were the secreting source of gm-csf and il-6 ( supplementary fig. 3e-h) .gm-csf has been recently involved in the pathogenesis of inflammatory and autoimmune diseases, in a mechanism that controls diverse pathogenic capabilities of inflammatory myeloid cells. among these myeloid cells, monocyte is the pathogenic gm-csf responsive cells that require gm-csf to initiate tissue damage in both mouse and human 31, 32 . to identify whether inflammatory monocyte exist in covid-19 patients, phenotype and subpopulation of monocytes have been analysis. cd14 + cd16 + inflammatory monocyte subsets seldom exist in healthy controls. by contrast, significantly higher percentage of cd14 + cd16 + inflammatory monocyte exists in peripheral blood of covid-19 patients. the percentage of cd14 + cd16 + monocyte was much higher in severe pulmonary syndrome patients from icu ( fig. 2a, c) .moreover, these monocyte from covid-19 patients also showed capability to secrete gm-csf. importantly, significantly higher expression of il-6 secreted from these inflammatory monocyte especially in icu patients, which let the inflammatory storm even worse (fig. 2b, d) . meanwhile, the number of gm-csf + monocytes and il-6 + monocytes increased rapidly (fig. 2e) , suggesting the potential high risk of inflammatory cytokine storm caused by monocytes that may migrate to the lung and further develop into macrophage or monocyte derived dendritic cells. thus, in covid-19 patients, gm-csf potentially links the severe pulmonary syndrome-initiating capacity of pathogenic th1 cells (gm-csf + ifn- + ) with the inflammatory signature of monocytes (cd14 + cd16 + with high expression of il-6) and their progeny. these activated immune cells may enter the pulmonary circulation in large numbers and played an immune damaging role in severe pulmonary syndrome patients (fig.   3 ).the study provides the detailed immunopathology report on sars-cov-2, suggesting excessive activated immune response caused by pathogenic gm-csf + th1 cells and inflammatory cd14 + cd16 + monocytes may connect pulmonary immunopathology leading to deleterious clinical manifestations and even acute mortality after sars-cov-2 infections.consistent with the situation with sars-cov or mers-cov 14, 33 , it is remarkable that children always experience mild-moderate clinical illness, elderly individuals exhibit worse outcomes after infection with sars-cov-2, further indicating that mature excessive immune response towards these pathogenic human coronavirus infections play a key role in inducing severe pulmonary syndrome and even organ failure. specific new drugs targeted sars-cov-2 may take a long time to evaluate and develop. at this critical moment, several marketed drugs to target inflammatory storm and reduce immunopathology could be considered 34 . tocilizumab, that can specifically bind both membrane bound il-6 receptor and soluble il-6 receptor and inhibit signal transduction, is the first il-6 blocking antibody approved for marketing and have proved its safety and effectiveness in therapy for rheumatoid arthritis 35 . in order to verify whether targeted il-6 receptor and inflammatory signals, may potentially be the right way to save severe covid-19 patients, we further launched the clinical trial using tocilizumab to block the interleukin 6 receptor (chictr2000029765).these severe patients recruited right now have inspiring clinical results including quickly decreased temperature and respiratory function improved. many urgent questions remain to be answered. evidence from alveolar washing fluid and organs autopsy from covid-19 patients are further needed to verify whether and how these aberrant pathogenic immune cells play a fatal immune damage to cause organ functional disability and mortality.for details, see supplementary data.supplementary data are available at nsr online. representative density plots showing an analysis of gm-csf and il-6 expressions in gated cd45 + cd14 + monocyte cells isolated from peripheral blood in healthy controls, in icu and non-icu patients of covid-19. (c) statistics calculated by the percentage of cd14 + cd16 + subsets from monocytes. (d) statistics calculated by the percentage of gm-csf + or il-6 + cells from cd14 + monocytes. (e) statistics calculated by the cell number of gm-csf + cd14 + or il-6 + cd14 + monocytes. data represent the mean ± sem. one-way anova. p<0.05 was considered statistically significant.pathogenic cd4 + th1 (gm-csf + ifn- + ) cells were rapidly activated to produce gm-csf and other inflammatory cytokines to form a cascade signature of inflammatory monocytes (cd14 + cd16 + with high expression of il-6) and their progeny. these activated immune cells may enter the pulmonary circulation in large numbers and played an immune damaging role in severe pulmonary syndrome patients. the monoclonal antibodies that targets the gm-csf or interleukin 6 receptor may potentially prevent or curb immunopathology caused by covid-19.the coronavirus disease 2019 (covid-19) broke out throughout the world now. the total number of deaths has been over 88900 up to now. the patients with confirmed covid-19 progressed to acute respiratory distress syndrome (ards) rapidly in an incident rate as high as 41.8% 1 , and many of them require mechanic ventilation. in a cohort of an intensive care unit (icu) from italy, 1287 cases need respiratory support, and among them, 88% of patients (1150 cases) had to be supported with mechanical ventilation 2 . apart from the desperate lacking of ventilator all over the world, mechanical ventilation could also cause barotrauma and ventilator-associated lung injury.cytokine storm has been disclosed as the main pathological characteristic of covid-19 3 , and it is also the direct pathogenic contributor to induce ards. cytokines could be eliminated effectively by extracorporeal blood purification (ebp) 4 , which thus could interrupt the initiation and progression of inflammation cascade in the scenario of covid-19.accordingly, there may be a chance of avoiding incubation and mechanical ventilation. herein, we report a case of severe sars-cov-2 infection with cytokine storm, who was completely recovered from cytokine storm using extracorporeal blood purification.a 62-year-old male presented to the hospital with 8-day history of fever and 6-day history of cough and chest distress. the patient had a history of gallstone. he got fever on day 1 (february 14, 2020) and had chill, headache, muscle soreness, fatigue, nausea, cough, and chest distress and shortness of breath on day 3. then, he was quarantined in a hotel. being tested positive j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f for sars-cov-2 on day 5, he received oseltamivir, moxifloxacin and lianhua qingwen capsule (chinese medicine) in the outpatient.he was admitted to the hospital with fever, cough and mild chest distress on day 9. arbidol, hydroxychloroquine, oseltamivir, and lianhua qingwen capsule were administered. supplemental oxygen was delivered by nasal cannula at 2 l/min. alterations in hepatic function were showed: levels of alanine aminotransferase (81 u/l, normal range: 9-50 u/l) and aspartate aminotransferase (94 u/l, normal range: 15-40 u/l) were elevated, and cd3 and cd4 cell counts were markedly decreased (supplemental table) on day 10. chest ct indicated multiple ground-glass opacities in bilateral lungs on day 11 (supplemental figure 1 . a-c). the peak of temperature was 38.5°c up to date. his vital signs remained clinically stable except oxygen saturation was 97% while providing oxygen at 3 l/min. il-6 (198.66 pg/ml) was almost 10 folds of normal range (≤5.9 pg/ml) which indicated an initiation of cytokine storm on day 12 ( figure 1 ). the ebp, including double plasma molecular adsorption system (bs330 and ha330ii, jafron, china) and plasma exchange (2000 ml each), was thus applied to remove the cytokines on day 13. the bs330 and ha330ii were installed in series after the plasma separator (ec-4w, asahi) with a blood flow velocity of 80-100 ml/min and a separating speed of 20-25ml/min, and the duration of the treatments was 6 hours. the plasma exchange was then conducted. intravenous methylprednisolone (40 mg daily) was used to suppress the inflammation reaction. the patient was largely stable until the chest distress exacerbated and blood in phlegm developed on day 14. he then progressed to type i respiratory failure (partial pressure of oxygen 51 mmhg, partial pressure of carbon dioxide 32 mmhg) with 89% oxygen saturation while the oxygen flow was 3 l/min. high-flow oxygen (40 l/min) was initiated to keep the oxygen saturation values between 96-99%. hydroxychloroquine was discontinued due to a long qt interval. the ebp therapy continued on days 14 and 15 respectively.the patient was transferred into icu on day 15. given the acute inflammatory reaction, methylprednisolone was improved to 60 mg twice daily, and piperacillin-tazobactam (4.5 g administered intravenously every 8 hours) was initiated concerning about the hospital-acquired pneumonia. acetylcysteine was used to dilute the phlegm. the human serum albumin and other supportive care were also administered. the clinical condition of the patient was improved on day 16 and was stable j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f thereafter, and his hepatic function was back to normal as well. the body temperature returned to normal on day 17. the igm of anti-sars-cov-2 was identified (77.11 au/ml, normal value <10 au/ml) at the same day. methylprednisolone was gradually reduced and discontinued on day 23. the lesions on chest ct was confined on day 17 and further alleviated on day 21 and almost disappeared on day 33 (supplemental figure 1) . low flow rate of oxygen (2 l/min) was delivered instead of high-flow oxygen on day 26 then discontinued on day 36. he was asymptomatic at rest and had no shortness of breath while doing activity training. his renal function was unaffected and immunoglobulin levels including igg, igm, iga and ige were normal throughout the clinical course. complement c3 level was staying below the normal range (0.9-1.8 g/l) during the hospital duration (supplemental table 1 ). c4 level (<0.06 g/l, normal range: 0.1-0.4 g/l) was reduced at day 16 and was back to normal (0.15 g/l) on day 31. the nucleic acid testing of sars-cov-2 was negative in four different times. he was discharged on day 38.the management of covid-19 in critical cases is still challenging nowadays. respiratory and circulation supports, such as mechanic ventilation and extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ecmo), were almost the last defense for severe covid-19 5 . although specific methods to intervene the progression of critical cases are unknown, the effects of ebp in treatment of covid-19 associated cytokine storm have not been emphasized. the outcome of the present case of covid-19 with ards is promising. pulmonary fibrosis was not observed up to date.ebp was suggested to interrupt the inflammation cascade and stop the progression of cytokine storm in this case. there were obvious peak levels of cytokines and bent over after the initiation of ebp on day 13. ha330 improved oxygenation and lung mechanics by removing circulating and alveolar cytokine levels 6 , and bs330 adsorbed bilirubin so as to attenuate liver injury 7 .the ebp that combined the double plasma molecular adsorption system and plasma exchange can directly reduce the cytokines. although methylprednisolone was also administered synchronously, it has been identified that the significant time point of il-6 reduce was the seventh day rather than the first three days in ards 8 pathogenesis of covid 19 infection is a subject of active research. however, no effective therapy has yet been developed for this disease caused by the sars cov 2 coronavirus. initially, sars cov 2 infects upper respiratory tract epithelial cells. if the infection is limited to these cells, the disease usually manifests mild symp toms. severe pneumonia can develop when the virus enters alveoli of the lungs and infects type ii pneumo cytes. the infection inhibits interferon response while upregulates expression of chemokines attracting immune cells (monocytes, b and t lymphocytes) [1] . excessive extravasation of these cells from the vessels into the alve oli is considered the main cause of pathogenic changes in the lungs, leading to the development of respiratory fail ure and acute respiratory distress syndrome (ards) [2] .in severe cases of covid 19 infection, the virus can enter bloodstream and infect endothelial and other target cells in kidneys, esophagus, bladder, ileum, heart tissues, and central nervous system. the endogenous "damage associated molecular patterns, damps" released from the dead cells additionally activate immune cells and sup port development of the cytokine storm. thus, in severe forms of covid 19 infection multiple organ failure asso ciated with hyperactivation of the immune system is observed. patients with covid 19 infection in critical condition often have high systemic inflammatory param eters, including levels of c reactive protein and cytokines il 6, tnfα, il 8, etc. [3 5] .increased generation of reactive oxygen species (ros) by immune cells and oxidative stress [6] inevitably accompanies the cytokine storm. inflammatory cytokines and ros act together, activating pulmonary epithelial and endothelial cells. this leads to disassembly of cell contacts, increased permeability, and influx of edematous fluid into alveoli resulting in an impaired gas exchange in the lungs. in addition, cytokine storm and oxidative stress lead to ros dependent apoptosis of endothelial cells [7] , which contributes to the release of coagulation factors and clot formation [8] .corticosteroids and inflammatory cascade inhibitors based on monoclonal antibodies are currently used for the treatment of the cytokine storm in covid 19 infec tion: tocilizumab (anti il 6), secukinumab (anti il 17a), canakinumab (anti il 1β), ruksolitinib phosphate biochemistry (moscow) vol. 85 no. 7 2020 (jak kinase inhibitor), etc. [4] . use of corticosteroids for treatment of covid 19 infection showed noticeable constraints related primarily to the suppression of specif ic immunity and an increased risk of secondary bacterial pneumonia [9, 10] . limitations of the monoclonal anti body therapy include their narrowly targeted action at only one of the many inflammatory cytokines. thus, it is extremely important to develop new approaches to pre vent cytokine storm during the covid 19 infection.the transcription factor nrf2 (nuclear factor ery throid 2 related factor 2) is responsible for adaptation of cells under electrophilic or oxidative stresses. under nor mal condition, nrf2 is located in the cytoplasm bound to its inhibitor keap1, which targets nrf2 for ubiquitination and subsequent degradation. in the presence of elec trophiles or ros, the keap1 nrf2 complex dissociates and nrf2 migrates to the nucleus, where it stimulates transcription of the target genes with antioxidant response element sequences in their promoters [11] . nrf2 controls expression of the genes participating in antioxi dant response, redox homeostasis, biogenesis of mito chondria, etc. activation of these genes protects cells from inflammation [12] . nrf2 stimulates expression of hemoxygenase (ho 1), which is responsible for degrada tion of the pro inflammatory free heme and formation of the anti inflammatory compounds -co and bilirubin. nrf2 also upregulates production of the antioxidant enzyme nad(p)h: quinone oxidoreductase (nqo1), as well as of the key enzymes of glutathione biosynthesis, which functions as the main cellular antioxidant. nrf2 knockout mice suffer from an uncontrolled inflammatory reaction involving activation of innate immune cells, increased production of cytokines, chemokines, and ros. all these factors contribute to cell and tissue dam age [13] .nrf2 activation results in suppression of inflamma tion not only through the antioxidant response, but also through the nrf2 transcriptional repressor activity. in human macrophages, nrf2 inhibits expression of the inflammatory cytokines il 1β, il 6, and tnfα [14] . it was shown in numerous animal inflammatory models that nrf2 inducers decreased circulating levels of proinflam matory cytokines [12, 15 17] . protective role of the nrf2 activation in numerous inflammatory processes was also demonstrated for airway epithelium and vascular endothelium [18 22 ]. dozens of clinical trials are cur rently underway to test the efficacy of nrf2 inducers for prevention and treatment of inflammatory and respirato ry diseases.the main facts and observations justifying feasibility of the nrf2 activation in treatment of covid 19 infec tion are summarized below:1. excessive inflammation in covid 19 infection is associated with high lethality [3] . activation of nrf2 reduces inflammatory response preventing expression of the inflammatory cytokines [14] and activation of the macrophage inflammasomes [23, 24] . nrf2 inducers also reduce inflammatory reactions in patients with acute and chronic diseases [25] .2. ards is the main mortality factor in covid 19 patients [26] . activation of nrf2 protects airway epitheli um from disassembly of the intracellular tight junctions during inflammatory exposure and subsequent develop ment of ards [27] .3. an impaired vascular permeability is a key event in the covid 19 pathogenesis leading to endothelial dys function and thrombosis [28] . induction of nrf2 protects vascular endothelium from damage caused by the oxida tive stress or inflammatory cytokines [29] .4. severe cases of covid 19 are accompanied by an increased oxidative stress [30] . there are some cases of successful treatment of covid 19 with glutathione [31] . key enzymes of glutathione biosynthesis are controlled by nrf2 [32] . the decrease of nrf2 activity promotes oxidative stress, and nrf2 activation increases glutathione content in the body and restores redox balance in the organism [33] .5. age is an important risk factor for severe covid 19 infection [34] . nrf2 activity decreases with age [33] .6. hyperglycemia is another risk factor in covid 19 infection [34] . nrf2 activity is reduced in patients with hyperglycemia [35] .7. mortality and severity of covid 19 infection is higher in men compared to women [34] . sexual differ ences in nrf2 activity in humans are unknown, but female mice have higher nrf2 activity compared to males [36] .so far, no attempts have been made to investigate nrf2 inducers as the therapeutic drugs that reduce oxida tive stress and inflammation in infections caused by sars cov 2. this task can be solved by repurposing of the drugs or drug candidates that are able to activate nrf2 response. a wide range of compounds can be used to acti vate nrf2, including the following:1. sulforaphane is a plant derived compound found in cruciferous plants such as broccoli and brussels sprouts. the effect of sulforaphane on reducing circulato ry inflammatory cytokines has been demonstrated in many animal models [37] . currently, about 70 clinical tri als with sulforaphane are conducted targeting chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, asthma, arthritis, cancer, and others. sulforaphane is well tolerated orally in daily doses up to 200 μmol, reaching therapeutic plasma con centrations [38] .2. dimethyl fumarate is a dimethyl ester of fumaric acid. in the usa it has been approved by the fda for treatment of recurrent multiple sclerosis (trade name tecfidera), and in germany for psoriasis (trade name fumaderm). interestingly, dimethyl fumarate reduces biochemistry (moscow) vol. 85 no. 7 2020 inflammatory reactions in both nrf2 dependent [39] and nrf2 independent ways [40, 41] .3. sodium thiosulfate is a drug used intravenously and orally. it is a safe substance used to treat various intoxications. sodium thiosulfate is a hydrogen sulfide (h 2 s) donor, which is a nrf2 inducer. hydrogen sulfide maintains redox balance of the cells and has an anti inflammatory property [42] . the compounds releasing h 2 s have anti inflammatory and antiviral activities against a wide range of pathogenic viruses [43] . a review paper has recently been published justifying the use of inhaled form of sodium thiosulphate for patients with covid 19 infection [44] . 4 . epigallocatechin 3 gallate is a polyphenol found in green tea. this non toxic compound displays an anti inflammatory activity both in vitro and in vivo [45] . in addition, epigallocatechin 3 gallate is an inhibitor of furin -a protease that processes sars cov 2 s protein and facilitates virus penetration into the cell [ 46 48 ].5. resveratrol is a plant polyphenol. resveratrol acti vates nrf2 by decreasing the expression of its negative regulator keap1 and activates sirt1 deacetylase [49] . oral administration of resveratrol leads to the decrease in the levels of inflammatory cytokines (il 1β and tnf) and activation of the expression of nrf2 target genes (nqo1 and glutathione s transferase) [50] . resveratrol enhances synthesis of endogenous glutathione and pro tects alveolar epithelial cells from oxidative stress [51] .these drugs are mainly used to treat chronic rather than acute inflammatory conditions. therapeutic effica cy of these nrf2 inducers is unknown for the cytokine storm and ards. potentially, nrf2 inducers can be used to prevent cytokine storm or during its manifestation in combination with already used anti inflammatory drugs.for most of the proposed drugs toxicity and bioavail ability are already known, which allows for a quick start of the relevant clinical trials. to reduce oxidative stress and inflammation in covid 19 infection, it seems reason able to use nrf2 inducers together with glutathione biosynthesis precursors, e.g., n acetylcysteine. this ther apy can be used to reduce damage to cells and tissues, to prevent respiratory failure, and ards.funding. this work received no financial support.patients with sars-cov-2 infections experience lymphopenia and inflammatory cytokine storms in the severe stage of the disease, leading to multi-organ damage. the exact pattern of immune system changes and their condition during the disease process is unclear. the available knowledge has indicated that the nf-kappa-b pathway, which is induced by several mediators, has a significant role in cytokine storm through the various mechanisms. therefore, identifying the state of the immune cells and the dominant mechanisms for the production of cytokines incorporated in the cytokine storm can be a sars-cov-2 is a new member of the beta coronavirus. its structural proteins consist of a spike (s), envelope (e), nucleocapsid (n), and membrane protein (m). among them, s glycoprotein on the surface of the virus plays a significant role in adhesion and entry to host cells. s proteins bind to the angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ace2) receptor on the host cell surface [1] . when the virus enters host cells by endocytosis, translation of proteins and replication of rna occurred in the cytoplasm of these cells through the golgi apparatus and endoplasmic reticulum system. then, with an attachment of vesicle containing viral particles to the cell membrane [2] , the virus released and activated antigen-presenting cells (apc), which consequently stimulated humoral and cellular immunity systems as well as mitogen-activated protein kinase (mapk) pathway and nfkappa-b signaling pathway, which regulated gene expression and altered immune cell differentiation [3] . the result is pro-inflammatory cytokines release [4] , unfolded protein production, and er stress induction [5] .patients with sars-cov-2 infections, which declared as covid-19 will probably develop different stages of the disease from asymptomatic to the mild stage with headache, fatigue, fever, and diarrhea, as well as the severe stage with an excessive decrease in lymphocyte count and failure of some vital organs frequently lungs [6] . the exact pattern of immune system changes and their condition during the disease process is unclear [7] .diabetes mellitus (dm) is defined as abnormal glucose metabolisms and insulin functions.it is well recognized as the result of a relative or absolute defect in insulin secretion and variable degrees of systemic insulin resistance. the most common form of the dm is type two, a heterogeneous complication, attributed to insulin resistance, with obesity, oxidative stress, and low-grade chronic inflammation as a background [8, 9] .insulin is an anabolic hormone secreted by beta cells of the pancreas. it is responsible for glycemic control by facilitating glucose utilization, regulating nutrient hemostasis, and stimulating gene expression, cell survival, and development. metabolic actions of insulin have exerted differently in three primary target tissues. with additional negative regulation of hormone-sensitive lipase activity, insulin leads to a decrease in free fatty acid efflux from adipose tissues [10] [11] [12] . in the lack of insulin sensitivity, blood, glucose elevated, the anabolic action of insulin reduced, the end products become glycosylated, and oxidative stress increased. insulin starts its function by binding to the extracellular alphasubunit of insulin receptors (insr) at targeted tissues, which induces intracellular betasubunit autophosphorylation.further, it acted like the trigger of several intracellular signaling cascades through the downstream tyrosine phosphorylation of insulin receptor substrates (irs1-4) leading to activate the phosphatidylinositol 3 kinase (pi3k), growth factor receptor-binding protein 2 (grb2), and mapk signaling pathways [11, 12] . the pi3k pathway activated several serine/threonine kinases, like protein kinase b (pkb is also known as akt) [13] . it largely contributed to insulin metabolic actions, including glucose hemostasis, lipid and protein synthesis, as well as an anti-inflammatory response. akt proteins are the major investigated serine/threonine kinases involving in insulin resistance, which has realized that akt2 activation is reduced in adipocytes and skeletal muscle in dm type two, leading to a higher inflammatory condition. mapk pathway, another intracellular signal, is responsible for gene expression and affects the cell development and inflammatory cascades by intervening in the pi3k-akt pathway. in certain conditions, mapk can act as a serine protease of irs and interfere with insulin signaling through an inappropriate activation [11] .insulin resistance and obesity are the major features of dm type two denoted as an insufficient response of targeted tissues to insulin [14] . the exact mechanism of insulin resistance is not yet determined, but the insidious role of inflammation underlying obesity, insulin resistance, and dm suggested by several studies [13] . understanding the hypoglycemic effect of salicylate, an anti-inflammatory agent, via the inhibition of the inhibitor of nuclear factor kappa-b kinase (ikk), is the origin of such studies [13, 15] . subsequent researches have further highlighted the positive relationship between inflammation and insulin resistance. they have also identified obesity as an essential factor in the development of insulin resistance and dm type two [13] . the downregulation of insulin receptors has seen in obesity leading to decrease insulin sensitivity [10] . irs1 is a common mediator which attributed to insulin signaling dysregulation [12] . reduced levels of irs1 are also associated with insulin resistance, and hyperinsulinemia can reduce the irs expression by negative transcription regulating [16] . suppressors of cytokine signaling (socs) are inflammatory proteins overwhelming irs. inflammation activates the socs1 and socs3, which induce ubiquitination, and finally disintegration of irs proteins [12, 17] . activation of the insulin receptor stimulates tyrosine phosphorylation of irs1, directing the signal transduction, while the two major inflammatory pathways inhibit signal propagation by serine kinase activity [12] . as previously mentioned, the nfkappa-b pathway plays a crucial role in an inflammatory response, silenced by nf-kappa-b inhibitor (i-kappa-b) in resting cells and can fulminate by serine phosphorylation activity of ikk on i-kappa-b, results in i-kappa-b degradation, in inflammatory condition [13, 15] .ikk subset signaling has a close association with obesity and metabolic disorders [15] . c-jun nh(2)-terminal kinase (jnk1) is another serine kinase that involves inflammatory signals through the jnk/ap-1 pathways, which also regulates the nf-kappa-b process [12, 13] .in docking analysis of cd26 and covid-19 s glycoprotein conducted by vankadari et al., a significant interaction between the proteins was found [18] . dpp4 or cd26 is the main receptor for mers-cov, which caused the transmission of various species and humans [19] .in recent years, the role of dpp4 in chronic inflammation has been proved. dpp4 or cd26 is a glycoprotein on the cell surface with 110-kda molecular weight [20] . dpp4 activity has been shown in mice, rats, and humans and is present in the kidney, intestine, lungs, liver, lymph node, thymus, prostate, spleen, monocytes, epithelial cell, and lymphocyte [21] . macrophages, natural killer (nk) cells, b cells, and t cells express the dpp4 protein.this protein is multifunctional and involved in cytokine production, dna synthesis, signaling activation, and cell proliferation [20] . interferons upregulate the expression of dpp4. il12 and tumor necrosis factor (tnf)-alpha are involved in the dpp4 translation and translocation. cd26 has a role in regulating the migration and maturation of cd4 + tcell, antibody production, cytokine secretion, and immunoglobulin class switching. but the exact role of this protein in immune cells is not clear. cd26 + t cells have a strong ability to migrate via endothelial cells [22] .dpp4 can also interact with caveolin-1 on apc, an integral protein on the membrane of smooth muscle cells, macrophages, and endothelial cells. dpp4 and caveolin-1 interaction lead to carma1-lipid rafts. carma1 belongs to the maguk family (caspase recruitment domain 11-containing membrane-associated kinase) whose role is the regulation of nf-kappa-b activation in lymphocytes [20] . the dimerization of cd26 is essential for its binding to carma1. the interaction of carma1-dimeric cd26 is via the cytoplasmic tail of the second one. this binding of apc to cd26 causes caveolin-1 phosphorylation and interleukin-1 receptor-associated serine/threonine kinase 1 (irak-1) and toll-interacting protein (tollip) dissociation from caveolin-1 [22] . both irak-1 and tollip are involved in the toll-like receptor (tlr) signaling pathway [20] . afterward, the phosphorylation of irak-1 is occurred, and activates nf-kappa-b [22] . this activation may cause tnf-alpha secretion and, consequently, jnk activation. parallel, nf-kappa-b activation induces m1 macrophage and then, different interleukins secretion, including il1, il6, and il12 (fig. 1) [22] . likewise, the secretion of tnf-alpha caused by nfkappa-b during the inflammation activates dpp4, which causes the migration and maturation of cd4 + t-cell, especially th1, th17, and cytokine secretion. dpp4 probably also has a role in the induction of hypoxia-inducible factor-1 (hif-1) alpha [22] , which exaggerates the inflammation (fig. 1) .so, dpp4 has a different role in the immune system, such as inflammation-related disease, immune responses, and t cell activation. it also enhances inflammation through the tlr pathway. dpp4 inhibitors like sitagliptin affect adipocytes and macrophages as an anti-inflammatory agent [23] . the inhibition of dpp4 reduces inflammation intensity in different states [24] .the severe stage of the covid-19 is associated with lymphopenia and inflammatory cytokine storm, which caused multi-organ damage [7] . therefore, identification of the state of the immune cells and the dominant mechanisms for the production of cytokines that incorporate in the cytokine storm can be an important step in the therapeutic approach. some studies identified that diabetic patients are at a higher risk for covid-19 infections [25] . due to that, dpp4 expressed on the different cell surfaces, dpp4inhibitors, in addition to the anti-diabetic effect, can inhibit t cell proliferation and production of pro-inflammatory cytokines and reduce the severity of inflammation.sitagliptin is a dpp4 inhibitor that can reduce inflammatory response [26] . interestingly, the docking studies have also suggested an additional association of dpp4 with s glycoproteins of the new coronavirus [18] . in addition to the fact that the inflammatory mediators are active in individuals with covid-19 and blocking the predominant pathway could be beneficial, the present hypothesis suggests a new therapeutic approach by linking the covid-19 pathogenesis with diabetes and potential sitagliptin mechanisms at the molecular levels.apcs like dendritic cells present viral antigens to t cells and play a significant role in the immunity system that leads to the production of cytokines and activation of cd8 + t cells. the innate immune system includes macrophage, dendritic cells, neutrophils, and t cells that express pattern recognition receptors (prrs) like tlr for detecting viral and microbial compartments [4, 19] . dysregulation of the immune system like inflammatory cytokine storm and lymphopenia has been confirmed in the severity of coronaviruses [27] .however, inflammation is a proper biological response to pathogens, and the inflammatory responses can also act as a double aged sword in infection conditions [28] .in covid-19 infection, changes in the immune system can cause deregulation in the immune system and higher expression of inflammatory pathways, especially nf-kappa-b that induces the further production of pro-inflammatory cytokines via the different mechanisms leading to the cytokine storms. increased pro-inflammatory cytokines level in the lungs prevents proper function of lungs and possibly causes lung failure [19, 29] .the stimulus of inflammation initiated by receptors activation and then developed within the intracellular signaling like the nf-kappa-b pathway. i-kappa-b protein is an inhibitor of nf-kappa-b activation presenting in the cytoplasm under the physiological state.whereas in the inflammatory condition, prrs activates ikk, an inhibitor kinas of i-kappa-b, leads to the i-kappa-b degradation and eventually causes the translocation of nfkappa-b to the nucleus to induce transcription of inflammatory genes [30] . activation of nf-kappa-b signaling is responsible for the induction of the naïve t cell activation and proliferation, which leads to the induction of chemokine expression, and additionally, the inflammatory effect of different innate immune cells and tcr (t cell receptor) signaling [31] . the pro-inflammatory effect of nf-kappa-b on macrophage was extremely studied.activated macrophages have different phenotypes, including m2 (activated alternatively) and m1 macrophage. m2 phenotype can produce anti-inflammatory cytokines like il10 and il13, but the m1 form produces inflammatory cytokines like il1, il1beta, il 6, il12, tnf-alpha, and il8 and involve in different inflammatory conditions [32] . il6 is a proinflammatory cytokine that triggers the nf-kappa-b pathway and allows it to translocate, transcript, and finally, release inflammatory mediators [20] . the nf-kappa-b pathway is an essential transcription factor for the induction of the m1 phenotype of macrophage and essential for the expression of pro-inflammatory genes that encode il1beta, il6, tnfalpha, cyclooxygenase two, and il12 [33] . nf-kappa-b induces differentiation of inflammatory t cells to consist of th1 and th17 that mediate inflammatory response and involved in different autoimmune diseases and inflammatory conditions. th1 secretes interferon-gamma (ifn-gamma), which contributes to inflammatory processes. nfkappa-b promotes secretion of cytokines by affecting the tcr signaling, which increases the differentiation of th1 cells [34] . th17 secrete il17, which recruits neutrophils and monocytes to the site of inflammation. the aberrant activation of the nf-kappa-b pathway stimulates tlr to produce il6, which induce th17 differentiation and increase the production of ifn-gamma and il1beta with t cells [31, 34] . as mentioned above, tlrs are the members of the prps group that involved in the activation of inflammatory processes. tlrs signaling activates the intracellular signaling processes and leads to the nf-kappa-b translocation to the nucleus [35] . patients with covid-19 have multi-organ damages like liver, heart and kidney disorders, and acute respiratory distress syndrome monocyte chemo attract protein-1 (mcp1) compared to non-icu patients [27] . it has been clear that sever cases of covid-19 patients with higher neutrophil/lymphocyte had a higher level of inflammatory cytokines like il6, il1, but a lower account of cd4+t cells level compared to covid-19 patients with a lower ratio of neutrophil/lymphocyte [36] . in the peripheral blood of covid-19-patients, the number of lymphocytes decreased, but they are in the excessive activated status. in this condition, activated cd8 + t cells have a higher expression level of cd44, cd69, and cd38, but activated cd4 + t cells have a higher level than healthy control individuals [3, 37] .as a presence of low-grade chronic inflammation in diabetes, the nf-kappa-b pathway is almost always excited. elevated nf-kappa-b pathway expression in diabetes affects the immune system in such patients. diabetic patients could also suffer from high levels of th1 and th17, which can explode the inflammatory cascade in an uncontrolled manner [3] . activation of the innate immune system in adipose tissue has been suggested in connection with inflammation, obesity, and diabetes [38] . weight gain causes adipose tissue remodeling and expansion with inadequate supporting of vasculature leading to higher oxygen supply and, consequently, trigger cellular hif-1 to promote inflammation state [12] . as a part of inflammation state, adipokines may alter, where mcp1, mip, il8, il6, il1beta, and tnf-alpha are increased, as well as, adiponectin and il10 are less secreted [38, 39] . these higher factors will activate adipose tissue macrophages and t cells, leading to the release of more pro-inflammatory chemokine to attract other immune cells [40, 41] . various evidence has indicated that adipose tissue macrophages play a major role and confront inflammation in the metabolic organs. it is also determined that predominantly anti-inflammatory m2-type macrophages are transformed into proinflammatory m1-macrophages in the obese population [13, 42] . ikk plays a vital role in both obesity and metabolic disorders and is also involved in interferon signaling, which is essential for fighting with viral infections [15] . enhanced production of ifn-gamma in adipose and hepatic tissue may also cause insulin resistance contributing to the switch from m2 macrophages to the m1 phenotype [42] . free fatty acids are also able to promote nf-kappa-b by tlr2/4 activation leading m1-subset to overcome [12, 15] . one of the most co-existing complications of diabetes is obesity-induced insulin resistance. it has a major role in ongoing inflammation, via the macrophage switching to m1 type, the release of various cytokine; especially, il6 and tnf-alpha, increase th1 and th17 cells, stimulation of tlr2/4 and finally activation of ikk (fig. 1) . macrophages can also exert their inflammatory responses via jnk-1 signaling, an important component of obesityinduced insulin resistance [12] . pro-inflammatory cytokines such as tnf-alpha and il6, disturb the insulin action, which consequently leads to systemic and local insulin resistance [43] . tnf-alpha impairs insulin function by irs1 tyrosine phosphorylation blockade in adipose and muscle tissue [44] .generally, it has been reported that patients with dm are more susceptible to viral infections, and covid-19 is no exception [45] . there are various reasons why diabetic patients are more likely to develop covid-19 symptoms and progress to more complications. patients with dm have shown to have increased receptor expression, more virus entry, impaired immunity response, decreased phagocytic activity, reduced viral elimination, dysregulated inflammatory cytokines, and higher susceptibility to hyperinflammatory states. accordingly, a closer look at each of these mechanisms could reveal a way to treat covid-19 not only in the diabetic population but for all patients.diabetes has been associated with a higher risk of sars-cov-2 infection and complications, and new clinical challenges exhibited in controlling of the covid-19 in diabetes [46, 47] . epidemiological documentations have declared severe clinical manifestation and more complications in patients with covid-19 and co-morbid diabetes [25] . the chronic state of low-grade inflammation and increased formation of glycosylated end products and oxidative reactive stress may contribute to the enhanced susceptibility of individuals with diabetes. one of the suggesting sites of intervention between diabetes and covid-19 is ikk with a particular relative role on nf-kappa-b signaling, as well as simultaneously association with insulin resistance and viral infection combat. chronic expression of ikk in diabetes shows the double burden of diabetes and viral infections [15] . although there is a basal inflammatory activity among the diabetic hosts, the strong clinical evidence has supported delayed and dysregulated inflammatory signals followed by impaired immune responses. aligned with inflammation, ace2 expression, and furin level, the two important binding mediators who mediate the virus entry and initiate viral pathogenesis, have been augmented in diabetic hosts [46, 47] . the altered glucose metabolism and oxidative stress have directly impaired phagocytic activity of neutrophils and macrophages [48] . together with defective apc recruitment and function, the initiation of adaptive immunity delayed in diabetic populations. a unique cytokine profile in the diabetic state also modifies the acquired immunity through both arms. in t-cell subset, cd4+ th1, th17, and cd8 + cytotoxic t cells (ctl) are up-regulated, whereas cd4+ th2 and regulatory t (treg) cells are diminished [48, 49] . treg cells have an important role in immunological tolerance. the cd4 involved in the auto-reactive t cells suppression and in vivo studies showed that they prevented the progression of diabetes [50] . diabetes also delays the b-cells activation, which may have considerable regulatory effects on the other functional immune response [48] .insert fig. 1 herethe bold role of dpp4 in different disorders like inflammation, cancer, immune disease, and diabetes put dpp4 inhibitors in the spotlight [22] . on the other hand, the parallel analysis of covid-19 and diabetes mellitus pathogenesis has proposed that the control of the inflammation through the interfering with the critical points of major signaling pathways may provide the new therapeutic approaches. sitagliptin is a dpp4-inhibitor, a class of oral diabetic agents for treating diabetes mellitus type two [51] . they are in the market since 2006. patients with uncontrolled diabetes mellitus and coronary artery disease, who consumed sitagliptin, had a better inflammatory state [21] . dpp4 inhibitors may have the anti-inflammatory effect independent of their effect on glp-1 level. dpp4inhibitors are supposed to decrease the expression of cd26 on the immune cell surface, which led to the inhibition of innate immune system activity. some data suggest that the positive role of dpp4 inhibitors like sitagliptin in controlling the inflammation is due to the increase of glp-1.on the other hand, some studies believe that dpp4 inhibitors adjust the activity of the innate immune system and t-cell activation and act as an anti-inflammatory agent [20] .alogliptin, a dpp4 inhibitor, inhibited the inflammation mediated by macrophage due to the presence of lps in u937 cells in nga et al. study [52] . sitagliptin reduces the inflammation mostly by affecting on nf-kappa-b signaling pathway [53] . it also decreases apoptosis wholly, partially suppresses il1beta and il6 levels [20] , and inhibits tnf-alpha secretion dose-dependently in vitro [21] . makdissi tlr4 leads to nf-kappa-b suppression. besides, the plasma concentration of il6 and creactive protein decreased in week four and two, respectively [24] .covid-19 is becoming a global health threat due to being highly contagious and is leading to mortality rates. covid-19 patients who reached the late sever stages developed the remarkable lymphocytopenia, and inflammatory cytokine storm, which caused multi-organ damage. pathogenesis of sars-cov-2 infection shows an immune system dysregulation with the major role of a well-known inflammatory pathway, nfkappa-b. the nf-kappa-b involves the defective cycle, which induces inappropriate cd4+t cell differentiation, and more inflammatory signals, that causes the systemic inflammatory condition and various organs to be involved with pro-inflammatory cytokines and consecutively lead to cytokine storm. on the other hand, diabetes mellitus is a metabolic disorder closely associated with obesity and insulin resistance. it has been revealed that the inflammatory process has an ambiguous role in diabetes onset and development. it is considering the fact that diabetic patients are more likely to contract covid-19 infection. signaling analysis of diabetes-inflammation linkage indicates the persistent nf-kappa-b activity and low grade chronic inflammatory state among the diabetic population.as the control of the inflammation is an important step in both covid-19 and diabetes mellitus treatment, modulating the macrophage transformation and t cell differentiation via the suppression of dpp4, tnf-alpha, and tlr2/4 are parallel approaches which are added to the direct nf-kappa-b suppression. due to the different role of dpp4 in the immune system, such as inflammation-related disease, immune responses, and t cell activation, especially th1 and th17, which have an inflammatory effect, dpp4 inhibitors are considered useful. as discussed, this drug class can meet all of the above antiinflammatory goals owning to their effects on the immune system. the drug inhibitory effect on various interleukins and cytokines such as il6, il1beta, and tnf-alpha, has been approved in different in vitro/in vivo studies. the recent evidence of sars-cov-2 docking analysis, which has interestingly shown the interaction of s glycoprotein and dpp4 receptors, magnifies the dpp4 inhibitors' role more than before. sitagliptin decreases the inflammation via suppressing main inducers and different characters in the nf-kappa-b signaling pathway. hence, dpp4 inhibitors like sitagliptin should be a good candidate for controlling the inflammation.the authors declare no conflicts of interest.of global disease burden (johns hopkins university -https://coronavirus.jhu.edu/map.html) is over 1.5 million infections and 85,000 deaths worldwide. social distancing in cities and countries around the world remains the only means available to limit the impact of virus transmission. at the same time, an unprecedented response from the world's biomedical research community seeks to identify treatments for covid-19 that include antiviral drug and vaccine development.current clinical observations indicate that sars-cov2 infection can range from an inapparent non-symptomatic infection, to a respiratory illness presenting with spiking fever and dry cough, accompanied by a high rate of human-human transmission. one of the most serious complications of corona virus disease (covid-2) is the development of an atypical upper respiratory tract pneumonia that poses a major challenge to clinicians in terms of disease management. an abnormal and uncontrolled production of cytokines has been observed in critically ill patients with covid-19 pneumonia 1 and the ensuing uncontrolled cytokine storm in covid-19 patients is centrally involved in the exacerbation of symptoms and disease development, and represents a major factor contributing to covid-19 mortality. in this sense, covid-19 disease shares similarities with other viral diseases such as sars, mers and influenza, where the development of a cytokine storm is a warning sign of disease escalation.in support of the above observations, a retrospective study of 41 patients with covid-19 2 showed that most sars-cov-2 infected patients present clinically with mild symptoms, while a minority of patients progressively declined from the infection and eventually died of acute respiratory distress syndrome (ards) and multiple organ dysfunction syndrome (mod). guidelines for the diagnosis and treatment of sars-cov-2 infected pneumonia were first published on january 30 th 2020, and recommended for the first time that cytokine monitoring be applied to improve the curative rate and reduce mortality 3 . in view of the severe morbidity and mortality of covid-19 pneumonia, here we review the current understanding of treatment of human coronavirus infections from the perspective of a dysregulated immune response.the emerging and re-emerging viruses (ebola, zika, chikungunya, h1n1, dengue, sars, mers) have led to numerous global public health crises in recent years and continue to threaten public health and security. unfortunately, these viruses are often difficult to control due to the lack of approved antiviral drugs and vaccines. in addition to sars-cov2, two other novel coronaviruses have emerged as global health threats since 2002, namely severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus (sars-cov in 2002) that was transmitted to 37 countries, and the middle east respiratory syndrome coronavirus (mers-cov in 2012) that was transmitted to 27 countries. severe pneumonia caused by pathogenic human coronaviruses (hcov) are often associated with induced hypercytokinemia, also termed cytokine storm, in immunocompetent individuals; uncontrolled overproduction of inflammatory cytokines contributes to acute lung injury and acute respiratory distress syndrome (ards).the secretion of multiple cytokines, also termed cytokine release syndrome (crs), is closely j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f related to development of clinical symptoms; for example, ifn-γ can cause fever, chills, headaches, dizziness, and fatigue; tnf-α can cause flu-like symptoms similar to ifn-γ, with fever, general malaise, and fatigue, but can also cause vascular leakage, cardiomyopathy, lung injury, and acute-phase protein synthesis 4 . il-6, which is an important target in crs induced by adoptive cell therapy, can lead to vascular leakage, activation of complement and the coagulation cascade, leading to the characteristic symptoms of severe crs, such as diffuse intravascular coagulation (dic) 5, 6 . it is noteworthy that il-6 is likely to cause cardiomyopathy by promoting myocardial dysfunction, which is often observed in patients with crs 7 . in addition, activation of endothelial cells may also be one of the hallmarks of severe crs. endothelial dysfunction can lead to capillary leakage, hypotension, and coagulopathy 8 ( figure 1 ). taken together, these studies argue that the virus-induced immunopathological events play a crucial role in the fatal pneumonia observed after hcov infections 9 .the development of a cytokine storm is a potentially fatal immune condition characterized by rapid proliferation and hyperactivation of t cells, macrophages, natural killer cells and the overproduction of more than 150 inflammatory cytokines and chemical mediators released by immune or nonimmune cells 10, 11 . in viral infections, the aberrant release of pro-inflammatory factors leads to lung epithelial and endothelial cell apoptosis which damages the lung microvascular and alveolar epithelial cell barrier, leading to vascular leakage, alveolar edema and hypoxia. the uncontrolled production of pro-inflammatory factors, containing il-6, il-8, il-1β, and gm-csf, and chemokines such as ccl2, ccl-5, ip-10, and ccl3, together with reactive oxygen species cause ards leading to pulmonary fibrosis and death 12 .in sars-cov infected patients, high levels of serum pro-inflammatory cytokines (ifn-γ, il-1, il-6, il-12, and tgfβ) and chemokines (ccl2, cxcl10, cxcl9, and il-8) were detected in cases of severe disease compared to patients with uncomplicated sars 13 . in mers infection, high levels of serum pro-inflammatory cytokines (il-6 and ifn-α) and chemokines (il-8, cxcl-10, and ccl5) were likewise observed in severe disease, compared to mild or moderate disease 14 . in contrast to sars and mers, doctors in wuhan central south hospital found that the levels of il2, il7, il10, gscf, ip10, mcp1, mip1a and tnf α were significantly elevated in the blood of severely ill patients, compared to patients with mild illness 2 . the level of il-6 in the blood of the severe group was 76% higher than that of the mild group (30%) 15 . furthermore, histological examination and biopsy samples obtained from a patient who died from severe sars-cov-2 infection showed an increased concentration of highly proinflammatory ccr4+ccr6+ th17+ cd4 t cells, suggesting that t cell hyperactivation contributesdin part to the severe immune injury in this patient 16 . pulmonary examination in other patients with early phase sars-cov-2 pneumonia also revealed patchy inflammatory cell infiltration; however, the pathological results in early stage of sars-cov2 pneumonia require further confirmation 17 . in short, aberrant release of multiple cytokines appears to trigger a cytokine storm that produces immunopathogenic damage to tissues and organs, even while the immune response seeks to suppress and eradicate the virus (figure 1 ).j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o fin view of the above observations, therapeutic strategies to treat the cytokine storm in the pathogenesis of severe covid-19 pneumonia deserve special attention. in accordance with current who guidance 18 , supportive therapy remains the most important management strategy for this pneumonia, including supplemental oxygen therapy, conservative fluid management and empiric antimicrobial application in the time of need. it is noteworthy that the use of glucocorticoids remains controversial. current who guidance recommends that corticosteroids should not be used in sars-cov2-induced lung injury or shock, except in the setting of a clinical trial. however, in clinical settings, front-line physicians in china tend to use corticosteroids prudently at a low to moderate dosage in patients with sars-cov2 infection 19 .in the period of sars epidemic (2002) (2003) , corticosteroids were generally used by clinicians for immunomodulatory treatment, and according to clinical feedback, could bring early beneficial changes including a decline in fever, resolution of radiographic lung infiltrates, and the improvement of oxygenation 20, 21 . however, further studies indicated opposite clinical outcomes and a systematic review in sars, mers and influenza infections indicated no survival benefit and possible harm (avascular necrosis, psychosis, diabetes, delayed viral clearance and secondary infections) with corticosteroids 22 . in our opinion, the use of corticosteroids is not recommended for patients with hcov infections, although corticosteroids may be used prudently in critically ill patients.in the treatment of patients with sars-cov-2 infection, clinicians should pay close attention to the impact immune inflammatory factor release, and several effective cytokine storm blockers and therapeutic methods have been reported. in the clinical process of covid-19 pneumonia, there is window period between the diagnosis and the occurrence of mods (about 5-7 days). after this window, the majority of patients tend to improve (~80%), whereas ~20% of the patients progress to severe pneumonia, with ~ 2% mortality 23,24 , 2 . to improve the prognosis, we suggest that patients with covid-19 pneumonia be given immunotherapy treatment at the time of diagnosis, in order to block the possibility of a subsequent cytokine storm. the early use of immunological intervention in the evaluation of patients with mods may reduce mortality in the most severe patients. ( figure  2 , position 2).one strategy that has received considerable attention in the face of covid-19 is the use of convalescent plasma, also called passive antibody therapy, to treat patients with advanced disease. the treatment uses plasma from a patient who has survived covid-19 infection to provide neutralizing antibodies against the virus; the antibodies are available and active immediately, but only for a limited time. as an example of one study, five patients critically ill with covid-19 and on mechanical ventilation received convalescent plasma 10 to 22 days after being admitted to a hospital in shenzhen, china. all patients improved; three were discharged after 50 days in hospital, while the other two patients were in stable condition. well controlled clinical evaluation of this strategy is currently ongoing in light of such positive anecdotal responses.another potential treatment involves the use of anti-il-6 monoclonal antibody (siltuximab) (johnson & johnson) which was used previously to treat the consequences of cytokine storm following by car-t cell therapy for cancer. interleukin-6 (il-6) has become a key point in some crs. originally described as b-cell differentiation factor-2 (bsf-2) and macrophage and granulocyte induction factor-2 (mgi-2), il-6 has significant pro-inflammatory and pyrogenic properties, and given chronic overproduction in covid-19 patients, anti-il-6 monoclonal antibody may be beneficial in controlling cytokine release. also il-17 inhibitor (secukinumab) (novartis) was used as specific treatment for severe patients with covid-19 pneumonia 25 to control th17 cell activation. an additional observation indicated that the expression levels of cd4 + t and cd8 + t were low, while il-6 levels were high in patients with severe pneumonia, suggesting that t cell subsets and cytokine levels could be used as one predictor of the transition from mild to severe pneumonia 15 .pegylated and non-pegylated interferons (ifn) have been under intensive study for some time. however, in the case of hcov infection, the results of ifn therapy were mixed, as predicted by animal and human hcov infection models. early application of ifn was slightly beneficial to reduce viral load and improve clinical outcome. however, delayed ifn administration was of no benefitscompared with the placebo group. early application of ifn and ribavirin moderately improved disease severity without affecting mortality 26 . the use of sifalimumab monoclonal antibody, produced against multiple ifn subtypes (medimmune) has not been examined clinically but could hold promise in situations of constitutive ifn production.the early use of ifn had some beneficial effects in sars-cov-infected animal model, although the timing of ifn treatment was crucial in determining the course of disease. the use of ifn-αβ receptor inhibitors or antagonists could be considered as an approach to avoid excessive inflammatory reactions in late stage severe hcov infection 27 . since sars-cov and mers-cov infect mainly airway epithelial cells and ifn-λ stimulates antiviral gene expression in these cells without over-stimulating the immune system, ifn-λ might be a option in the therapy of hcov infection.oxidized phospholipids (oxpl) have been demonstrated to promote acute lung injury by increasing the production of cytokines/chemokines from lung macrophages via tlr4-trif signaling in influenza a virus (iav)-infected mice 28 . in a recent study, therapeutic administration of the tlr4 antagonist eritoran protected mice from lethal iav infection by decreasing the levels of oxpl and inflammatory cytokines/chemokines 29 . because pathogenic human coronaviruses can cause acute lung injury and promote the production of oxpl in the lungs, the strategies of oxpl suppression by using eritoran (boc sciences) or other similar compounds may have value in controlling hcov induced inflammation.signal transduction by the sphingosine-1-phosphate receptor 1 (s1p1) in mouse endothelial cells j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f nfected with influenza a virus has been shown to contribute to the pathogenesis of inflammation responses 30 . targeted s1p1 antagonism inhibited the recruitment of inflammatory cells, limited proinflammatory cytokine/chemokine release, and reduced mortality and morbidity induced by influenza a virus 31 . s1p1 antagonism may be considered a potential therapy in hcov-infected individuals to limit cytokine responses.the results of studies in animal models have borne out claims that imms paly pathogenic roles in the process of fatal hcov infections. in the mice cardiac inflammation model, the systemic administration of optimized lipid nanoparticles including ccr2-silenced small interfering rna (sirna) can effectively degrade ccr2 mrna and destroy the imm recruitment in the inflammatory site, thus improving the outcome of the disease 32 . because hcovs are single-chain rna viruses and tlr7 agonist r837 (a synthetic single-chain rna analog) stimulates imms which causes exuberant inflammatory response. therefore, imm specific tlr-7 signal may promote the excessive inflammatory response caused by hcov infection. therefore, a tlr7 antagonist targeted approach to alleviate inflammation reaction could be useful.continuous renal replacement therapy (crrt) may benefit severe patients by removing potentially harmful components and maintaining haemodynamic and metabolic status. in addition to the conventional aim of maintaining renal function, crrt can be used to regulate the immune response of patients with sepsis, with the goal to regulate circulating levels of inflammatory cytokine mediators, as shown in studies demonstrating removal of inflammatory mediators containing cytokines and complement (tnfα, il-1β, il-6, il-8, complement factors c3a, c5a, and d) by crrt 35 . at present, there is a need for well-designed clinical trial to evaluate the efficacy of such a treatment regimen.after covid-19 infection, some patients develop systemic inflammatory response syndrome (sirs) and mods characterized by the uncontrolled release of inflammatory mediators, giving rise to a cytokine storm that contributes to increased mortality in ards. in summary, further experimentations is required to understand the changes in the immune response of patients with covid-19 infection and the mechanisms of abnormal cytokine expression in covid-19 pneumonia. accurate prediction and targeted intervention during the course of covid-19 pneumonia will be essential to improve patient survival (figure 2 ).a summary of the process of onset sars-cov2 pathogenesis with potential treatment options against the virus-induced cytokine storm.j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f 2 the pathogenesis of a covid-19 respiratory infection, in a major way, is related to what is referred to as the cytokine storm [cytokine storm syndrome (css, hypercytokinemia, etc.], i.e., it is a hyper-inflammatory response. during this response, an explosive production of proinflammatory cytokines such as tnf-α il-1β, and others occurs, greatly exaggerating the generation of molecule-damaging reactive oxygen species (free radicals) (1) . in severe cases, the cytokine storm is responsible for the most obvious signs of a covid-19 infection including fever, lung injury which causes cough and shortness of breath (and the long-term complication, lung fibrosis) and in death.a causative factor related to the hyper-inflammatory state of immune cells is their ability to dramatically change their metabolism. similar to cancer cells in many solid tumors, immune cells such as macrophages/monocytes under inflammatory conditions abandon mitochondrial oxidative phosphorylation for atp production in favor of cytosolic aerobic glycolysis (also known as the warburg effect) (2) . this switch is driven by the transcription factor hif-1α (hypoxia inducible factor-1α) and the serine/threonine kinase, mtor (mammalian target of rapamycin) and other proteins the change to aerobic glycolysis allows immune cells to become highly phagocytic, accelerate atp production, intensify their oxidative burst and to provide the abundant metabolic precursors required for enhanced cellular proliferation and increased synthesis and release of cytokines (fig. 1) .a number of drugs have been proposed as treatments to prevent or reduce the severity of a covid-19 infection. one agent that has been suggested to be potentially useful in this regard is the endogenously synthesized molecule, melatonin (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) . melatonin was initially discovered in and thought to be exclusively a product of the vertebrate pineal gland. however, in consideration of the identification of melatonin in prokaryotic bacteria (8) , from which j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f 3 mitochondria evolved (the endosymbiotic theory) and the uncommonly high levels of assayable melatonin in mitochondria (9) , it was speculated and eventually documented that this indoleamine is synthesized in this organelle (10) . given that most cells (a few exceptions) contain mitochondria, it is now believed that melatonin production occurs in most cells in all organisms. this has also been specifically demonstrated in human lung monocytes/macrophages (11) .in healthy cells, including macrophages, melatonin synthesis in mitochondria is maintained by the entrance of pyruvate, a glucose metabolite, into the mitochondria where it is metabolized to acetyl-coenzyme a by the enzyme, pyruvate dehydrogenase complex (pdc).acetyl-coenzyme a feeds the citric acid cycle and supports atp synthesis, but it is also a required co-factor/substrate for the rate limiting enzyme in melatonin synthesis, arylalkylamine n-acetyltransferase (aanat) (fig. 1) . thus, when mitochondria adopt aerobic glycolysis, pyruvate in mitochondria is no longer converted to acetyl-coenzyme a because pdc is inhibited by the enzyme pyruvate dehydrogenase kinase (pdk); therefore, as a consequence of a covid-19 infection the macrophage mitochondria cannot synthesize melatonin (12) .because of melatonin's potent antioxidant and anti-inflammatory activities, it would normally reduce the highly proinflammatory cytokine storm and neutralize the generated free radicals thereby preserving cellular integrity and preventing lung damage. in the absence of acetyl-coenzyme a, mitochondrial melatonin is no longer available to combat the inflammatory response or to neutralize the generated reactive oxygen species and the massive damage that occurs in the respiratory tree resulting in the primary signs of covid-19 disease. importantly, endogenous melatonin production diminishes markedly with age especially in frail older aerobic glycolysis is an important feature of highly proinflammatory state since it ensures the necessary high levels of atp and the abundant supply of biomolecules to ensure synthesis and release of the damaging molecules that constitute the cytokine storm. this increased aerobic glycolysis coupled with the absence of locally-produced melatonin provides the optimal environment (the perfect "cytokine storm") for the massive tissue damage that occurs in covid-19 disease.given the above information, the use of supplemental melatonin as a treatment to overcome a covid-19 infection is justified. exogenously administered melatonin reverses aerobic glycolysis by repressing both hif-1α and mtor thereby disinhibiting pdc activity and allowing acetyl-coenzyme a synthesis which also ensures locally-produced melatonin production (13) . the functionally re-instated mitochondria-generated melatonin in combination with the parenteral melatonin provides a formidable weapon to reduce the cytokine storm as well as its damaging consequences thereby relieving the signs of a covid-19 infection.the anti-inflammatory and antioxidant actions of melatonin in protecting the lungs from damage in many experimental models that involve inflammation or oxidative stress (or both) is well documented (14) . moreover, melatonin has anti-viral actions against viruses other than covid-19 (15, 16). the collective data, in addition to its very high safety profile, indicate that melatonin would be effective as a treatment for covid-19 and support the recommendation of the published reports that encourage its use for this purpose (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) . melatonin is inexpensive, non-toxic over a very wide dose range, has a long shelf-life and can be self-administered which fig. 1 this figure illustrates the differential glucose metabolism in a healthy macrophage and in a covid-19-activated macrophage. in a healthy macrophage, pyruvate, a glucose metabolite, enters the mitochondria where it is enzymatically converted to acetyl-coenzyme a by the enzyme pyruvate dehydrogenase complex (pdc). acetyl-coenzyme a feeds the tricarboxylic acid cycle (tca) and supports oxidative phosphorylation (oxphos). additionally, acetylcoenzyme a is an essential co-factor/substrate for the rate limiting enzyme in melatonin synthesis, arylalkylamine n-acetyltransferase (aanat). this allows for melatonin to be regularly produced in healthy macrophages; melatonin functions intracellularly and is released into the cellular microenvironment, but not into the blood. in covid-19-activated mitochondria, via hif-1α, mtor, etc., the enzyme pyruvate dehydrogenase kinase (pdk) is strongly upregulated and inhibits pdc (red x). thus, acetyl-coenzyme a is not synthesized and mitochondrial oxphos falters with atp synthesis occurring in the cytosol via aerobic glycolysis (warburg effect). similarly, mitochondrial melatonin production is shut down so the cell is deprived of an essential antioxidant, anti-inflammatory agent and of an immune-enhancer so the elevated synthesis of proinflammatory cytokines goes uncontested and the cytokine storm is a result. 5-ht = serotonin; asmt = acetylserotonin methyltransferase; coa = coenzyme a; imm = inner mitochondrial membrane; hif-1α= hypoxia inducible factor-1α; mtor = mammalian target of rapamycin; nas = n-acetylserotonin; omm = outer mitochondrial membrane; ppp = pentose phosphate pathway. figure 1 coronavirus disease 2019 (covid-19) has now infected over 2 million people worldwide, with a death toll of more than 125,000 people. emerging risk factors for poor outcomes in this disease include age, male sex, and cardiovascular comorbidities, including hypertension, prior cardiovascular disease, diabetes, and, more recently, obesity (1) . the centers for disease control and prevention (atlanta, georgia) has now reported a threefold increase in death in new orleans compared with new york, and speculation has grown as to whether these worrying mortality statistics might in part be attributable to higher levels of morbid obesity (2) . in this paper, we develop a theoretical framework that describes why individuals with obesity may be at increased risk of poor outcomes compared with counterparts without obesity (3) . we propose a mechanism for adverse consequences of virus seeding to adipose tissue (at), with potential for prolonged viral shedding and extended cytokine activation in a voluminous and richly vascularized organ that is already perturbed in a metabolic and inflammatory sense in human individuals with obesity (4). we present a rationale for testing this concept in patients with covid-19 through prospective studies of individuals with and without obesity with accessible at and plasma to determine whether or not an inflammatory and cytokine signature presages a systemic cytokine storm and clinical decline.obesity was not specifically reported in the initial cohort studies of covid-19 from wuhan, china (5), but regional epidemiological data from the united states suggests that at least 25% of patients who die of this disease have obesity, which is similar to reported rates of cardiovascular disease in the same high-risk group (21%) (6) . more recently, a small retrospective study of 85 individuals with covid-19 identified obesity as a risk factor for admission to the intensive care unit, with patients requiring increased medical attention (3) . moreover, in the influenza a subtype h1n1 pandemic, obesity was also strongly associated with a worse disease outcome and death (7) . together, these data raise the questions of whether there is a mechanistic link between obesity and disease survival and whether obesity over and above its endocrine or cardiometabolic associations might independently contribute to covid-19 risk.it is clear that obesity could contribute to both diabetic and cardiovascular covid-19 risk, and these elements of risk, in addition to thrombosis more recently, have been well described in the scientific literature (8) (9) (10) (11) (12) . moreover, obesity is an independent risk factor for hypoventilation syndrome in patients in the intensive care unit (13) and could thus contribute to respiratory failure in patients with acute respiratory distress syndrome (14) . here, we propose additional unheralded pathophysiologic aspects of increased at burden in morbid obesity that may amplify the pro-inflammatory response to extensive viral infection. at should be viewed as a highly active organ interfacing immune, endocrine, and metabolic homeostasis throughout the body (15) . in individuals with obesity, there is marked dysregulation of myeloid and lymphoid responses within at, with associated dysregulation of cytokine profiles (15) . intrinsically bound to this are endocrine and metabolic derangements, including insulin resistance and adipokine dysregulation with dysfunctional lipid and fatty acid metabolism (16) . in highly vascularized at, endothelial and smooth-muscle cells, as well as resident macrophages, exhibit additional perturbations in response to an activated renin angiotensin system at a local level, with attendant depletion and dysfunction of the counterregulatory angiotensin converting enzyme 2 mas receptor system (17, 18) . this makes at, particularly in visceral distributions, pro-immunogenic, metabolically active, and highly integrated into the cardiovascular system, with the capability to drive acute disease through augmented inflammation at an organ level in the heart, vasculature, pancreas, liver, and kidneys (19) . this "preactivation state" of at in obesity makes this organ a potential target for further immune amplification by external pathogens such as viruses.currently, there is no evidence for direct severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2) infection of at, although angiotensin converting enzyme 2 receptor expression represents a basis for viral tropism in several cells within this tissue (20) , including adipocytes, smooth-muscle cells, and endothelial cells (21) . moreover, many at-resident cells are proven targets for multiple viruses, including adipocytes [h1n1, type a influenza, and adenovirus 36 ( (25, 26) ]. although sars-cov-2 was detected only at low levels in blood in a small human study (28) , we cannot exclude hematogenous spread to at, given the very high virus affinity for its target cell receptor. alternative routes of sars-cov-2 spread to at include local egress of the virus from organs known to be infected to adjacent visceral fat deposits, such as intrathoracic fat (lungs), epicardial fat (heart), perirenal fat (kidneys), and mesenteric fat (intestines). finally, shared viral tropism for lung epithelium and at has already been shown for h5n1 virus infection (29) , and at significantly prolongs the duration of viral shedding in humans with obesity infected with influenza (22) . were similar tropism of sars-cov-2 to occur within at of individuals with covid-19 and obesity, there exists the potential for prolonged viral shedding in this organ, with extended activation of local "preactivated" immune systems and resident cytokine signaling pathways.resident myeloid and lymphoid cells are plentiful in at, and obesity is associated with macrophage (30) and lymphocyte dysfunction (31) . expansion of distinct memory t lymphocytes within at can also activate aberrant immune responses with wider tissue damage on viral challenge (31) . a recent report from wuhan suggests that sars-cov-2 induces a dysregulated immune response in severely ill individuals with covid-19 (32), characterized by reduced numbers of circulating memory t lymphocytes, as well as reduced helper/suppressor and regulatory t-cell subtypes. it is tempting to speculate whether already dysfunctional immune responses in individuals with obesity may accentuate this sars-cov-2 effect on t-cell function.specific inflammatory cytokine programs such tumor necrosis factor (tnf)-α, interleukin (il)-1, and il-6 are known to be preactivated in at in the context of obesity (33) , and, thus, viral infection may similarly amplify the already primed organ cytokine response in at. the cytokine storm identified in multiple respiratory viral infections, including covid-19, exhibits diverse interferon, il, chemokine, tnf, and colony-stimulating factor responses, which are beyond the scope of this paper but are comprehensively reviewed elsewhere (34) . the intensity of inflammatory lung responses reflect the imbalance between pro-inflammatory cytokines (such as tnf and il1β) and their soluble cognate receptors that inhibit cytokine effects in aqueous phase (35) . il-10 produced by macrophages and t lymphocytes (t helper 2 and regulatory t cells) acts as a negative regulator of inflammation, whereas il-6 and its soluble receptor enhance activity of il-6 on target cells, providing a mechanism for enhancement of tnf and il-1β activity when these soluble cognate receptors are particularly high (35) . thus, a balance between pro-and anti-inflammatory mechanisms is critical in maintaining lung-tissue homeostasis. it is conceivable that if one or more of these regulatory elements were absent or dysfunctional, then it might contribute to a cytokine storm in the lung or in other tissues such as at, where aberrant cytokine activation exists. temporal studies of cytokine dynamics in human "cytokine storm" models show that il-6 sustains activation of multiple cytokine pathways for many days after the initial immune insult (36) . interestingly, in early covid-19 studies, il-6 was a strong independent predictor of mortality (37) . human at is a major source of il-6 and its receptor il-6r (38) , and, thus, at may provide a reservoir for il-6 activation and cascade signaling in viral infection ( figure 1 ). viral spread from affected organs to adjacent at may take days, with subsequent prolonged viral shedding contributing to the delayed cytokine storm and consequences for tissue injury in patients with covid-19.initial studies should aim to detect sars-cov-2 in at on autopsy of individuals who have died of covid-19. focus should be on analysis of specific cells that have evidence of infection by immunocytopathic and in situ viral detection techniques. parallel studies should identify whether specific cell types in at can support sars-cov-2 infection and replication ex vivo. with respect to the cytokine storm, an integrated-systems biology approach would enable multiple pathways to be assessed simultaneously. in this regard, cytokine and chemokine genomic data analysis in blood and at would be an important first step. moreover a weighted gene correlation network analysis of sars-cov-2-mediated transcriptional response in infected cells could also be used as a model for human at analysis downstream (39) . interesting aspects of transcriptional network analysis could then be tested in appropriate animal models to determine pivotal components of the cytokine storm, including key cytokine and chemokine genes that are conserved across species (40) . these insights may allow rational diagnostics and therapeutic strategies to be developed. in line with this, il-6 inhibition has already been proposed as a treatment in covid-19, and the results of trials of tocilizumab are awaited (41) . it would be interesting to examine whether individuals with obesity, who are expected to have higher circulating il-6 levels compared with lean counterparts, respond more favorably to il-6 inhibition strategies in covid-19 in a post hoc analysis of review obesity biology and integrated physiology this randomized controlled trial. similarly, tissue and systemic analysis of cytokine dynamics may identify likely responders and nonresponders to such therapy.in summary, we present a rationale for studying the relationship between obesity and covid-19 disease severity. we provide a theoretical framework whereby viral systemic spread, entry, and prolonged viral shedding in already "inflamed" at may augment immune responses with consequences for cytokine cascade amplification. we highlight at as an abundant source for local and systemic enrichment of cytokines, some already independently associated with increased covid-19 mortality. finally, we suggest a series of research studies to identify whether a mechanistic link exists among at, sars-cov-2 infection, organ seeding of infection, immune activation, and the delayed cytokine storm known to presage rapid clinical decline in high-risk patients with covid-19.o disclosure: the authors declared no conflict of interest.however, there is currently little clinical data available in regard to evidence for cytokine storms 31 in covid-19. the expression levels of interleukin-2 receptor (il-2r) and il-6 in the sera of 32 critical care cases were found to be significantly higher (p < 0•05) than those of severe cases of 33 in contrast, there were no statistically significant differences in serum tumor 34 necrosis factor alpha (tnf-α, il-1, il-8, or il-10 between these two groups (p > 0•05).[26] 35 however, following initially high expression of th1 cytokines (e.g., interleukin (il)-1β, interferon 1 (ifn)-γ, interferon-inducible protein 10 (ip10), and monocyte chemoattractant protein-1 (mcp1) 2 th2 cytokines (e.g., il-4 and il-10) may subsequently suppress inflammation during sars-cov-2 3 infection. [12, 27] furthermore, other observational covid-19 studies have suggested that cytokine 4 storms (comprised of il-1β, il-1ra, il-7, and il-8) may be associated with disease severity.[7, 12, 5 28] for example, higher concentrations of granulocyte colony-stimulating factor (gcsf), ip10, 6 mcp1, mip1a, and tnf-α were found in patients who required admission into an intensive care 7 unit (icu). [12, 27] taken together, we posit that cytokine storms may be associated with the 8 severity of covid-19. however, it is not feasible to conduct a prospective study of covid-19 at 9 present, and current evidence for cytokine storms in covid-19 has been derived from small 10 sample sizes. it is also important to consider that patients at different phases of inflammation when 11 corresponding samples are collected will likely also contribute to increased variability of cytokine 12 storm metrics. however, the close relationship between cytokine storms and ards strongly 13 suggests that excessive and maladaptive cytokine release contributes to the unfavorable initiation, 14 strengthening, and promotion of ards in covid-19. 15 some other biological indicators are also closely related to hyper-inflammatory subphenotypes 28 of ards. as a novel indicator of inflammation, endocan is a promising biomarker to predict 29 disease severity and mortality in patients with ards.[48] a decrease in the plasmatic endocan 30 cleavage ratio (ecr) is associated with hyper-inflammatory phenotypes of ards. also, a change 31 in ecr < -4•5% is the optimal cutoff value for the diagnosis of a hyper-inflammatory subphenotype 32 (sensitivity of 0•86; specificity of 0•82).[49] early vascular injury and disrupted alveolar-capillary 33 barrier integrity can also reflect differences in subtypes of inflammatory responses. early-onset 34 ards is associated with higher levels of the biomarkers srage and ang-2.[42] subphenotypes 35 with higher ang-2 levels, which are characterized by higher inflammatory biomarkers and 1 hypotension, may reflect more endothelial permeability and predilection for extravascular fluid 2 accumulation that responds favorably to fluid restriction.[37] however, uncertainty remains 3 regarding how diverse initial environmental injuries result in a sequence of events culminating in 4 the clinical syndrome of ards, involving various molecular pathways along with a general 5 imbalance between injurious and reparative mechanisms. classification of patients with ards into 6 hyper-and hypo-inflammatory subphenotypes using plasma biomarkers may facilitate more 7 effective targeted therapies.[30] therefore, further elucidation of phenotypes and identifying 8 treatable traits represent the future of personalized medicine for ards. 9in covid-19, there is also suggestive evidence of hyper-inflammatory subphenotypes of ards. clinical evidence helps to progress patient-level and population-level decision making. 26 therefore, we need to build upon prior experience and identify similarities versus differences 27 among covid-19 patients.[53] from the evidence that we were able to retrieve, we found that 28 during the time from the onset of symptoms to mv, which was reported to be 10•5 days (7•0-14•0 19 days),[12] if patient was identified as having a hyper-inflammatory subphenotype of covid-19 20 and given targeted therapy, this approach would be expected to ameliorate the probability of the 21 patient progressing to a severe or critical condition. therefore, the key treatment for ards, a key 22 factor in covid-19 deterioration, is closely related to the identification and monitoring of hyper-23 inflammatory subphenotypes. 24it is difficult to distinguish the hyper/hypo inflammatory subphenotypes of covid-19 since 27 there is currently little data on this phenomenon. c-reactive protein (crp) levels of most patients 28 are above the normal range.[9, 24] additionally, hypersensitive crp (hs-crp) has also been found 29 to be increased. the authors declare that there are no competing interests regarding the publication of this paper. 20 pathological findings of covid-19 associated with acute respiratory distress syndrome.the concern about the role of nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs (nsaids) in patients with covid-19 has led to considerable speculation. fang et al. offered an early commentary on covid-19 that suggested that angiotensinconverting enzyme (ace) inhibitors or angiotensin-receptor blockers (arbs) may be associated with worse covid-19 outcomes and added that ibuprofen may be associated with upregulation of the ace2 receptors, the presumptive entry point of the sars-cov-2 virus [1, 2] . further, immune suppression may occur with some nsaids [2] , such as, but not limited to, ibuprofen. however, fang and colleagues subsequently cautioned against ''overinterpretation'' of these hypotheses that in some cases led to abrupt changes in drug regimens; they state that ace inhibitors and nsaids are important therapeutic drugs and should not be discontinued without careful clinical judgement [2] . likewise, a website run by prominent international specialists entitled ace2 and hypertension advises individuals taking ace inhibitors or arbs not to change their drug therapy unless a physician advises them to do so [3] .the speculation about nsaids for patients with covid-19 is twofold: first, do nsaids increase the likelihood that a person will contract covid-19 and, second, will a patient with covid-19 taking nsaids have exacerbated symptoms? there is no evidence that either of these is the case [4] , but there have been observations that worse outcomes in covid-19 may be associated with nsaid use. in this connection, it must be pointed out that worse outcomes with covid-19 typically occur in older patients, and the elderly are more likely than younger patients to take nsaids for chronic pain and are also at elevated risk for covid-19 complications [5] . no age-adjusted reports of the association between adverse covid-19 outcomes and nsaid use have been published to the best of the knowledge of the authors. thus, older age and higher rates of comorbid conditions may be confounding factors.the purpose of this article is to provide a brief overview of what is currently known-and what is not known-about the use of nsaids in the setting of covid-19.this article is based on previously conducted studies and does not contain any studies with human participants or animals performed by any of the authors.siddiqi and mehra have staged the progression of covid-19 on the basis of 72,314 cases observed in china and identified three stages. stage i is mild disease and represents the majority of infections; stage ii is moderate disease with pulmonary involvement with or without hypoxia; and stage iii is severe illness characterized by extrapulmonary hyperinflammation, in particular observed by biomarkers such as interleukin (il)-2, il-6, il-7, granulocyte colony-stimulating factor (gcsf), macrophage inflammatory protein 1-alpha (mip1a), c-reactive protein (crp), ferritin, and high d-dimer scores [6] . prior to the outbreak of covid-19, the association of intense cytokine activity with adverse outcomes of influenza had been reported [7] . the severity of influenza results from the interplay of viral virulence and host resistance. in mild cases of flu, the host has a degree of resistance such that the disruptions to homeostasis are quickly resolved and normal balance is restored. when that resistance is hyperactive, an exaggerated inflammatory response may occur called ''cytokine storm.'' cytokine storm can cause injury to tissue, morbidity, and mortality [8] . the sars-ncov-2 virus targets epithelial cells of the respiratory system and these progeny viruses can replicate to infect other cells, producing an inflammatory response when those cells die either by necrosis or apoptosis [9] . high levels of pro-inflammatory cytokines and crp have been observed in critically ill patients with covid-19 [10] . cytokine storm has likewise been observed in patients with infectious and rheumatic diseases, usually arising from the focal point of the infection and spreading outward through the circulatory system [10] . in diseases associated with coronaviruses, such as middle eastern respiratory syndrome (mers) or severe acute respiratory syndrome (sars), the marked increase in inflammatory cytokines parallels a rapid replication of the virus resulting in lung injury and potentially life-threatening acute respiratory distress syndrome (ards) [10] . early evaluations of patients with covid-19 suggest similarly high levels of pro-inflammatory cytokines along the lines of mers and sars [10] . in china, one of the diagnostic criteria for covid-19 is lymphocytopenia [10] . patients with covid-19 have reduced levels of t cells and natural killer (nk) cells and some critically ill patients with covid-19 had undetectable levels of nk cells [10] . it has been speculated that cytokine storm destroys lymphocytes, and destruction of secondary lymphoid tissue has been observed on autopsy of patients with covid-19 [10] .as cytokine storm likely plays a major role in adverse outcomes of severely ill patients with covid-19, the role of anti-inflammatories ranging from nsaids to glucocorticoids to hydroxychloroquine and others would seem beneficial in an effort to reduce inflammation before it overwhelms the body's systems. tocilizumab, an il-6 inhibitor, has also been discussed in this context along with anakinra (an il-1ra) to suppress cytokine storm [6, 10] . tnfa blockade via the etanercept receptor downregulates inflammatory response in cytokine storm and etanercept has been proposed as a potential pharmacological strategy in controlling influenza-induced viral pneumonia [11] . in a study of mice infected with the influenza a/ h5n1 virus, treating them with celecoxib plus mesalazine plus zanamivir significantly reduced cytokine dysregulation and prevented apoptosis to a greater extent than mesalazine or zanamivir alone [12] . that is, the addition of celecoxib plus other drugs reduced mortality in these infected mice. while such treatment may have value to address the patient's hyperinflammatory state, it must be recognized that the prognosis for patients with stage iii covid-19 is poor.anti-inflammatory therapy for influenza may be associated with certain drawbacks. the use of an anti-inflammatory might potentially slow viral elimination and elevate the risk of a secondary infection. while an anti-inflammatory can reduce inflammation, it may have a limited or poorly understood effect on cytokine storm, which involves multiple cytokines and complex interactions. in other words, an anti-inflammatory agent may affect certain cytokines but not others [10] . even if anti-inflammatory therapy were to be advocated, it is not yet clear which therapies are best, at which point during the disease, at what doses, and for what duration.of course, the role of nsaids in viral infections of other kinds has been controversial [13] . one argument against the use of nsaids and acetaminophen is that these are antipyretic drugs that may mask a rising fever associated with covid-19 and thus delay diagnosis and rapid management of the infection [14] . selective coxibs have been associated with an increased cardiovascular risk, but the risk varies with the particular drug [15] [16] [17] . since cox-2 is associated with prostaglandin i 2 (pgi 2 or prostacyclin), nsaids that inhibit cox-2 reduce pgi2 but do not inhibit the prothrombotic platelet thromboxane a 2 production, resulting in a selective reduction in prostacyclin activity that may set the stage for endothelial damage [18, 19] . nsaids suppress the production of prostaglandins, lipids that are associated with fever and pain. ibuprofen, a widely used nsaid, is not strongly selective and blocks both cox-1 and cox-2 [13, 20] . in cases of multiple organ failure, which has happened with sars, mers, and possibly covid-19, the use of nsaids might more easily be associated with gastrointestinal damage. if gastrointestinal symptoms occur, this should be carefully investigated and treated [21] .prostaglandin e 2 is associated with the classic symptoms of inflammation such as fever, redness, and localized edema [22] . the confusion about nsaids arises mainly because prostaglandin production is complex and can both promote and inhibit inflammatory processes. the nsaid indomethacin is known to block the rna synthesis of viruses, but this mechanism is independent of cox inhibition and it is not clear if this antiviral activity applies to the sars-ncov-2 virus [22] .nsaids may be contraindicated in some patients with respiratory disorders. nsaids administered to patients with an acute respiratory infection have been implicated in acute myocardial infarction (adjusted odds ratio 3.41, 95% confidence interval, 2.8-4.2) but it must be noted that patients with acute respiratory infection have an adjusted odds ratio of 2.65 (95% confidence interval, 2.3-3.1) for acute myocardial infarction even without nsaid use [23] . the risk was much higher with parenteral than oral nsaid use (adjusted odds ratio 7.22, 95% confidence interval, 4.1-12.8) [23] . a similar increased risk for stroke was observed in patients suffering acute respiratory infection and taking nsaids, in particular, by parenteral route. nsaids may alter the intrinsic function of neutrophils and, in that way, change bacterial clearance and delay the resolution of the inflammatory process [24] .to date there is no strong evidence in favor or disputing the use of nsaids in patients diagnosed with covid-19 [4, 25] . the expert working group of the commission on human medicines in the uk has issued a statement that there is ''currently insufficient evidence to establish a link between the use of ibuprofen and susceptibility to contracting covid-19 or the worsening of its symptoms'' [26] . indeed, any blanket ''for'' or ''against'' statement on this topic would not be clinically realistic. for covid-19, oral nsaids might only be used intermittently over a very short period of time, and it is not clear if this would be the same as chronic, round-the-clock nsaid therapy or parenteral nsaid administration [25] . since nsaids are available over-the-counter, accurate records about who has taken them, when, and in what doses is often sparse and, if collected from patient memory, would be inherently unreliable. furthermore, even if evidence emerged favoring or rejecting one particular nsaid in this setting, it is not clear whether such evidence would apply to all nsaids in similar fashion.as covid-19 ravages the globe, clinicians, scientists, epidemiologists, regulators, and politicians are eager to offer sane, sound advice to keep people safe. unfortunately, our socialmedia-driven era of nonstop news is not compatible with the slow and serious work of science. clinicians are being confronted with hypotheses, speculation, anecdotal reports, and conjecture on important topics such as the use of nsaids in patients with covid-19 with little strong evidence to guide them. first, clinicians must consider who is taking the nsaid and why. there is no evidence that the occasional use of an oral, over-the-counter nsaid for a few days by a person with suspected or diagnosed mild covid-19 infection will exacerbate the infection. second, there is no reason to think that patients taking prescribed nsaids for a chronic painful condition should stop taking this drug for fear it might increase their risk of contracting covid-19 or exacerbate it if they get it [5] . it is likely that many patients with mild cases of covid-19 may take an over-thecounter remedy to help manage symptoms such as muscle aches and fever. acetaminophen (paracetamol) has been proposed as an alternative to nsaid use, but there are also issues with acetaminophen toxicity [27] .to be sure, there are covid-19 cases when nsaids should not be used. but there is no strong evidence that they must be avoided in all patients with covid-19. clinicians on the frontlines and those advising patients with mild covid-19 cases managed at home should weigh these considerations carefully.funding. no funding or sponsorship was received for this study or publication of this article.authorship. all named authors meet the international committee of medical journal editors (icmje) criteria for authorship for this article, take responsibility for the integrity of the work as a whole, and have given their approval for this version to be published. compliance with ethics guidelines. this article is based on previously conducted studies and does not contain any studies with human participants or animals performed by any of the authors.data availability. data sharing is not applicable to this article as no datasets were generated or analyzed during the current study.open access. this article is licensed under a creative commons attribution-noncommercial 4.0 international license, which permits any non-commercial use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the creative commons licence, and indicate if changes were made. the images or other third party material in this article are included in the article's creative commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. if material is not included in the article's creative commons licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. to view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/bync/4.0/.although the severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2) continues to spread rapidly around the world, research is being actively conducted on the pathogenesis and treatment options for coronavirus disease 2019 (covid- 19) , but there are still many unsolved aspects. most of the patients infected with sars-cov-2 usually have a mild to moderate illness, but depending on the viral load, immune system, underlying comorbid diseases, or currently unknown factors, approximately 5% of patients develop the critical disease with respiratory failure and organ dysfunctions (1) . pneumonia is the most frequent serious manifestation of infection, while acute respiratory distress syndrome (ards) is the major complication in patients with severe illness. other complications include as follows: coagulopathy, microvascular thrombosis (such as myocardial infarction and stroke), arrhythmias, acute cardiac injury, liver injury, acute kidney injury, and shock (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) . in a series of 21 severely ill patients admitted to the icu in the united states, ards was observed in most patients, and one-third developed cardiomyopathy (4). human angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ace2) is a functional receptor attacked by sars-cov-2 for cell entry, similar to sars-cov (6) . ace2 is broadly expressed in the nasal mucosa, bronchus, lung, heart, esophagus, kidney, stomach, bladder, and ileum, and these human organs are all vulnerable to sars-cov-2, especially in severe cases with viremia (7) . presumably, viral replication of sars-cov-2 in target organs, as well as resulting cellular damage, causes a systemic inflammatory response, cytokine storm, mainly ards, and multiple organ damage. some autopsy studies support these findings. in an autopsy study of 21 severe covid-19 patients, the primary cause of death was respiratory failure with exudative diffuse alveolar damage with massive capillary congestion accompanied by microthrombi (8) . in another postmortem study conducted on 12 patients, a high concentration of sars-cov-2 rna was detected in the lung tissue of all the patients and around half of them had high titers of viral rna in the liver, kidney, or heart, in addition to viremia (9) .according to the third international consensus definitions for sepsis and septic shock (sepsis-3), sepsis is defined as "life-threatening organ dysfunction caused by a dysregulated host response to infection" (10) . considering the multisystemic clinical and autopsy findings in "severe covid-19 patients, " viral sepsis would be a more accurate term to describe the whole clinical picture (fig. 1) .to put it simply, if mild to moderate covid-19 is considered www.ccejournal.org 2020 • volume 2 • e0141 "bad infection, " then severe covid-19 is "viral sepsis" or "bad viral sepsis. " viral sepsis can be caused by a variety of viruses such as herpes simplex virus, influenza, enteroviruses, human parechoviruses, ebola, and dengue virus (11) . common features of viral sepsis are intense cytokine release, prolonged inflammation, and consequently, immunosuppression, t cell exhaustion, the development of multiple organ damage, and increased susceptibility to secondary bacterial infections. a combination of these concepts has led to a new approach to severe covid-19 patients as "a subset of sepsis, " in which particularly profound cellular, immunologic, and metabolic abnormalities are associated with a higher risk of mortality than with infection alone.currently, the optimal approach to the treatment for covid-19 is uncertain. we can classify treatment approaches under three main headings: potential anti-infectives, supportive treatments for specific target organ systems, and immunomodulators (fig. 2) . understanding the mechanism of viral sepsis and associated immunosuppression in covid-19 is vitally important. in this way, it will be possible to develop effective treatment approaches (12) .the identification of the toll-like receptors (tlrs) and the associated concept of innate immunity based upon pathogen-associated molecular pattern molecules allowed for significant advances in our understanding of the molecular biology and pathophysiology of sepsis (13) . previous studies revealed that lung epithelial cells, macrophages, and dendritic cells all express cytokines to some extent during influenza infection via the activation of pattern recognition receptors, including tlr3, tlr7, and tlr8, a retinoic acid-inducible gene i, and the nucleotide-binding oligomerization domain-like receptor family members (14) . cytokine storm, which is a key factor in the rapid progression of covid-19, induces not only inflammation but also apoptosis-related immunosuppression (13, 15, 16) . the primary features of the cytokine storm are fever, progressive dyspnea, tachypnea, elevated interleukin (il)-6, c-reactive protein, ferritin, and other inflammatory markers (17, 18) . the treatment of cytokine storm is of vital importance as it is associated with severe and mortal disease. currently, there are no specific therapeutic agents for sars-cov-2 and cytokine storm induced by covid-19. however, il-6 receptor antibodies, as an immunotherapeutic agent, have been under compassionate use for cytokine storm treatment in covid-19 patients.il-6 is a multifunctional cytokine produced by different cells such as immune cells, mesenchymal cells, endothelial cells, and fibroblasts in response to infections and tissue damage. betacoronavirus infection of monocytes, macrophages, and dendritic cells results in their activation and the secretion of il-6 and other inflammatory cytokines that result in cytokine release syndrome (crs). il-6 can signal through different pathways: classic signaling, trans-signaling, and trans-presentation (18) . in classical signaling, il-6 binds to the membrane-bound il-6 receptor (mil-6r, found mainly on macrophages, neutrophils, t cells, etc.) and shows pleiotropic effects on the acquired and innate immune system. on the other hand, in the trans-signaling pathway, il-6 forms a complex with soluble il-6 receptor (sil-6r) and can activate virtually all cells of the body, especially the endothelial cells, and develop inflammatory effects (19) . both classic-and trans-signals contribute to the development of cytokine storm, pulmonary dysfunction, and ards. crs may also be the contributing factor to t cell exhaustion, apoptosis, and lymphopenia. tocilizumab is a humanized anti-il-6r monoclonal antibody that binds both mil-6r and sil-6r and then inhibits classical and trans-signals. a small clinical trial in china examined the effectiveness of tocilizumab in patients who met the criteria for severe covid-19. after a few days of tocilizumab treatment, symptoms such as fever, pulmonary infiltrates, and oxygenation improved, and also the lymphocyte counts returned to normal (20) . unfortunately, despite the use of tocilizumab and antivirals, some severe covid-19 patients still have lymphopenia, and the prognosis in these patients is poor. at this point, we need alternative therapeutic agents that will boost the immune system and correct the lymphopenia in severe covid-19 patients.cd8+ cytotoxic t cells and natural killer (nk) cells play a critical role in the protection and control of viral infections. lymphopenia is commonly seen in patients with severe covid-19 disease and may be a sign of poor prognosis (21) . immunopathologically, in severe covid-19 patients, there is a marked increase in inflammatory cytokines (il-2, il-6) combined with lymphopenia (22) . there was also an unexpected increase in anti-inflammatory cytokines such as il-10 and il-4, which is an uncommon phenomenon for acutephase viral infection (17) . as the severity of the disease progresses in patients with covid-19, a concomitant rise in inflammatory cytokine levels may lead to the depletion and exhaustion of t cell populations. as a result, the adaptive immune response cannot be effectively initiated because of the substantial reduction and dysfunction of lymphocytes. the uncontrolled virus infection leads to more macrophage infiltration and a further worsening organ injury. the degree of lymphopenia has been shown to correlate with the severity of covid-19 and the mortality of septic shock (21, 23) . a recent study conducted by zheng et al (24) showed that the total number of nk cells and cd8+ t lymphocytes had decreased significantly in severe covid-19 patients. furthermore, it showed that nkg2a expression had significantly increased in immune cells whose functions were suppressed, a picture consistent with t cell exhaustion. furthermore, the number of nk and cd8+ t cells had increased in recovering patients, while the expression of nkg2a had decreased.similarly, a previous study has shown that nkg2a receptors on cytotoxic t lymphocytes are over-upregulated during acute polyomavirus infection. consequently, there was a noticeable decrease in the cytotoxic cellular immune response to prevent viral clearance and viral oncogenesis (25) . t cell exhaustion and similar findings were also seen in hiv, chronic hepatitis b, and hepatitis c infections (26) . it is well known that patients with sepsis have an increased checkpoint molecule expression-cytotoxic t lymphocyte antigen-4 (ctla-4) and programmed cell death protein 1 (pd-1)-and this condition causes lymphopenia (27) (28) (29) . in another study, which involved patients with candida bloodstream infection, circulating immune effector cells displayed an immunophenotype consistent with immunosuppression, as evidenced by t cell exhaustion and the number of pd-1 positive cd8+ t cells that had significantly increased (30) . taken together, these observations point to a common cascade of events during viral and/ or bacterial sepsis which leads to increased checkpoint molecule expression and t cell exhaustion.developing an efficient immunotherapeutic approach to restoring cell-mediated immunity may play an essential role in overcoming severe covid-19. when we act on the logic of immune checkpoint inhibitors applied in cancer treatments, we believe that the inhibition of nkg2a receptors, which are upregulated in covid-19, will boost the antiviral activity of cytotoxic t cells and nk cells. the immune checkpoint molecules, ctla-4, and pd-1 are potent immunomodulators with their inhibitory effects on t cell activation. cancer cells and presumably cells infected with viruses produce ligands that stimulate inhibitory checkpoints and inhibit the activity of t cells. when these checkpoints are blocked, t cells are able to kill cancer cells and virally infected cells more strongly. currently, many monoclonal antibodies are targeting these immune checkpoints that have been used in cancer treatment (31) . immune checkpoint inhibitors may also increase absolute lymphocyte count in cancer patients, and this finding is a good prognostic factor and sign of response to treatment (32) . in this regard, upon extensive literature search, monalizumab caught our attention as a novel immune checkpoint inhibitor developed against nkg2a receptors (33) . monalizumab is a humanized anti-nkg2a monoclonal antibody that can increase the degranulation of nk cells and hence the production of interferon-gamma that is a vital cytokine for natural and adaptive immunity against viral infections (34).we herein propose that a combination of nkg2a inhibitor as an immune system booster with il-6 receptor antibody as an anti-inflammatory agent may be beneficial in severe covid-19 cases. inhibition of pd-1 and programmed cell death ligand 1 (pd-l1) has been shown to improve pathogen clearance in viral infection models (35) . hotchkiss et al (36) hypothesized that by blocking pd-1 or pd-l1, antibody-mediated immunotherapy can reverse t cell depletion-mediated immunosuppression in critically ill patients with sepsis. in their clinical evaluation of pd-1/pd-l1 pathway inhibition in sepsis, monoclonal antibodies against pd-1/pd-l1 were well tolerated, with no evidence of drug-induced hypercytokinemia or cytokine storm, and at higher doses, some indication of restored immune status.currently, there are a few clinical studies registered to clinicaltrials.gov that are aimed at evaluating the efficacy of antibodies against pd-1 receptors in covid-19. we urgently need to consider the use of proven immunomodulatory agents in the treatment of severe covid-19 sepsis until effective vaccines and antiviral drugs are developed.numerous reports have described an association between elevated inflammatory markers and poor outcomes in covid-19 patients. [1] [2] [3] these data have sparked interest in "cytokine storm" as a major driver of illness severity in covid-19, and multiple clinical trials are underway to test the efficacy of immunosuppressive therapies, including il-6antagonists. however, it is unclear if inflammatory cytokine levels are truly higher in patients with severe covid-19 than in critically ill patients with ards or sepsis due to other causes.while ards and sepsis are recognized to be highly inflamed states, large-scale randomized controlled trials of immune modulators (e.g. anti-il1b, activated protein c, steroids) have failed. 4, 5 recent reporting of il-6 levels in severe covid-19 patients (~10-40 pg/ml measured in clinical labs) [1] [2] [3] are lower than levels reported in prior ards cohorts ( ~100-2000 pg/ml using elisa). [6] [7] [8] given potential variability in cytokine quantification across platforms, we measured plasma levels of 76 cytokines, including six inflammatory cytokines associated with cytokine storm (il-1b, il-1ra, il-6, il-8, il-18, and tnfα), in a prospective cohort of patients hospitalized with covid-19 and directly compared them to levels in banked biospecimens from ards and sepsis patients enrolled in the stanford icu biobank prior to the covid-19 pandemic.all rights reserved. no reuse allowed without permission.(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. levels of il-1b, il-1ra, il-6, il-8, il-18 and tnfα did not significantly differ between the moderate covid-19, severe covid-19, and ards/sepsis group (figure 1 , after adjustment for multiple comparisons, all p values > 0.05). there was a trend towards higher levels of il-1ra and il-6 in the patients with severe covid-19 as compared to those with moderate covid-19, consistent with prior reports. [1] [2] [3] there was also a trend towards higher il-18 in the severe covid-19 group compared to the other critical illness group (p-unadjusted = 0.01, p-adjusted = 0.10).in the more extended exploratory analysis of 70 additional cytokines, the three patient groups did not differ strongly in principal component analysis (supplemental figure s1 , available in the online supplement). there were small but statistically significant differences in the levels of il-16, il-21, il-28a (ifnl2), and tslp between the three groups (supplemental figure s2 ), but no cytokine levels were dramatically increased in covid-19 compared to other causes of critical illness (supplemental figures s2 and   s3 ). together, these data suggest that a "cytokine storm" in covid-19 that is distinct from other critical illness (e.g. sepsis and ards) is unlikely.all rights reserved. no reuse allowed without permission.(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. our primary goal was to directly compare levels of six inflammatory cytokines commonly associated with cytokine storm (il-1b, il-1ra, il-6, il-8, il-18, and tnfα) between severe covid-19 patients and patients with ards or sepsis due to other causes. our findings are consistent with previous data demonstrating higher levels of inflammatory cytokines among covid-19 patients with more severe disease. importantly, however, our data suggest that inflammatory biomarkers in severe covid-19 patients are not markedly elevated when directly compared to critically ill patients with ards or sepsis.il-6 levels were measured by the clinical lab (as part of clinical care) in 6 of the covid-19 patients, including 4 with severe disease, though not at matched time points with the research blood collection. levels ranged from <6-31 pg/ml. given the small number of patients who had clinical measurements available, and the variation in collection times, we were unable to derive accurate concentrations based on mfi for the remaining patients. nonetheless, these data points further support our findings that il-6 levels in particular-while elevated above levels found in healthy subjects-are not markedly elevated in all severe covid-19 patients compared to other critically ill patients.this brief report calls into question the idea that "cytokine storm" is the major driver of morbidity and mortality in all severe covid-19 patients. as ritchie and singanayagam have stated, it is equally possible that the higher levels of proinflammatory cytokines seen in severe covid-19 reflect an increased burden of virus rather than "an inappropriate host response that requires correction." 9 all rights reserved. no reuse allowed without permission.(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. the most important limitation of this study is our small sample size. even in our predetermined analysis of six cytokines strongly associated with cytokine storm, we lack power to detect minor differences between groups. the exploratory analyses of an additional 70 cytokines is similarly limited, but is provided as a reference for the field. in addition, we do not have measurements of cytokines over time, but only near the point of enrollment. finally, as discussed above, we report cytokine levels by mfi per recommended luminex analysis methods, 10 precluding direct comparison of our values to previously published data that report cytokine levels in pg/ml. (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 16, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.15.20103549 doi: medrxiv preprint unit (icu), and "moderate" if they did not require icu admission.twenty-eight critically ill subjects with ards and sepsis who had been enrolled in the stanford icu biobank between 2015-2018 were selected for comparison. briefly, the stanford icu biobank recruits patients at risk for development of respiratory failure and ards admitted to stanford hospital as previously described. 11 subjects are eligible for enrollment when decision to admit to icu is made, either from the emergency department or the hospital wards, with goal enrollment in <24h of icu transfer. all 28 patients were phenotyped for ards and sepsis by 2-physician consensus (ajr and jel), based on the berlin criteria and sepsis-2 criteria and using all available hospital clinical data including history, physical exam, laboratory and microbiologic data, invasive monitoring data, autopsy results, and physician summaries. the stanford icu is a major referral center for cancer and thus typically has high rates of immunosuppression. to assess cytokine response to infection in patients with a normal immune system (similar to the covid population), the ards and sepsis patients were therefore enriched for normal baseline immune system (e.g. no metastatic cancer, bone marrow transplant, or high dose steroids) in comparison to the biobank as a whole.all rights reserved. no reuse allowed without permission.(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 16, 2020. all statistical analyses were performed using the open source statistical software r (https://www.r-project.org). because we observed significant differences in chex4 mfi between the three groups tested, we corrected for chex4 nonspecific binding, keeping the clinical conditions (severe covid-19 (cov-icu), moderate covid-19 (cov-noicu), ards and sepsis), age, and sex as covariates. each sample was normalized according to methods used by the human immune monitoring center at stanford university. 12 briefly, the median fluorescence intensity (mfi) of each cytokine was corrected first for plate/batch/lot artifacts by linear mixed modeling, then the average of technical replicates was log transformed. then the log transformed average mfis were corrected for nonspecific binding by local polynomial regression and repeated cross-validation, resulting in plate-detrended mfi (dpmfi) values. all rights reserved. no reuse allowed without permission.(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 16, 2020. this study was conducted according to declaration of helsinki principles, and was approved by the stanford university hospital irb (protocol 28205). all patients or their surrogates gave written informed consent to participate in the stanford icu biobank.all rights reserved. no reuse allowed without permission.(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 16, 2020. all rights reserved. no reuse allowed without permission.(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. all rights reserved. no reuse allowed without permission.(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 16, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.15.20103549 doi: medrxiv preprintrequired to have a significant impact on clinical outcome. immunomodulatory therapy to down-regulate the cytokine storm may provide insights into the treatment of covid-19. combined use of an immunomodulatory agentto reduce the cytokine stormwith an antiviral agent may give physicians more time to provide supportive treatment for patients with corticosteroids are among the most commonly used drugs for immunomodulatory therapy of infectious diseases. however, the use of corticosteroids in the treatment of covid-19 can cause host immune suppression and delay viral clearance. recent study results have provided information to help handle this dilemma. a study at xi'an jiaotong-liverpool university found that the use of corticosteroids did not influence viral clearance time, length of hospital stay or duration of symptoms in patients with mild covid-19 [5] . this study, which included 201 patients with covid-19, found that treatment with methylprednisolone decreased the risk of death (hazard ratio 0.38, 95% confidence interval 0.20-0.72) among patients with acute respiratory distress syndrome (ards). based on these findings, the use of corticosteroids is considered beneficial in severe cases of covid-19 (especially in partients with ards), but not in mild cases [6] . according to treatment experiences in china, cautious use of corticosteroids is only recommended in certain critically ill patients (e.g. those with hypoxaemia) at low-to-moderate doses (no more than 1-2 mg/kg/day methylprednisolone or equivalent) for a short duration (3-5 days), as stated in the diagnosis and treatment protocol for novel coronavirus pneumonia (trial version 7).issued by the national health commission of china [7] .recently, chloroquine and its derivative hydroxychloroquine have been used in the treatment of covid-19. in february 2020, results from more than 100 chinese patients with covid-19 showed that chloroquine phosphate had good efficacy [8] .french doctors conducted an open-label non-randomized clinical trial, and 20 patients with covid-19 who received hydroxychloroquine treatment showed good efficacy [9] . both chloroquine and hydroxychloroquine are weak bases and are able to accumulate in acidic organelles (e.g. lysosomes); as such, they can increase endosomal/lysosomal ph and inhibit viral replication [10] . in addition to their antimalarial and antiviral effects, their anti-inflammatory properties have been demonstrated in the treatment of autoimmune diseases such as rheumatoid arthritis and lupus erythematosus. chloroquine and hydroxychloroquine can inhibit major histocompatibility complex class ii expression, antigen presentation and immune activation (reducing cd154 expression by t cells) via toll-like receptor signalling and cgas stimulation of interferon genes [11] . thus, chloroquine and hydroxychloroquine can reduce the production of various pro-inflammatory cytokines, such as il-1, il-6, interferon-α and tumour necrosis factor, which are involved in the cytokine storm [11] . these immunomodulatory effects synergize their antiviral effects in the treatment of covid-19.immunomodulatory agents that directly target the key cytokines involved in covid-19 may also help to alleviate hyperinflammation symptoms in severe cases [12] . elevated levels of the inflammatory indicator il-6 in the blood have been reported to be predictive of a fatal outcome in patients with covid-19 [13] .tocilizumab, a specific monoclonal antibody that blocks il-6, has been recommended for use in severe or critically ill patients with extensive lesions in bilateral lungs and a confirmed elevated level of il-6 in the diagnosis and treatment protocol for novel coronavirus pneumonia (trial version 7) issued by the national health commission of china [7] . a retrospective analysis on 20 severe cases of covid-10 showed that treatment with tocilizumab led to a reduction in fever and lung lesion opacity, and recovered the percentage of lymphocytes in peripheral blood [14] .il-6 can bind to transmembrane il-6 receptors (mil6r) and soluble il-6 receptors (sil-6r), and the resulting complex can combine with signal transducing component gp130 to activate the inflammatory response. tocilizumab can bind specifically to sil-6r and mil-6r, and block signal transduction [15] . tocilizumab is a good therapeutic option for cytokine release syndrome in chimeric antigen receptor t-cell immunotherapy. however, clinical experience with tocilizumab in viral disease is very limited. in a retrospective study on patients with juvenile idiopathic arthritis infected with influenza a, reduced fever and a reduced level of c-reactive protein were observed in patients who received tocilizumab compared with patients who did not receive tocilizumab [16] . meanwhile, il-6 inhibition by tocilizumab did not exacerbate or increase susceptibility to influenza virus infection [16] . however, there are well documented warnings on increased risk of opportunistic infections (including tuberculosis, fungal or other viral infections) caused by anti-il-6 monoclonal antibodies during the treatment of rheumatoid arthritis [17] . high costs and safety risks may be a barrier for the wide use of tocilizumab in the treatment of covid-19.in early march 2020, chinese clinicians investigated the use of other immunomodulatory agents, such as ulinastatin, for treatment of the cytokine storm for covid-19 [18] . ulinastatin is a serine protease inhibitor with anti-inflammatory properties (including inhibition of il-6), and it has been used in the treatment of acute pancreatitis and sepsis in japan and china [19] . expert consensus from shanghai was that ulinastatin is recommended in patients with exacerbated lung lesions [18] .overall, certain immunomodulatory agents with good safety profiles may be considered for use in combination with antiviral drugs for the treatment of severe or critical cases of covid-19.competing interests: none declared.ethical approval: not required. this article has been edited extensivelyplease check the proof carefully to ensure that your meaning has not been altered in the 15 covid-19 patients were retrospectively assessed. totally 15 patients with covid-19 were included in this study. two of them were moderately ill, six were seriously ill and seven were critically ill. the tcz was used in combination with methylprednisolone in eight patients. five patients received the tcz administration twice or more. although tcz treatment ameliorated the increased crp in all patients rapidly, for the four critically ill patients who received an only single dose of tcz, three of them (no. 1, 2, and 3) still dead and the crp level in the rest one patient (no. 7) failed to return to normal range with a clinical outcome of disease aggravation. serum il-6 level tended to further spiked firstly and then decreased after tcz therapy in 10 patients. a persistent and dramatic increase of il-6 was observed in these four patients who failed treatment. tcz appears to be an effective treatment option in covid-19 patients with a risk of cytokine storms. and for these critically ill patients with elevated il-6, the repeated dose of the tcz is recommended. the first report of pathological characteristics of the patient who died from severe infection with sars-cov-2 showed that an increased concentration of highly proinflammatory cytokines. 1 actually, the cytokine storms mediated by overproduction of proinflammatory cytokines have been observed in a large population of critically ill patients infected with covid-19. 2, 3 patients suffered from cytokine storms progress to cardiovascular collapse, multiple organ dysfunction, and death rapidly. therefore, early identification, treatment, and prevention of the cytokine storms are of crucial importance for the patients.il-6 is a cytokine that plays an important role in inflammatory reaction and immune response. 4 the most recent clinical experiences in china suggested that il-6 is one of the most important cytokines in this retrospective observational study, we aimed to present treatment responses of tcz in the covid-19 patients and to some extent, provide guidance for clinical use.the patients infected with covid-19, who were treated with tcz from january 27 to 5 march 2020 at zhongfaxincheng campus of tongji hospital in wuhan, china, were recruited in this retrospective study. all patients were anonymous. the study was approved by the ethical committee of huazhong university of science and technology.the data of demographics, comorbidities, treatments, laboratory results, and clinical outcomes of the patients were obtained from the medical records. based on diagnosis and treatment of pneumonia infected by novel coronavirus issued by the national health commission of china, the covid-19 was classified into four types: mildly ill, moderately ill, seriously ill and critically ill. 5 the serum levels of crp and il-6 were observed before and after tcz administration. crp, an acute-phase reactant reflecting the inflammatory activity, was defined as elevated when it was higher than 5.0 mg/l. 2 the level of il-6 was defined as elevated when it was higher than 7.0 pg/ml. 2 the patients whose laboratory data of crp or il-6 is complete deficiency before or after tcz administration were considered as study dropouts. the most recent crp or il-6 values before tcz administration was selected as the value of before tcz therapy and the changes of the value after tcz administration was observed for a week. the clinical outcome of the patients was evaluated within 1 week after tcz therapy.statistical analysis was done with spss, version 23.0. data are presented as median (min-max) or as the number and percentage, as appropriate. the wilcoxon signed-rank test used to compare parameters whenever appropriate. a p-value of less than .05 was considered statistically significant.fifteen patients (12 males and 3 females) with covid-19 were included in this study. the characteristics of patients, the use of tcz and other anti-inflammatory drugs are summarized in table 1 . the median age (min-max) of the patients was 73 (62-80) years. two (13.3%) patients were moderately ill, six (40.0%) patients were seriously ill, and seven (46.7%) patients were critically ill. ten (66.7%) patients had one or more co-morbidities, including cadiocerebrovascular diseases and endocrine system diseases. eight (53.3%) patients received tcz in combination with mp. five (33.3%) patients received tcz administration twice or more. the dose of tcz used in patients was the range from 80 to 600 mg per time.the laboratory findings of the 15 patients before, and in the first week after tcz treatment are summarized in table 2 . the crp levels were far above the normal range in all patients before the start of tcz therapy, and were rapidly ameliorated after the tcz treatment.the value of crp at the first time it was detected after tcz therapy was significantly decreased compared with before tcz therapy, which dropped from 126.9 (10.7-257.9) to 11.2 (0.02-113.7) mg/l (p < .01). although tcz has benefits in relieving inflammatory activ- the present study suggested that a single dose of tcz seems to fail to improve the disease activity in critically ill patients although it was used in combination with glucocorticoid. however, repeated doses (even repeated with a lower dose) of tcz might improve the condition of critically ill patients. therefore, in addition to the safety advantage, a repeated dose of tcz is more likely to be effective than glucocorticoid in the treatment of covid-19. moreover, single dose of tcz might be expected to benefit these seriously ill patients with about 10 times elevated il-6. and the moderately ill patient with an extremely higher level of il-6, almost 90 times of normal, could also benefit from repetitive tcz therapy. nevertheless, it seems that repeat the dose at a frequency of daily, every other day, or every 3 days with a totally two to three doses would be sensible in these critically ill patients or our result should be evaluated with caution although we reported a good response in patients with tcz. the number of cases reported is still small and using laboratory parameters to define the disease activity is still challenging. furthermore, the treatment duration observed in our study may not be sufficient to make a final conclusion. therefore, observation with a sufficient number of covid-19 patients is still needed to document the effectiveness of tcz.as of 20 april, almost 1.7 million people globally have been diagnosed with corona virus disease 2019 , a pandemic that has evolved from the emergence of a new coronavirus strain, acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2), in china. more than 170,000 deaths have been reported, while there are certainly many more cases of milder disease that have not been diagnosed and officially confirmed due to limited testing capacity in most countries. the pandemic is a global emergency due to the rapid transmission of the disease and the potential to overwhelm the healthcare systems, and is expected to have considerable economic and health impacts. possible contributing factors, their possible role in the relatively high infection, death rates between countries and origin have recently been studied (goumenou et al. 2020a , goumenou et al. 2020b ). this new outbreak has been additionally evaluated for current knowledge on coronaviruses based on a short history to epidemiology, pathogenesis, clinical manifestation of the disease, as well as treatment and prevention strategies (docea et al 2020) . the search for potential protective and therapeutic antiviral strategies is of particular and urgent concern (skalny et al., 2020) .while in most cases, especially in young people without any comorbidities, the disease is expected to be relatively mild, there is a substantial proportion of patients who develop complications and need intensive care-unit support and mechanical intubation. in one case series of 1099 patients in china (guan et al., 2020) , 6.1% of cases suffered from the primary composite end-point of admission to an intensive care unit, the use of mechanical ventilation, or death.patients with severe disease typically present with dyspnea and hypoxemia shortly after disease initiation, and may quickly progress to respiratory failure, acute respiratory distress syndrome (ards) and multi-organ failure (chen et al., 2020) . predictors of adverse outcomes include j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f elevated levels of inflammatory markers and pro-inflammatory cytokines. a study of 150 covid-19 cases reported that elevated levels of c-reactive protein (crp), ferritin and il-6 were associated with death (ruan et al., 2020) . il-6, an important pro-inflammatory cytokine, was elevated in fatal cases of covid-19 in another study of 191 patients (zhou et al., 2020) . another study of 452 patients reported that those with severe disease showed lymphocytopenia, neutrophilia, low levels of monocytes, eosinophils and basophils, and elevated levels of infection-related biomarkers and inflammatory cytokines (qin et al., 2020) . pathological examination of a case in china revealed bilateral diffuse alveolar damage, desquamation of pneumocytes, hyaline membrane formation and interstitial mononuclear inflammatory infiltrates (xu et al., 2020) . flow cytometry of peripheral blood revealed reduced levels of cd4+ and cd8+ t cells, which however were hyper-activated, and elevated concentration of proinflammatory ccr6+ th17 in cd4+ t cells. such findings are hallmarks of ards and resemble features observed in sars and middle eastern respiratory syndrome (ng et al., 2016; ding et al., 2003) . systemic vasculitis was also observed (xu et al., 2020) . therefore, it seems that immune dysregulation may be implicated in the pathophysiology of severe covid-19.while for decades common thinking suggested that every immune response to antigenic invasion was always beneficial in averting potential damage, studies in the 1980s identified that immune cells produce proteins with pleiotropic properties, having the potential to be either beneficial or harmful (tracey, 2007) . the proteins, called cytokines, were found to cause clinical manifestations similar to sepsis such as hemodynamic instability, fever, and localized inflammation (tracey et al., 1986; dinarello et al., 1986) . cytokines are important in mediating both immune cell recruitment and complex intracellular signaling control mechanisms that they are expressed by numerous cells,   including macrophages, monocytes, b cells and t cells, promote differentiation of t-helper cells and stimulate cd4+ cells (turner et al., 2014) . while activation of the immune system is important in fighting pathogens, dysregulation of cytokine production may lead to uncontrolled effects that can ultimately be detrimental to health (dinarello, 2007; turner et al., 2014) . several animal experimental models inducing pro-inflammatory cytokines, such as sepsis, ischemia-reperfusion and pancreatitis have shown that vagus stimulation improves outcomes. this effect is mediated by the nicotinic acetylcholine receptor (nachr) α7 subunit on macrophages (wang et al., 2003) . mice deficient of the α7 subunit exhibited increased endotoxin-induced tnf production, and electrical vagus innervation failed to reduce serum tnf levels (wang et al., 2003) . b-lymphocytes also express α7 nachrs. macrophages appear to be very sensitive to acetylcholine, which suggests that any source of acetylcholine, even from nonneuronal sources such as epithelial and endothelial cells, could also modulate the activity of adjacent macrophages (tracey, 2002) . besides tnf, other pro-inflammatory cytokines are inhibited by acetylcholine, such as high mobility group b1 (hmgb1), il-1, and il-6 (ulloa, 2005 ).modulation of inflammatory and immune response by the central nervous system (cns) through the vagus nerve is based on bi-directional communication between the immune and nervous systems. afferent vagus nerve fibers, located in nucleus tractus solitarius, provide sensory input to the cns about the inflammatory status that can result in the transmission of efferent signals, originating from the dorsal motor nucleus, to control the inflammatory response (pavlov et al., 2003) . such a response is rapid and localized, unlike the diffusible anti-inflammatory network, which is slow, distributed, non-integrated and dependent on concentration gradients (tracey, 2002) .smoking is known to increase the risk for respiratory infection susceptibility and severity (cohen et al., 1993; millett et al., 2015) . considering that covid-19 was declared by the world health organization as a pandemic, a substantial disease burden would be expected among the estimated 1.1 billion smokers, especially in countries with high smoking prevalence. therefore, there were understandable concerns about this population subgroup (berlin et al., 2020) .additionally, smoking-related disease conditions such as cardiovascular disease and copd are also established risk factors for adverse outcomes in covid-19 (wu & mcgoogan, 2020) .china was the first country to be affected by the pandemic and has a high smoking prevalence. in 2018, the population smoking prevalence was 26.6% with a much higher prevalence in men (50.5%) than in women (2.1%) (world health organization, 2018). therefore, a high smoking prevalence among patients with covid-19 would be expected, even if smoking did not adversely affect disease susceptibility and severity. it is obviously inappropriate to suggest that anyone should initiate smoking or to continue to smoke due to the well-established smoking-related morbidities and the large number of potentially toxic chemicals in cigarette smoke. furthermore, it is unlikely that any other compound in tobacco cigarette smoke, besides nicotine, would be implicated to the potential benefits observed in smokers. moreover, due to the adverse effects of smoking and the fact that many smokers would suffer from co-morbidities (such as cardiovascular disease, copd etc.), it is expected that the potential benefits of nicotine would be blunted when observed in smokers.nicotine is a cholinergic agonist. therefore, it is an important inhibitor of pro-inflammatory cytokines acting through the cholinergic anti-inflammatory pathway via α7-nachrs. nicotine a prominent feature of covid-19 is coagulopathy that results in thromboembolic complications. venous thromboembolism was reported in 25% of patients who were not under thromboprophylaxis, and was associated with higher mortality rate (cui et al., 2020) . abnormal coagulation parameters were also associated with poor survival (tang et al., 2020) . although antagonists of acetylcholine on α7-nach receptor with high affinity, we decided to explore the hypothesis that sars-cov-2 may have acquired sequences by any of the potential, and not defined yet, intermediates through genomic recombination. we compared the protein sequences between sars-cov-2 and snake venom neurotoxins. we were able to identify regions with four or five amino acids homology between the coronavirus and several neurotoxin molecules (e.g. sars-cov-2 compared with alpha bungarotoxin, fig 1a; sars-cov-2 and alpha-cobratoxin, fig 1b) . j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f therefore, we hypothesize that these sequences on the sars-cov-2 proteins, being similar to the active sites of a neurotoxin, can result in binding to nachrs and adversely affecting their function by preventing the action of acetylcholine.nicotine could act as a competitive agonist for the nachrs that could restore the compromised function of the nicotinic cholinergic system. this may be feasible through repurposing already approved (for other indications) pharmaceutical nicotine products such as nicotine patches for use by non-smokers, or even by using these products as already indicated (i.e. as smoking substitutes) among current smokers. these products are available over-the-counter in most countries. they have been administered therapeutically in non-smokers for neurological conditions and inflammatory bowel disease for larger periods than would be needed for covid- clinical trials will dictate future approaches and the role of nicotine in covid-19, while further experimental studies should examine the affinity of the virus to nachrs.in conclusion, we noticed that most of the clinical characteristics of severe covid-19 could be explained by dysregulation of the cholinergic anti-inflammatory system. the observation that patients eventually develop cytokine storm which results in rapid clinical deterioration, led to the development of a hypothesis about the series of events associated with adverse outcomes in covid-19 (fig. 2) .once someone is infected with sars-cov-2, the immune system is mobilized. as the virus replicates, cell and viral debris or virions may interact with the nachrs blocking the action of the cholinergic anti-inflammatory pathway. if the initial immune response is not enough to combat the viral invasion at an early stage, the extensive and prolonged replication of the virus j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f will eventually block a large part the cholinergic anti-inflammatory pathway seriously compromising its ability to control and regulate the immune response. the uncontrolled action of pro-inflammatory cytokines will result in the development of cytokine storm, with acute lung injury leading to ards, coagulation disturbances and multiorgan failure. based on this hypothesis, covid-19 appears to eventually become a disease of the nicotinic cholinergic system. nicotine could maintain or restore the function of the cholinergic anti-inflammatory system and thus control the release and activity of pro-inflammatory cytokines. this could prevent or suppress the cytokine storm. this hypothesis needs to be examined in the laboratory and the clinical setting.ethics approval and consent to participate. not applicable.as of june 3, 2020 over 1.8 million cases of coronavirus disease 2019 (covid- 19) have been identified in the united states with over 105,000 deaths reported [1] . the severity of covid-19 ranges from asymptomatic to severe disease [2] [3] [4] . severe disease often requires admission to the intensive care unit (icu) [4] [5] [6] . mortality rates of critically ill patients with covid-19 range from 16-78% [7] .pharmacologic treatment options have been proposed for covid-19, including antivirals and immunomodulators [8] . antivirals have not demonstrated reductions in mortality to date [9] [10] [11] [12] .immunomodulators remain a possible therapeutic option based on the pathophysiologic understanding of covid-19 [13] [14] [15] .covid-19 can progress in two overlapping phases described as an initial viral response followed by a host inflammatory response [16] . the host response includes an unregulated pro-inflammatory cytokine storm resulting in lung injury, development of acute respiratory distress syndrome (ards), and death [16, 17] . interleukin-6 (il-6) is theorized to play a significant role in the covid-19 related cytokine storm [13] [14] [15] [16] . tocilizumab, an il-6 receptor antagonist, has garnered interest as a possible treatment option [8, 14, 18] . the use of il-6 receptor antagonists is recommended in the setting of clinical trials [19, 20] . risks of immunomodulator use include propagation of covid-19 progression by interfering with innate antiviral immunity, development of secondary infections, and adverse drug effects [21] [22] [23] [24] . given the high mortality rates observed in severe covid-19, clinicians have used off-label tocilizumab and other immunomodulatory agents in practice in select cases [25] [26] [27] [28] [29] .literature to date on tocilizumab in covid-19 has described outcomes at 14 days, predominately in those with less severe disease, and with limited descriptions of adverse effects. the factors associated with a beneficial response from tocilizumab are unknown. we report the clinical characteristics associated with in-hospital survival at 28 days in patients with covid-19 receiving off-label tocilizumab.this was a retrospective cohort study of patients admitted to a five-hospital health system in southeast and south-central michigan. the study was approved by henry ford health system's institutional review board (irb #13809) with waiver of consent.patients hospitalized from march 1, 2020 through april 3, 2020 were eligible for inclusion if they were 18 years of age or older, had confirmed covid-19 infection, and received tocilizumab. patients were excluded if they were transferred from an out-of-system hospital, had a positive microbiologic culture 24 hours prior to or 48 hours after tocilizumab administration that was treated with an antimicrobial, were pregnant, or incarcerated. a confirmed case of covid-19 was defined as a patient with positive reversetranscriptase-polymerase-chain-reaction (rt-pcr) assay for severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus-2 (sars-cov-2) in a nasopharyngeal sample tested by the michigan department of health and human services or the health system's centralized clinical microbiology laboratory.patients were risk stratified by symptoms prior to tocilizumab administration as mild, moderate, or severe covid-19. patients without hypoxia or exertional dyspnea were considered to have mild covid-19. patients who presented with infiltrates on chest radiography and required supplemental oxygen by nasal cannula or high-flow nasal cannula (hfnc) were classified as having moderate covid-19. patients who had respiratory failure requiring invasive mechanical ventilation were classified as having severe covid-19 [30] . all patients were followed for up to 28 days from the first dose of tocilizumab. patient data was censored on april 30, 2020.hospitalized patients with covid-19 received supportive care comprised of supplemental oxygen, hfnc, invasive mechanical ventilation, antibiotics, vasopressors, and renal-replacement therapy, as determined by the primary team. patients who progressed to ards were managed with lung protective ventilation strategies [19] . an institutional treatment covid-19 guideline was developed that included lopinavir-ritonavir with ribavirin or hydroxychloroquine monotherapy based on disease severity. intravenous (iv) remdesivir was available for compassionate use or within a clinical trial. the institutional guidelines were developed by consensus, and based on the available literature, experience from wuhan, china and other centers around the world affected by covid-19 before michigan. on march 17, 2020 lopinavir-ritonavir with ribavirin was removed [9] . a short course of corticosteroids was added to the institutional guideline for patients with moderate to severe covid-19 on march 20, 2020 [19, 30] .tocilizumab was used on a case-by-case basis for patients exhibiting symptoms of cytokine storm, as described below, when assessed by the primary and infectious disease physician.patients were eligible for tocilizumab if exhibiting persistent fevers (38.0 ⁰c for greater than 6 hours), had a partial pressure of oxygen to fraction of inspired oxygen ratio less than 200, and exhibited persistently rising inflammatory laboratory parameters (ferritin, d-dimer, and lactate dehydrogenase (ldh)) or an elevated inflammatory laboratory parameter defined as a ferritin ≥ 1000 μg/l, d-dimer ≥ 5 mg/ml, or ldh ≥ 500 u/l. an il-6 level ≥ five times the upper limits of normal (≤ 5 pg/ml) was assessed in addition to the above parameters. bacterial, fungal, and alternate viral infections were to be ruled out prior to tocilizumab administration. tocilizumab was administered as an 8 mg/kg iv dose using actual body weight with a maximum dose of 800 mg. doses were rounded to 400 mg, 600 mg, or 800 mg.patients were eligible for a second dose if persistently febrile despite treatment. due to medication shortages the tocilizumab dose was changed to a fixed 400 mg iv dose for all patients on march 30, 2020.data was ascertained from the health system's electronic medical record and recorded in a standardized electronic case report form. demographic data, information on clinical symptoms at presentation, vital signs, laboratory tests, chest radiograph results, covid-19 treatments received prior to tocilizumab, length of stay, and discharge disposition were collected. baseline data was defined as information collected within 24 hours from emergency department presentation. study day 0 was defined as the first day tocilizumab was administered.the comorbidity, age, lymphocyte, and ldh (call) score was calculated at baseline [31] . the score ranges from 4 to 13, with increased values predicting higher likelihood of progressing to severe covid-19. the sequential organ failure assessment (sofa) score and a six-point ordinal scale of clinical status (as recommended by the world health organization r&d blueprint group) were collected at baseline and after tocilizumab administration [10, 32] . the six-category scale consists of the following categories: 1, not hospitalized; 2, hospitalized, not requiring supplemental oxygen; 3, hospitalized, requiring supplemental oxygen; 4, hospitalized, requiring hfnc, non-invasive mechanical ventilation, or both; 5, hospitalized, requiring invasive mechanical ventilation, ecmo, or both; and 6, death. the american society for transplantation and cellular therapy (astct) consensus grading for cytokine release syndrome (crs) used for chimeric antigen receptor t-cell therapy was collected prior to tocilizumab [33] . the astct grading ranges from 1 to 5 and has three features including temperature, blood pressure, and oxygenation support to denote crs grade. ards was diagnosed and classified according to the berlin definition [34] . adverse effects observed in practice and those known to be associated with chronic tocilizumab use were collected. infection after tocilizumab was defined as a positive microbiologic assay that prompted antimicrobials for the identified pathogen.characteristics of non-survivors, defined as in-hospital death within 28 days of tocilizumab administration, were compared to survivors. comparisons included assessment of demographics, time from symptom onset to tocilizumab administration ≤ 12 days, laboratory parameters, alternative treatments received, and prognostic scores collected [9] . other endpoints evaluated included clinical response to tocilizumab, defined as a decline of two levels on the six-category scale or discharged alive from the hospital [10] . a comparison of laboratory parameters, sofa score, six-category scale, and severity of ards in survivors and non-survivors from days 0 to 15 was completed. the six-category scale was also assessed at study day 28.continuous variables were reported as median and interquartile range (iqr) and compared using the mann-whitney u test or student t-test, as appropriate. categorical data was reported as number and percentage (no., %) and compared using the chi-squared test or fisher's exact test, as appropriate. no imputations were made for missing data points. the sample size was derived from all eligible consecutive hospitalized patients during the study period. a two-sided α < 0.05 was considered statistically significant.bivariate and multivariate logistic regression analysis were planned a-priori to identify independent predictors associated with 28 day in-hospital survival. covariates in the bivariate analysis with a p-value <0.2 and clinical rationale were included in a multivariate regression model that was restricted to a subject-to-variable ratio of 10:1. statistical analysis was performed using ibm spss version 25 (chicago, il) and sas 9.4 (cary, nc).a total of 92 patients with an order for tocilizumab were identified. eleven were excluded, leaving 81 available for analysis in the study (supplemental index figure 1 ). the median age was 64 (58-71) years and 69.1% were male. the median time from covid-19 symptom onset to hospital admission was 5 (3-7) days. the 28 day in-hospital mortality was 43.2%, leaving 46 patients in the survivors and 35 in the non-survivors group. on study day 0 patients were classified as having mild, moderate, or severe covid-19 in 1 (1.2%), 10 (12.3%), and 70 (86.4%) of cases, respectively. the median sofa score was 9 (6-11) on day 0, and the median increase in the sofa score from baseline was 5 (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) there were no differences observed in the prevalence of comorbidities, rate of obesity, median sofa score on day 0, or median change in sofa score from baseline to day 0 between survivors and non-survivors. no other differences were noted between the survivors and non-survivors at baseline or on day 0 (table 1 and supplemental index table 1 ). the median days from symptom onset to tocilizumab administration was 10 (8-13) days. there was a difference in time from symptom onset to tocilizumab administration between survivors and non-survivors (9 [7] [8] [9] [10] [11] vs. 11 [9] [10] [11] [12] [13] [14] [15] ; p=0.038). there were no differences noted in the covid-19 treatment characteristics or prognostic scores of survivors and non-survivors ( table 1 ).the single independent predictor of 28 day in-hospital survival was receipt of tocilizumab within 12 days of symptom onset (adjusted or: 0.296, 95% ci: 0.098-0.889). a sofa score ≥ 8 was independently associated with 28 day in-hospital mortality (adjusted or: 2.842, 95% ci: 1.042-7.753) ( [9] [10] [11] [12] [13] [14] [15] [16] [17] [18] [19] [20] ; p < 0.001). fourteen (17.3%) patients remained hospitalized at the end of the study (table 3) no differences were noted in the occurrence of adverse effects between survivors and non-survivors (supplemental table 2 ).in this retrospective cohort study, the clinical characteristics, factors independently associated with survival, and 28 day outcomes in patients with covid-19 after tocilizumab administration were described. receipt of tocilizumab within 12 days of symptom onset in patients with covid-19 was the only factor independently associated with in-hospital survival at 28 days. a clinical response was more likely to occur in those that survived. the association with improved survival remained intact when adjusting for sofa score and male sex. covid-19 progression has been characterized by a biphasic response with the latter phase consisting of an excessive hyper-inflammatory response [16] . early intervention to mitigate the cytokine storm with an immunomodulator may optimize patient outcomes. this study further supports that intervention timing relative to disease onset is a key factor [27] .the study population had a high likelihood for severe covid-19 and mortality based on presenting call and sofa scores [31, 35] . high rates of obesity, hypertension, and diabetes were observed in the present study relative to previous epidemiologic reports of covid-19 [5, 7] . rates of mechanical ventilation and mortality were higher compared to previous reports of tocilizumab use in covid-19. reasons for this difference in mortality may be explained by a difference in severity of illness, high rates of co-morbidities associated with severe covid-19, a longer duration of follow-up, a higher rate of invasive mechanical ventilation, and rates of ards [25] [26] [27] [28] . mortality rates observed in the present study are similar to those reported for critically ill covid-19 populations and the general icu population with ards [7, 36, 37] .a sofa score of ≥ 8 on day 0 was independently associated with mortality. a sofa score of ≥ 3 on hospital presentation has been described as an independent predictor for mortality in the covid-19 population [35] . an improvement was noted in survivors for sofa scores and six-category scale. ards severity was also improved in survivors, a finding consistent with other immunomodulatory trials [29] .these findings are important to guide the use of off-label tocilizumab in those with cytokine storm associated with covid-19 until results of randomized controlled trials are available.no standard definition for cytokine storm related to covid-19 exists. previous studies have defined cytokine storm associated with covid-19 using various threshold values for vital signs, crp, il-6, ferritin, and ldh [25] [26] [27] 29] . crp is the only common diagnostic marker amongst all published reports to date with values of 5-10 mg/dl (10-20 times the upper limits of normal) being used to define cytokine storm. following tocilizumab administration in the present study, crp was reduced in all patients, as seen in previous reports of tocilizumab and an il-1 receptor antagonist, anakinra [25] [26] [27] [28] [29] . the astct grading for crs identified 85.2% of patients with cytokine storm, but this may be an imperfect diagnostic tool in the setting of covid-19. future research is needed to establish criteria to define cytokine storm associated with covid-19 and identify progression of disease from the viral phase to the hyperinflammatory phase [16] . recent studies have demonstrated the effectiveness of antivirals in limiting disease severity [10, 12] . a step-wise treatment approach using antiviral and immunomodulatory agents in succession for patients with disease progression appears to be a viable therapeutic approach that may warrant research.hypertriglyceridemia occurred frequently in the present cohort, irrespective of propofol use.clinicians should routinely monitor triglyceride levels, markers for pancreatitis, and secondary hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis (shlh) if tocilizumab is administered. due to the inflammatory markers associated with shlh, an il-6 antagonist may not prevent this complication, and continuous monitoring is paramount [23] . secondary infections were noted in 22.2% of patients, which is higher than a previous report of 16%; however, rates in epidemiologic reports of critically ill covid-19 populations describe a range of 4.7-32.5% [10, 28, 35, 38, 39] . if unable to enroll patients into a clinical trial, clinicians should consider a multidisciplinary approach to weigh the benefits and potential risks of off-label tocilizumab for covid-19.this study has several limitations. the study population included is predominately one that is critically ill with severe covid-19, and results may not be applicable to less severe populations. this study was conducted within a single health system, with a limited sample size, and with no placebo comparator group. the study follow-up period was 28 days after tocilizumab administration which limits the assessment of long term efficacy and adverse effects. however, the follow-up is longer than what has been reported for tocilizumab and is consistent with duration of follow-up for antiviral agents [9, 10] .the health system's covid-19 guideline were modified during the study period, but the treatments received in both survivors and non-survivors was consistent.the receipt of tocilizumab within 12 days of symptom onset may be a key factor independently associated with 28-day survival in covid-19. research is needed to define diagnostic criteria for cytokine storm associated with covid-19, establish the clinical efficacy of tocilizumab in placebocontrolled trials, and further describe which covid-19 populations may derive clinical benefit from tocilizumab. to play a significant role in the covid-19 related cytokine storm [13] [14] [15] [16] . tocilizumab, an il-6 receptor antagonist, has garnered interest as a possible treatment option [8, 14, 18] . the use of il-6 receptor antagonists is recommended in the setting of clinical trials [19, 20] . risks of immunomodulator use include propagation of covid-19 progression by interfering with innate antiviral immunity, development of secondary infections, and adverse drug effects [21] [22] [23] [24] . given the high mortality rates observed in severe covid-19, clinicians have used offlabel tocilizumab and other immunomodulatory agents in practice in select cases [25] [26] [27] [28] [29] .literature to date on tocilizumab in covid-19 has described outcomes at 14 days, predominately in those with less severe disease, and with limited descriptions of adverse effects. the factors associated with a beneficial response from tocilizumab are unknown. we report the clinical characteristics associated with in-hospital survival at 28 days in patients with covid-19 receiving off-label tocilizumab.this was a retrospective cohort study of patients admitted to a fivehospital health system in southeast and south-central michigan. the study was approved by henry ford health system's institutional review board (irb #13809) with waiver of consent.patients hospitalized from march 1, 2020 through april 3, 2020 were eligible for inclusion if they were 18 years of age or older, had confirmed covid-19 infection, and received tocilizumab. patients were excluded if they were transferred from an out-of-system hospital, had a positive microbiologic culture 24 h prior to or 48 h after tocilizumab administration that was treated with an antimicrobial, were pregnant, or incarcerated. a confirmed case of covid-19 was defined as a patient with positive reverse-transcriptase-polymerase-chain-reaction (rt-pcr) assay for severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus-2 (sars-cov-2) in a nasopharyngeal sample tested by the michigan department of health and human services or the health system's centralized clinical microbiology laboratory.patients were risk stratified by symptoms prior to tocilizumab administration as mild, moderate, or severe covid-19. patients without hypoxia or exertional dyspnea were considered to have mild covid-19. patients who presented with infiltrates on chest radiography and required supplemental oxygen by nasal cannula or high-flow nasal cannula (hfnc) were classified as having moderate covid-19. patients who had respiratory failure requiring invasive mechanical ventilation were classified as having severe covid-19 [30] . all patients were followed for up to 28 days from the first dose of tocilizumab. patient data was censored on april 30, 2020.hospitalized patients with covid-19 received supportive care comprised of supplemental oxygen, hfnc, invasive mechanical ventilation, antibiotics, vasopressors, and renal-replacement therapy, as determined by the primary team. patients who progressed to ards were managed with lung protective ventilation strategies [19] . an institutional treatment covid-19 guideline was developed that included lopinavir-ritonavir with ribavirin or hydroxychloroquine monotherapy based on disease severity. intravenous (iv) remdesivir was available for compassionate use or within a clinical trial. the institutional guidelines were developed by consensus, and based on the available literature, experience from wuhan, china and other centers around the world affected by covid-19 before michigan. on march 17, 2020 lopinavirritonavir with ribavirin was removed [9] . a short course of corticosteroids was added to the institutional guideline for patients with moderate to severe covid-19 on march 20, 2020 [19, 30] . tocilizumab was used on a case-by-case basis for patients exhibiting symptoms of cytokine storm, as described below, when assessed by the primary and infectious disease physician.patients were eligible for tocilizumab if exhibiting persistent fevers (38.0°c for greater than 6 h), had a partial pressure of oxygen to fraction of inspired oxygen ratio less than 200, and exhibited persistently rising inflammatory laboratory parameters (ferritin, d-dimer, and lactate dehydrogenase (ldh)) or an elevated inflammatory laboratory parameter defined as a ferritin ≥1000 μg/l, d-dimer ≥ 5 mg/ ml, or ldh ≥ 500 u/l. an il-6 level ≥ five times the upper limits of normal (≤5 pg/ml) was assessed in addition to the above parameters. bacterial, fungal, and alternate viral infections were to be ruled out prior to tocilizumab administration. tocilizumab was administered as an 8 mg/kg iv dose using actual body weight with a maximum dose of 800 mg. doses were rounded to 400 mg, 600 mg, or 800 mg. patients were eligible for a second dose if persistently febrile despite treatment. due to medication shortages the tocilizumab dose was changed to a fixed 400 mg iv dose for all patients on march 30, 2020.data was ascertained from the health system's electronic medical record and recorded in a standardized electronic case report form. demographic data, information on clinical symptoms at presentation, vital signs, laboratory tests, chest radiograph results, covid-19 treatments received prior to tocilizumab, length of stay, and discharge disposition were collected. baseline data was defined as information collected within 24 h from emergency department presentation. study day 0 was defined as the first day tocilizumab was administered.the comorbidity, age, lymphocyte, and ldh (call) score was calculated at baseline [31] . the score ranges from 4 to 13, with increased values predicting higher likelihood of progressing to severe covid-19. the sequential organ failure assessment (sofa) score and a six-point ordinal scale of clinical status (as recommended by the world health organization r&d blueprint group) were collected at baseline and after tocilizumab administration [10, 32] . the six-category scale consists of the following categories: 1, not hospitalized; 2, hospitalized, not requiring supplemental oxygen; 3, hospitalized, requiring supplemental oxygen; 4, hospitalized, requiring hfnc, non-invasive mechanical ventilation, or both; 5, hospitalized, requiring invasive mechanical ventilation, ecmo, or both; and 6, death. the american society for transplantation and cellular therapy (astct) consensus grading for cytokine release syndrome (crs) used for chimeric antigen receptor tcell therapy was collected prior to tocilizumab [33] . the astct grading ranges from 1 to 5 and has three features including temperature, blood pressure, and oxygenation support to denote crs grade. ards was diagnosed and classified according to the berlin definition [34] . adverse effects observed in practice and those known to be associated with chronic tocilizumab use were collected. infection after tocilizumab was defined as a positive microbiologic assay that prompted antimicrobials for the identified pathogen.characteristics of non-survivors, defined as in-hospital death within 28 days of tocilizumab administration, were compared to survivors. comparisons included assessment of demographics, time from symptom onset to tocilizumab administration ≤12 days, laboratory parameters, alternative treatments received, and prognostic scores collected [9] . other endpoints evaluated included clinical response to tocilizumab, defined as a decline of two levels on the six-category scale or discharged alive from the hospital [10] . a comparison of laboratory parameters, sofa score, six-category scale, and severity of ards in survivors and non-survivors from days 0-15 was completed. the six-category scale was also assessed at study day 28. (continued on next page)continuous variables were reported as median and interquartile range (iqr) and compared using the mann-whitney u test or student ttest, as appropriate. categorical data was reported as number and percentage (no., %) and compared using the chi-squared test or fisher's exact test, as appropriate. no imputations were made for missing data points. the sample size was derived from all eligible consecutive hospitalized patients during the study period. a two-sided α < 0.05 was considered statistically significant. bivariate and multivariate logistic regression analysis were planned a-priori to identify independent predictors associated with 28 day in-hospital survival. covariates in the bivariate analysis with a p-value < 0.2 and clinical rationale were included in a multivariate regression model that was restricted to a subject-to-variable ratio of 10:1. statistical analysis was performed using ibm spss version 25 (chicago, il) and sas 9.4 (cary, nc).a total of 92 patients with an order for tocilizumab were identified. eleven were excluded, leaving 81 available for analysis in the study (supplemental fig. 1 ). the median age was 64 (58-71) years and 69.1% were male. the median time from covid-19 symptom onset to hospital admission was 5 (3-7) days. the 28 day in-hospital mortality was 43.2%, leaving 46 patients in the survivors and 35 in the non-survivors group. on study day 0 patients were classified as having mild, the following variables were assessed for goodness of fit within the multivariate analysis and did not fit the model: age > 60, presence of acute respiratory distress syndrome, use of prone mechanical ventilation, body mass index greater than 30, call score ≥7, african american, presence of infection. *sofa denotes sequential organ failure assessment.clinical outcomes at the end of the study day 28. moderate, or severe covid-19 in 1 (1.2%), 10 (12.3%), and 70 (86.4%) of cases, respectively. the median sofa score was 9 (6-11) on day 0, and the median increase in the sofa score from baseline was 5 (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) .the c-reactive protein was higher in non-survivors (13.8 [9.5-21.5] vs. 19 [14.4-32.7 ] mg/dl; p = 0.01). there were no differences observed in the prevalence of comorbidities, rate of obesity, median sofa score on day 0, or median change in sofa score from baseline to day 0 between survivors and non-survivors. no other differences were noted between the survivors and non-survivors at baseline or on day 0 (table 1 and supplemental  table 1 ). the median days from symptom onset to tocilizumab administration was 10 (8-13) days. there was a difference in time from symptom onset to tocilizumab administration between survivors and non-survivors (9 [7] [8] [9] [10] [11] vs. 11 [9] [10] [11] [12] [13] [14] [15] ; p = 0.038). there were no differences noted in the covid-19 treatment characteristics or prognostic scores of survivors and non-survivors ( table 1) .the single independent predictor of 28 day in-hospital survival was receipt of tocilizumab within 12 days of symptom onset (adjusted or: 0.296, 95% ci: 0.098-0.889). a sofa score ≥8 was independently associated with 28 day in-hospital mortality (adjusted or: 2.842, 95% ci: 1.042-7.753) ( table 2) . patients in the survivor group were more likely to have a clinical response to tocilizumab by day 28 (80.4% vs 5.7%; p = < 0.001). the hospital length of stay was longer in the survivors compared to non-survivors (27.5 [14-31] vs 14 [9] [10] [11] [12] [13] [14] [15] [16] [17] [18] [19] [20] ; p < 0.001). fourteen (17.3%) patients remained hospitalized at the end of the study (table 3) . numerical reductions in ferritin and crp were observed in survivors and non-survivors after tocilizumab administration to study day 15. lactate dehydrogenase declined in survivors from day 0-15. significant differences were observed in crp, ldh, d-dimer, and ferritin levels when comparing survivors and nonsurvivors on select study days as depicted in fig. 1 . improvements were observed in the six-category scale, sofa score, and ards severity when comparing the survivors to non-survivors from study day 0-15 (fig. 2) .twenty-nine (35.8%) patients experienced hypertriglyceridemia with levels greater than 500 mg/dl. of the patients that developed hypertriglyceridemia, eight did not receive propofol. all patients with elevated amylase and lipase levels received concurrent propofol. a total of 18 (22.2%) patients developed an infection. the median time to development of infection from tocilizumab was 9 (6-13) days. no difference was observed in the median time to development of infection between survivors and non-survivors. there was a total of seventeen (21.0%) bacterial infections and three (3.7%) fungal infections. no differences were noted in the occurrence of adverse effects between survivors and non-survivors (supplemental table 2 ).in this retrospective cohort study, the clinical characteristics, factors independently associated with survival, and 28 day outcomes in patients with covid-19 after tocilizumab administration were described. receipt of tocilizumab within 12 days of symptom onset in patients with covid-19 was the only factor independently associated with in- fig. 1 . temporal changes in laboratory parameters after tocilizumab administration. fig. 1 shows temporal changes in c-reactive protein, serum ferritin, lactate dehydrogenase, and d-dimer. the n values in parenthesis represents the evaluable population in the data, if not representative of the entire cohort. median values are shown by the circles graphed on the line, interquartile range is denoted by the error bars above and below the circles. a p < 0.05 for non-survivors vs survivors on study day. crp=c-reactive protein, ldh = lactate dehydrogenase.hospital survival at 28 days. a clinical response was more likely to occur in those that survived. the association with improved survival remained intact when adjusting for sofa score and male sex. covid-19 progression has been characterized by a biphasic response with the latter phase consisting of an excessive hyper-inflammatory response [16] . early intervention to mitigate the cytokine storm with an immunomodulator may optimize patient outcomes. this study further supports that intervention timing relative to disease onset is a key factor [27] .the study population had a high likelihood for severe covid-19 and mortality based on presenting call and sofa scores [31, 35] . high rates of obesity, hypertension, and diabetes were observed in the present study relative to previous epidemiologic reports of covid-19 [5, 7] . rates of mechanical ventilation and mortality were higher compared to previous reports of tocilizumab use in covid-19. reasons for this difference in mortality may be explained by a difference in severity of illness, high rates of co-morbidities associated with severe covid-19, a longer duration of follow-up, a higher rate of invasive mechanical ventilation, and rates of ards [25] [26] [27] [28] . mortality rates observed in the present study are similar to those reported for critically ill covid-19 populations and the general icu population with ards [7, 36, 37] .a sofa score of ≥8 on day 0 was independently associated with mortality. a sofa score of ≥3 on hospital presentation has been described as an independent predictor for mortality in the covid-19 population [35] . an improvement was noted in survivors for sofa scores and six-category scale. ards severity was also improved in survivors, a finding consistent with other immunomodulatory trials [29] . these findings are important to guide the use of off-label tocilizumab in those with cytokine storm associated with covid-19 until results of randomized controlled trials are available.no standard definition for cytokine storm related to covid-19 exists. previous studies have defined cytokine storm associated with covid-19 using various threshold values for vital signs, crp, il-6, ferritin, and ldh [25] [26] [27] 29] . crp is the only common diagnostic marker amongst all published reports to date with values of 5-10 mg/ dl (10-20 times the upper limits of normal) being used to define cytokine storm. following tocilizumab administration in the present study, crp was reduced in all patients, as seen in previous reports of tocilizumab and an il-1 receptor antagonist, anakinra [25] [26] [27] [28] [29] . the astct grading for crs identified 85.2% of patients with cytokine storm, but this may be an imperfect diagnostic tool in the setting of covid-19. future research is needed to establish criteria to define cytokine storm associated with covid-19 and identify progression of disease from the viral phase to the hyper-inflammatory phase [16] . recent studies have demonstrated the effectiveness of antivirals in limiting disease severity [10, 12] . a step-wise treatment approach using antiviral and immunomodulatory agents in succession for patients with disease progression appears to be a viable therapeutic approach that may warrant research.hypertriglyceridemia occurred frequently in the present cohort, irrespective of propofol use. clinicians should routinely monitor triglyceride levels, markers for pancreatitis, and secondary hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis (shlh) if tocilizumab is administered. due to the inflammatory markers associated with shlh, an il-6 antagonist may not prevent this complication, and continuous monitoring is paramount [23] . secondary infections were noted in 22.2% of patients, which is higher than a previous report of 16%; however, rates in epidemiologic reports of critically ill covid-19 populations describe a range of 4.7-32.5% [10, 28, 35, 38, 39] . if unable to enroll patients into a clinical trial, clinicians should consider a multidisciplinary approach to weigh the benefits and potential risks of off-label tocilizumab for covid-19.this study has several limitations. the study population included is predominately one that is critically ill with severe covid-19, and results may not be applicable to less severe populations. this study was conducted within a single health system, with a limited sample size, and with no placebo comparator group. the study follow-up period was 28 days after tocilizumab administration which limits the assessment of long term efficacy and adverse effects. however, the follow-up is longer than what has been reported for tocilizumab and is consistent with duration of follow-up for antiviral agents [9, 10] . the health system's covid-19 guideline were modified during the study period, but the treatments received in both survivors and non-survivors was consistent.the receipt of tocilizumab within 12 days of symptom onset may be a key factor independently associated with 28-day survival in covid-19. research is needed to define diagnostic criteria for cytokine storm associated with covid-19, establish the clinical efficacy of tocilizumab in placebo-controlled trials, and further describe which covid-19 populations may derive clinical benefit from tocilizumab.this research did not receive any specific grant from funding agencies in the public, commercial, or not-for-profit sectors. severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2) is the pathogen that causes covid-19. although early studies suggested that children and adolescents could be spared from severe disease, reports have since been published of children hospitalised or dying from covid-19. 1, 2 we report a 14-year-old previously healthy individual who presented to our institution with a 3-day history of pyrexia, abdominal pain, nausea, and vomiting, but with out respiratory symptoms. the patient's mother reported mild respiratory symptoms 3 weeks previously but the patient had not been tested for sars-cov-2.on admission (day -2), the patient was febrile (38·1°c) and cardiovascularly stable, and showed no signs of respiratory distress (figure). the abdomen was tense, with guarding in the right upper and lower quadrants. initial investigations showed lymphopenia (0·14 × 10 9 cells per l [normal range 1·5-7·6]), a signi ficant increase in c-reactive protein (242 mg/l [normal range 0-8]), and sterile pyuria (30 cells). the patient was started on empiric piperacillin-tazobactam for sus pected acute appendicitis, and nasopharyngeal swabs were sent for sars-cov-2 pcr testing. chest radiography (figure, a) and abdominal ultrasound were normal. within 24 h of admission, the patient developed increasing dyspnoea, cough, and oxygen requirement (8 l/min), finally escalating to continuous positive airway pressure ventilation support. the patient seemed visually more unwell and inter acted less, developed a widespread maculopapular blanch ing rash (figure, b), and received fluid boluses for persistent tachycardia. chest ct showed typical findings of sars-cov-2 pneumonia (figure, c). 3 a diagnosis of presumptive covid-19 was made. secondary multisystem inflammatory disease or cytokine storm syndrome was diagnosed based on clinical symptoms, lymphopenia, anaemia, thrombocyto penia, increased acutephase pro teins (ie, c-reactive protein and ferritin), raised serum interleukin (il)-6 (1098 pg/ml [ . furthermore, the patient developed mild polyarticular arthritis of the small joints of the hands. no sub stan tial cervical lymphadenopathy, conjunctivitis, or mucous mem brane changes were seen to suggest classic or com plete kawasaki disease.the patient was not eligible for remdesivir compassionate use because sars-cov-2 pcr was negative. because the patient showed clinical features sugges tive of covid-19-associated cytokine storm syn drome, 1,4 antiinflammatory treatment with recombinant il-1 rec e ptor antagonist (anakinra) was initiated after multi disciplinary discussions. anakinra was started at 4 mg/kg per day (100 mg twice a day) subcutaneously and increased to 8 mg/kg per day (200 mg twice a day) after 36 h, because the patient required inotropic support for hypotension and rising lactate (6 mmol/l). borderline left-ventricular systolic dysfunction, enzyme leak (troponin-t 45 ng/l), aortic regurgitation, and pro gressive left coronary dilatation were noted (figure, d), and aspirin was started (2 mg/kg) for its anti thrombotic effects. of note, kawasaki disease-like features, including coronary aneurysms, have been rep orted in patients with covid-19. 2 since coronary artery dilation can occur in the context of systemic inflammatory disease, endothelial activation, or both, 5 and because the patient did not show additional clinical features of kawasaki disease, we did not start intravenous immuno globulin or corticosteroids, after weighing the risks associated with intravenous immunoglobulin treatment (ie, thromboembolic events, aseptic meningitis, and antibody-dependent enhancement).in temporal relation with anakinra treatment, the patient's respiratory status stabilised and clinical and laboratory variables returned to normal (figure, e), with the exception of coronary dilation that persisted at the time of discharge. thus, anakinra was tapered and discontinued after 6 days. subsequently, serum tested positive for sars-cov-2 igg (borderline day 6, positive day 11). sars-cov-2 pcr on three nasopharyngeal samples (days 3, 5, and 7) and stool (day 11) were negative.to our knowledge, this case is the first paediatric patient reported with cytokine storm syndrome during the covid-19 pandemic presenting without respiratory symptoms on hospital admission who was successfully treated with il-1 inhibition. although respiratory and stool pcr testing was negative, ct chest findings and biochemical and haematological variables were highly suggestive of covid-19, with evidence of seroconversion. considering that pcr test sensitivity ranges around 60%, after three negative pcr results, this case could represent a post-covid-19 inflammatory process. an alternative explanation could be viral replication at an alternative site. although the patient developed earlystage acute respiratory distress syndrome (ards) in the hospital (severe oxygenation defect and bilateral pulmonary infiltrates), respiratory symptoms were not part of the initial presentation. thus, the case resembles a previously unappreciated clinical phenotype of covid-19 in children with rapid onset ards and cytokine storm syndrome after fever and abdominal pain in the absence of preceding respiratory symptoms. 1, 2 based on our current pathophysiological under standing, sars-cov-2 replicates in respiratory and intes tinal epithelial cells and suppresses early type i inter feron responses. furthermore, sars-cov-2 can abort ively infect innate immune cells (monocytes and macro phages), which can be facilitated by immune com plexes, accelerating viral replication and amplify ing pro inflam matory cytokine (il-1, il-6, tumour nec rosis factor [tnf]) release in a process termed antibody-dependent enhancement. viral replication results in tissue damage and excessive recruitment of innate and adaptive immune cells, which mediates a dysregulated hyperinflammatory response ferritin (ng/ml) c-reactive protein (mg/l) d-dimer (ng/ml) that contributes to cyto kine storm syndrome and organ damage, includ ing ards. 6 in addition to the direct cytopathic effect inflicted on target organs, pulmonary damage seen in covid-19 is probably augmented, if not dominated, by an unopposed dysregulated immune response. ards can occur in patients with primary or secondary cytokine storm syndrome, including systemic juvenile idiopathic arthritis, resembling the clinical picture in the reported patient. this finding could account for the rapid onset of clinical and imaging findings. 7 since the patient showed altered clotting (prolonged prothrombin time and activated partial thromboplastin time, and increased d-dimer) in the presence of antiphospholipid antibodies and pathologically reduced serum complement levels, immune complex generation and deposition could, in addition to endothelial activation through il-1, have contributed to activation of the complement and clotting cascades. 8 indeed, postinfectious antiphospholipid syn drome with thromboembolism has been reported in the context of covid-19. 9 furthermore, complement activa tion can take place in systemic inflammatory disorders, such as systemic juvenile idiopathic arthritis-associated macrophage activa tion syndrome. 10 off-label treatment with anakinra was chosen to limit proinflammatory cytokine expression, which could have been triggered by antibody-dependent enhancement or invasion of yet uninfected immune cells to infected tissues. of note, anakinra blocks il-1 receptor signalling, which induces the expression of il-1, il-6, and tnf via activation of nf-κb-dependent pathways. 11 although most clinical trials currently underway investigate il-6 blockade, we chose anakinra based on its action upstream of il-6 and because of less neutropenia, liver enzyme elevation, and hypertriglyceridemia, which are already present in patients with cytokine storm syndrome. furthermore, anakinra reduces mortality in sepsis patients, 12 whereas chronic use of il-6 blocking agents might increase the risk of secondary infections. anakinra treatment coincided with clinical improvement and was stopped after 6 days.during the ongoing pandemic, covid-19 must be considered in patients with increased inflammatory vari ables and abdominal symptoms. the onset of cytokine storm syndrome and ards can be rapid and lifethreatening. based on the time of testing, the site of infection, or both, pcr testing might remain negative.anakinra is safe and effective in other inflammatory and auto inflammatory disorders, and it could be beneficial in covid-19-associated cytokine storm syndrome, in which disordered host responses contribute to path ology. inflammatory endothelial activation, antiphospho lipid antibodies, and complement activation all promote a pro inflammatory and coagulopathic state. anti thrombotic prophylaxis should be considered, particularly in the presence of coronary artery dilation or aneurysm. pros pective controlled trials are necessary to generate evidence for stage-specific and individualised treatment options in covid-19.every minute, an american dies of covid-19. cytokine storm, multiorgan failure and particularly acute respiratory distress syndrome (ards) are the leading causes of mortality and morbidity in patients with covid-19. a fulminant ards kills the majority of covid-19 victims. (1) also, there are whispers that some of the survivors might develop pulmonary sequels. further investigations and follow-ups are warranted in this case. (2, 3) a large number of suggested treatments such as ivermectin, hydroxychloroquine, and azithromycin are currently under investigation. among them, hydroxychloroquine, azithromycin, and recently remdesivir showed acceptable results in clinical trials, as of june 2020. (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) (10) nevertheless, the results of these interventions are not completely satisfactory and studies for other medications are still warranted.pirfenidone (5-methyl-1-phenyl-2-[1h]-pyridone), is a novel anti-fibrotic agent with trivial adverse effects. (11) (12) (13) pirfenidone is approved for the treatment of idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (ipf) in humans for patients with mild to moderate disease. (14, 15) diverse action mechanisms have been suggested for pirfenidone, among them are downregulating effects on a series of cytokines, including transforming growth factor (tgf)-β1, connective tissue growth factor (ctgf), platelet-derived growth factors (pdgf), and tumor necrosis factor (tnf)-α. (16) (17) (18) (19) (20) additionally, pirfenidone is a reactive oxygen species (ros) scavenger, and last but not the list, pirfenidone downregulates the expression of ace receptor, the major cellular receptor for covid-19. (21) (22) (23) additioally, some other characteristics of pirfenidone makes it an appropriate treatment for covid-19, among them are anti-apoptotic and anti-fibrotic effects of pirfenidone. the details of the hypothesis have been discussed below. based on known pirfenidone mechanism of action and the pathophysiology of covid-19, i believe that pirfenidone has the potential for the treatment of covid-19 patients.cytokine storm, severe inflammation, oxidative stress, and reactive oxygen species damage and increased permeability of vascular bed are responsible for the development of ards and multiorgan damage in patients with covid-19. (24, 25) elderly patients, particularly those with comorbidities such as dm, cardiovascular disorder, and cancer are at increased risk of severe manifestation of covid-19. (26, 27) pathologic manifestation of covid-19 under microscope includes the presence of exudate, vascular congestion, inflammatory clusters with fibrinoid material and multinucleated giant cell. reactive alveolar hyperplasia and fibroblastic proliferation have been shown in alive patients with covid-19 who underwent a lung biopsy due to cancer before the diagnosis of covid-19. (28, 29) almost all of the current promising treatments have anti-inflammatory characteristics, beyond their antibiotic effects. for example, both azithromycin and hydroxychloroquine possess antiinflammatory effects. (4) pirfenidone, a novel anti-fibrotic agent is known to have several anti-fibrotic, anti-inflammatory, oxygen radical scavenger/antioxidant effects. (11, 22, 23, 30, 31) the anti-inflammatory effects of pirfenidone have been shown in several experimental studies. it has been shown that pirfenidone inhibits tnf-α secretion and decrease a large number of other inflammatory cytokines as well. (20, (32) (33) (34) additionally, li et al. in a recent study shown that pirfenidone ameliorates lipopolysaccharide-induced pulmonary inflammation and fibrosis by blocking nlrp3 inflammasome activation. (35, 36) it has been shown in several studies that pirfenidone significantly inhibits tgf-β 1-induced fibronectin synthesis. (17, 18) down-regulating of profibrotic gene expression and collagen secretion has been shown in humans and animal models treated with pirfenidone. (37) (38) (39) reduction of overexpression of tgf-β in inflammatory conditions plays a key role in the antifibrotic activity of pirfenidone. (38, 40) pirfenidone inhibits collagen i fibril formation and causes a reduction in collagen fibril bundles. (39, 41, 42) it has been shown that pirfenidone has pleiotropic actions on both the immune system and extracellular matrix (ecm), such as hyaluronan, a major component of the ecm that regulates tissue injury and repair. (43) recently, the upregulation of rgs2 has been suggested as a novel mechanism of amelioration of pulmonary fibrosis with pirfenidone treatment. (44)the followings are probable endpoints of an overactive inflammatory response and wbc free radical formation in microsome (via microsomal nadph cytochrome c reductase) and mitochondria (nadh-quinone oxidoreductase of the inner/outer membranes): excitotoxicity, damage to lipids and proteins, apoptosis, adp-ribosylation, injury to mitochondrial dna, and impaired no activity. (11, 22, 45) cytoskeletal damage and lipid peroxidation are the other destructive effects of inflammation and severe oxidative stress due to cytokine storm. (23, 45, 46) hence, the antioxidant character of pirfenidone makes it potent for the treatment of hyperimmune response. (11, 22, 23, 30, 31) lipid peroxidation, which is initiated by generated superoxide in the cyclic reduction-oxidation is one of the mechanisms of cytokine storm-inflammation-oxidative stress end-organ-damage and pulmonary toxicity. (11) it has been shown that pirfenidone could inhibit nadph dependent lipid peroxidation. (22, 45) anti-apoptotic effects of pirfenidone it has been shown that fas-dependent alveolar apoptosis that results in inflammatory reaction and finally interstitial fibrosis is responsible for the battle against viruses and also responsible for sequels of infections such as poxvirus, bacterial lps, etc. (35, 47) on the other hand, it has been shown that pirfenidone could decrease apoptosis. (19, (48) (49) (50) (51) down regulation of ace receptor expression ace receptors are the major covid-19-sars virus receptor in humans. trials that targeted the inhibition of these receptors with antibodies are under investigation. (52) surprisingly, it has been shown that pirfenidone inhibits the at1r/p38 mapk pathway, decreased angiotensinconverting enzyme (ace), angiotensin ii, and angiotensin ii type 1 receptor expression, and strongly enhanced liver x receptor-α expression. (21) this will not only protect cells from developing fibrosis (lxr-α) also by decreasing the ace receptor expression decrease entrance of the covid-19-sars virus into cells.with respect to the known characteristics of pirfenidone (anti-inflammatory, anti-fibrotic, antioxidant) and our current understanding of severe covid-19 pathophysiology (cytokine storm, inflammation, probable fibrosis, hyper-immunity and as a result oxidative stress, it is rational to suggest pirfenidone application in the treatment of patients with moderate to severe covid-19-sars.uncontrolled overreaction of the immune system to the virus leads to the release of numerous inflammatory cytokines, further superoxide production, ards development and subsequently matrix remodeling and overproduction of collagen and other matrix components that may cause fibrosis in survivors. (25, 53, 54) cytokine storm, an uncontrolled immune reaction is responsible for the development of multi-organ damage and ards in patients with covid-19-sars. (53) anti-inflammatory effects of pirfenidone have been shown in several animal studies and clinical trials. the antioxidant activity of pirfenidone has been verified in several experimental studies. (20, 24, 25, (32) (33) (34) 54) furthermore, the anti-fibrotic effects of pirfenidone have been shown in several clinical trials and tend to fda approval of this drug for the treatment of patients with ipf. (14, 22, (55) (56) (57) (58) based on pirfenidone characteristics and therapeutic effects, i have previously suggested the treatment of paraquat with pirfenidone which is gradually opened its space in the treatment protocols of patients with paraquat poisoning. (11, (59) (60) (61) (62) previously, saha et al. successfully treated the patients with post h1n1 ards pulmonary fibrosis with combined pirfenidone, azithromycin, and prednisolone. (63) to the best of my knowledge, the mechanisms of post h1n1 ards fibrosis and paraquat poisoning and covid-19 share similarities. additionally, pirfenidone successfully improved treatment of post-h1n1 ards fibrosis, hence it seems equitable to evaluate the potential of pirfenidone in the treatment of covid-19. (63) also, pirfenidone has been suggested and tried successfully in the treatment of ards due to white smoke-induced ards. (11) as another example, zinc chloride smoke (white smoke) inhalation induced severe ards has been successfully treated with a combination of pirfenidone and corticosteroids. (35, 64) verification of the hypothesis pirfenidone has been approved by the fda for the treatment of patients with ipf. it has been tolerated very well with trivial side effects. (15, 65, 66) the current situation enforced clinicians and agencies to relax strict preclinical approval and extensive experimentation before starting human experimental treatment and clinical trials. the fact that our hands are empty in the battle against covid-19, and an urgent need for treatment, enforced us to try any possible probably safe treatment, and those approved medications with low side effects are among the suggested and tried medications. actually, our current standard of care knowledge is based on these experiments.nevertheless, a limited number of labs have access to animal models of covid-19-sars and can conduct experimental studies parallel or before human trials. we have no time to wait for animal modeling, and animal models do not necessarily provide valid shreds of evidence in this case in terms of toxicity or efficacy of treatments, because mortality of this virus is almost always due to interaction of the virus with human immune system and animals are not appropriate surrogate models here. (67) at the end of the day, only a well-designed double-blind randomized controlled clinical trial is the best method to appropriately analyze this hypothesis.in a limited number of patients, covid-19 present as a fulminant cytokine storm, ards, and end-organ damage. but the death toll of this limited number of patients surpassed a one and a half million recently. this is a human tragedy that calls for immediate intervention.new therapeutic strategies are considered in the treatment of covid-19. however, to the best of my knowledge, pirfenidone has not been tried yet. as discussed above, i believe that pirfenidone could be a safe add on to the current protocols of covid-19 treatment, with trivial side effects and plenty of potential benefits.during the reviewing process of this article, some other studies proposed similar point of view. (68) (69) (70) for example, parallel to what i discussed here, george et all, also pointed to the shared risk factors of covid-19 and ipf, and mentioned that the burden of lung fibrosis following covid-19 is likely to be high; they concluded that given the scale of the pandemic, the global burden of fibrotic lung disease will probably increase considerably.they also suggested a therapeutic rationale for application of approved antifibrotic therapy in acute exacerbations of ipf. pirfenidone and nintedanib are among them.in conclusion, pirfenidone could inhibit apoptosis, downregulate ace receptors expression, decrease inflammation by several mechanisms and ameliorate oxidative stress and hence protect pneumocytes and other cells from covid-19 invasion and cytokine storm simultaneously. the outbreak of the novel coronavirus disease 2019 (covid- 19) , induced by severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2), firstly found in wuhan, in the hubei province of china, in december 2019, has rapidly spread worldwide, becoming a global public health emergency. on 11th march 2020, the world health organization (who) declared covid-19 a pandemic. as of 28 april 2020, who reports more than 2,8 million confirmed cases and 198 842 deaths worldwide (who, 2020, https://covid19.who.int). after the isolation of sars-cov-2, the viral genome was sequenced, thus facilitating diagnostic testing, epidemiologic tracking, as well as investigations on potential preventive and therapeutic strategies in the management of covid-19. to date, despite the intense scientific effort demonstrated by more than 600 clinical trials currently underway (typing sars-cov-2 on clinicaltrials.gov), no vaccines or effective drugs have been approved to prevent or treat covid-19 and the current standard care is supportive treatment. therefore, based on the fast and global spread of the virus, urgent investigations are warranted in order to develop effective therapies. within this context, treatments addressing the immunopathology of the infection have become a major focus.the new human-infecting sars-cov-2 is a positive-sense singlestranded rna-enveloped virus belonging to cov family. 1 among the six covs pathogenic to humans, four of them have been associated with mild respiratory symptoms, 2 while two of them, sars-cov and the middle east respiratory syndrome (mers) cov (mers-cov), whose epidemic outbreaks took place in 2002 and 2012 respectively, caused severe respiratory diseases in affected individuals. 2 sars-cov-2 is the seventh identified cov and, after sars-cov and mers-cov, the third zoonotic virus of covs that has been transmitted from animals to humans via an intermediate mammalian host. 3, 4 in particular, based on genetic analysis, chinese horseshoe bats have been proposed to serve as natural reservoir hosts for sars-cov-2, similar to sars-cov and mers-cov. [4] [5] [6] moreover, genomic analysis indicates that sars-cov-2 is in the same beta-cov clade as sars-cov and mers-cov. 1 in particular, sars-cov-2 has been observed to share almost 80% of the genome with sars-cov 1,6,7 and almost all encoded proteins of sars-cov-2 are homologous to sars-cov proteins. 1 in contrast, sars-cov-2 has been found to be more distant from mers-cov, with only 50% identity. 1 moreover, the entry of sars-cov-2 into human host cells has been found to rely on the same receptor as sars-cov: the surface angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ace2), which is expressed in the type ii surfactant-secreting alveolar cells of the lungs. 8, 9 consistently, despite amino acid variations at specific key residues, homology modeling revealed a structural similarity between the receptor-binding domains of sars-cov and sars-cov-2. 1 however, further studies are necessary to compare sars-cov and sars-cov-2 affinities to ace2 receptor that might explain the increased transmissibility and greater virulence of sars-cov-2 compared with sars-cov. 8 two independent groups provided key insights into the first step of sars-cov2 infection, by demonstrating that ace2 host receptor is required for host cell entry of sars-cov-2. 8, 10 noteworthy, the expression of ace2 receptors is not only restricted to the lung, and extrapulmonary spread of sars-cov in ace-expressing tissues has been demonstrated. [11] [12] [13] hence the same pattern may be expected for sars-cov-2, with most of human tissues, such as oral mucosa and gastrointestinal tract, kidney, heart, blood vessels expressing ace2 receptors, particularly prone to sars-cov-2 infection. 14, 15 the viral entry of sars-cov-2 has been further found to be prevented by a clinically proven inhibitor of the cellular host type 2 transmembrane serine protease tmprss2 (camostat mesylate). 8 priming of the envelope-located trimeric spike (s) protein by host proteases, which cleave at the s1/ s2 and the s2' sites, has been described as a fundamental step for viral entry, and the host protease tmprss2 emerged as a key cellular factor necessary for the priming of s protein and for the consequent membrane fusion and viral internalization by endocytosis in the pulmonary epithelium. 8 hence, tmprss2 has been proposed as a potential target for clinical intervention 6, 8 and its inhibitor camostat mesylate, approved for human use in japan to treat pancreatic inflammation, has attracted the attention of the scientific community. currently, a randomized, placebo-controlled, phase iia trial is investigating the use of camostat mesylate (nct04321096) and is expected to run until december 2020, whereas another independent trial will start in june 2020 to evaluate the efficacy of camostat mesilate in combination with hydroxychloroquine in hospitalized patients with moderate covid-19 infection (nct04338906).a detailed analysis of additional mechanisms of cellular viral infection for sars-cov-2 is still missing and would be fundamental to identify further potential biological substrates to target.the majority of covid-19 cases (about 80%) is asymptomatic or exhibits mild to moderate symptoms, but approximately the 15% progresses to severe pneumonia and about 5% eventually develops acute respiratory distress syndrome (ards), septic shock and/or multiple organ failure. 16, 17 as for sars and mers, the most common symptoms of covid-19 are fever, fatigue, and respiratory symptoms, including cough, sore throat and shortness of breath. 16, 18 notably, sars-cov-2 infection activates innate and adaptive immune response, thus sustaining the resolution of covid-19. while a rapid and well-coordinated immune response represents the first line of defense against viral infection, excessive inflammatory innate response and dysregulated adaptive host immune defense may cause harmful tissue damage at both at the site of virus entry and at systemic level. the excessive proinflammatory host response has been hypothesized to induce an immune pathology resulting in the rapid course of acute lung injury (ali) and ards occurring in sars-cov-2 infected patients. [16] [17] [18] for example, the massive cytokine and chemokine release, the so-called "cytokine storm", clearly reflects a widespread uncontrolled dysregulation of host immune defense. thus, given the key role of the immune system in covid-19, a deeper understanding of the mechanism behind the immune dysregulation, as well as of sars-cov-2 immune-escape mechanisms might give us clues for the clinical management of the severe cases and for preventing the transition from mild to severe stages. moreover, although no within the goal of the present review, future investigations concerning the systemic effects of uncontrolled immune system on other physiological systems, such as the gastrointestinal tract, neuroendocrine, renal and cardiovascular are urgent.immune response to sars-cov-2 several studies highlight relevant changes occurring both in innate and adaptive immune system in covid-19 patients. in particular, lymphocytopenia and a modulation in total neutrophils are common hallmarks and seem to be directly correlated with disease severity and death. 6, 18 in patients with severe covid-19, a marked decrease in the levels of absolute number of circulating cd4 + cells, cd8 + cells, b cells and natural killers (nk) cells, 16, 17, 19 as well as a decrease in monocytes, eosinophils and basophils has been reported. [19] [20] [21] in addition, most of patients with severe covid-19 displayed significantly increased serum levels of proinflammatory cytokines (e.g. il-6, il-1β, il-2, il-8, il-17, g-csf, gm-csf, ip-10, mcp-1, ccl3, and tnfα). 20, 22 although no direct evidence for pro-inflammatory cytokines and chemokines involvement in lung pathology in covid-19 has been reported, an increase in serum cytokine and chemokine levels, as well as in neutrophil-lymphocyte-ratio (nlr) in sars-cov-2 infected patients has been correlated with the severity of the disease and adverse outcomes, suggesting a possible role for hyper-inflammatory responses in covid-19 pathogenesis. 20 moreover, a recent multicenter retrospective cohort study analyzing data from the early risk stratification of novel coronavirus pneumonia (ers-covid-19) study (chictr2000030494) showed that patients with covid-19 had elevated high-sensitivity c-reactive protein (hs-crp) and procalcitonin serum levels, two major inflammation markers associated with high risks of mortality and organ injury. 23 noteworthy, mers-cov has been demonstrated to infect thp-1 cells, human peripheral blood monocyte-derived macrophages and dendritic cells, and sars-cov to directly infect macrophages and t cells, 24 thereby inducing delayed but elevated levels of proinflammatory cytokines and chemokines. 25, 26 however, ace2 receptor is only minimally expressed in monocytes, macrophages, and t cells in the lung, hence, the mechanism by which sars-cov directly infects immune cells is still unknown. 27 taking into account the similarities between sars-cov and sars-cov-2, it is likely that also this latter may infect monocytes and macrophages by a mechanism that has to be still unveiled. in this regard, it is possible that the virus may be capable to bind other specific receptors and/or other mechanisms of viral entry mode can be exploited by the virus.as far as concerns the adaptive immunity, the novel sars-cov-2 has been demonstrated to mainly affect lymphocyte counting and balance. in particular, li et al. reported that, compared with survivors, dead covid-19 patients showed lower percentage and count in cd3 + , cd4 + , and cd8 + lymphocytes populations, strong predictive values for in-hospital mortality, organ injury, and severe pneumonia. 23 in a retrospective, single-center study enrolling a cohort of 452 patients with covid-19 in wuhan, patients with severe covid-19 displayed a significantly lower number of total t cells, both helper t cells and suppressor t cells. 20 in particular, among helper t cells, a decrease in regulatory t cells, with a more pronounced reduction according to the severity of the cases, and in memory t cells has been observed, whereas the percentage of naïve t cells was found increased. 20 notably, naïve and memory t cells are essential immune components, whose balance is crucial for maintaining a highly efficient defensive response. naïve t cells enable the defenses against new and previously unrecognized infection by a massive and tightly coordinated release of cytokines, whereas memory t cells mediate antigen-specific immune response. a dysregulation in their balance, favoring naïve t cells activity compared with regulatory t cells, could highly contribute to hyperinflammation. a reduction in memory t cells on the other hand could be implicated in covid-19 relapse, since a number of recurrences has been reported in recovered cases of covid-19. 6, 28 these data are consistent with results reported by tan et al. 29 overall, the lymphopenia observed in covid-19 patients may depend on the fact that sars-cov-2 may directly infect lymphocytes minimally expressing ace2, leading to lymphocyte death or, alternatively, may directly damage lymphatic organs since they express ace2 receptors. 29 however, to date no data are available on lymph nodes and spleen shrinking and lymphocytes functionalities, hence such speculations need to be further investigated to confirm these hypotheses.as far as concerns b cells, by using single-cell rna sequencing to characterize the transcriptome landscape of blood immune cell subsets during the recovery stage of covid-19, wen et al. 30 found significant changes in b cells. in particular, while the naïve b cells have been reported to be decreased, the plasma cells have been found remarkably increased in peripheral blood mononuclear cells. 30 moreover, several new b cell-receptor changes have been identified (e.g. ighv3-23 and ighv3-7). 30 in addition, isotypes, including ighv3-15, ighv3-30, and igkv3-11, previously used for virus vaccine development have been confirmed. 30 the strongest pairing frequencies, ighv3-23-ighj4, has been suggested to indicate a monoclonal state associated with sars-cov-2 specificity. 30 moreover, given the pivotal role of b cells in the control of infections, tracking the antibody seroconversion response is an important process for the clinical evaluation of infections. in covid-19 patients, while serum samples from patients with covid-19 showed no cross-binding to the s1 subunit of the sars-cov spike antigen, some cross-reactivity of serum samples has been observed from patients with covid-19 to nucleocapsid antigens of sars-cov. 31 interestingly, this study reports that 96.8% of tested patients achieved seroconversion of igg or igm within 20 days after symptom onset with a titer plateaued within 6 days after seroconversion. 31 moreover, 100% of patients had positive virus-specific igg approximately 17-19 days after symptom onset. 31 instead, 94.1% patients showed positive virus-specific igm approximately 20-22 days after symptom onset. 31 in addition to these observations about immunity, a critical aspect has to be raised concerning the ability to escape from antiviral host defenses. viral evasion of host immune response is in fact believed to play a major role in disease severity. 32 as an example, sars-cov and mers-cov escape and suppress the signaling pathways mediated by type i interferon (ifn), a key cytokine secreted by virus-infected cells to enroll nearby cells to heighten their anti-viral immune defenses. 33 based on genomic sequence comparison and on partial identity of sars-cov-2 with sars-cov, it is speculative that sars-cov-2 can adopt similar strategies to modulate the host innate immune response, thus evading immune detection and dampening human defenses.inflammatory cytokine storm and lung damage mounting clinical evidence from severe covid-19 patients suggests that extensive changes in the serum levels of several cytokines play a pivotal role in the pathogenesis of covid-19. 22, 34, 35 such hypercytokinemia, the so-called "cytokine storm", has been proposed as one of the key leading factors that trigger the pathological processes leading to plasma leakage, vascular permeability, and disseminated vascular coagulation, observed in covid-19 patients, and accounting for life-threatening respiratory symptoms. 17 huang et al. 16 found that plasma concentrations of il-1β, il-1ra, il-7, il-8, il-9, il-10, basic fgf, g-csf, gm-csf, ifn-γ, ip-10, mcp-1, mip-1α, mip-1β, pdgf, tnfα, and vegf were higher in both icu (intensive care unit) patients and non-icu patients than in healthy adults. moreover, when comparing icu and non-icu patients, plasma concentrations of il-2, il-7, il-10, g-csf, ip-10, mcp-1, mip-1α, and tnfα were higher in icu patients than non-icu patients, thus indicating that the cytokine storm might be correlated with disease severity. 16 another study on a small set of patients with severe covid-19 pneumonia, found 15 cytokines (ifn-α2, ifn-γ, il-1ra, il-2, 4, 7, 10, 12 and 17, chemokine ip-10, as well as g-csf and m-csf) associated with lung injury based on murray score. 35 evidence from literature indicates that the cytokine storm observed in covid-19 resembles that occurring in cytokines release syndrome (crs), a form of systemic inflammatory response syndrome, and in secondary haemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis (shlh), an hyperinflammatory syndrome characterized by fulminant and fatal hypercytokinemia with multiorgan failure, mainly induced by viral infections. 22, 36 therefore, as detailed below, existing pharmaceutical modulators of cytokines might be repurposed as therapeutic strategy to attenuate the hypercytokinemia in covid-19 patients.interestingly, gou et al. 37 recently reported that the disruption of gut microbiome features by host and environmental factors may predispose healthy individuals to abnormal inflammatory response observed in covid-19. in particular, the authors constructed a blood proteomic risk score for the prediction of covid-19 progression to clinically severe phase and observed that core gut microbiota features were significantly correlated with proinflammatory cytokines in a set of 366 individuals, using a machine learning model. 37 specifically, bacteroides genus, streptococcus genus and clostridiales order have been negatively correlated with most of the tested inflammatory cytokines, whereas ruminococcus genus, blautia genus and lactobacillus genus have been positively associated. 37 moreover, fecal metabolomics analysis indicated some potential amino acid-related pathways (e.g. aminoacyl-trna biosynthesis pathway, arginine biosynthesis pathway, and valine, leucine and isoleucine biosynthesis pathway) that correlate core microbial features with host inflammation among 987 participants. 37 thus, the core intestinal microbiological characteristics, along with its related metabolites, should be further investigated as potential predictors for the individual susceptibility to covid-19 progression and severity and might represent potential targets for the prevention of susceptible populations, as well as for the development of therapeutic approaches to manage covid-19.it is well-established that, upon binding of the viral spike protein to the host cells by the entry receptor ace2, the viral rnas, as pathogen-associated molecular patterns (pamps), are detected by the pattern recognition receptors, which include the family of tolllike receptors (tlrs). in particular, for rna virus such as covs, viral genomic rna or the intermediates during viral replication, including dsrna, are recognized by either the endosomal rna receptors, tlr3 and tlr7/8, and the cytosolic rna sensor, retinoic acid-inducible gene (rig-i)/mda5. 38 consistently, such tlrs have been found to activate different signaling pathways in human cd14 + monocytes, correlating with differential type i ifn and cytokine secretion involved in cd4 + t cells polarization. 38 as a result of virus recognition, downstream transduction pathways, crucial for proper antiviral response, such as irf3 (ifn regulatory factor-3), nuclear factor κb (nf-κb), jak (janus kinase)/stat (signal transducer and activator of transcription) signaling pathways, are activated. 39 the identification of the most relevant intracellular signaling pathways involved in the modulation of host immune systems may give important hints on how to overcome the infectious disease driven by sars-cov-2. in particular, taking into account the structural similarities of sars-cov-2 as well as the analogies in the infection mechanisms with pathogenic sars-cov, it is tempting to speculate that the viral infection may induce the activation of shared intracellular pathways, in particular of those mainly involved in the innate immune response. however, to date, it has to be demonstrated whether such sequence similarities between sars-cov and sars-cov-2 can be directly translated into similar biological outcomes. taking into account such limitation, the identification of signaling pathways altered during viral infections may help to unravel the most relevant molecular cascades implicated in biological processes mediating viral infections and to unveil key molecular players that may be targeted. the advantage of targeting intracellular molecules rather than viral proteins is that their effect is not likely to be negated by mutations in the virus genome. in fact, antiviral drugs inhibiting virus replication may select for mutational escape, thus rendering the therapy ineffective. thus, the modulation of the host immune response shows the potential advantage of exerting less-selective pressure on viral populations. 40 repurposing of existing drugs targeting specific signal transducers will be discussed as potential treatment options for the management of covid-19, as schematized in fig. 1 .the nf-κb/tnfα signaling pathway the transcription factor nf-κb is a critical regulator of both innate and adaptive immunity. 41 under basal conditions, nf-κb is retained in the cytoplasm by the inhibitory proteins (iκbs). a variety of cellular stimuli, including pathogens, induce iκb phosphorylation, ubiquitination and degradation by the proteasome, thereby promoting nf-κb nuclear translocation. 41 in the nucleus, nf-κb induces the transcription of a wide spectrum of genes encoding pro-inflammatory cytokines and chemokines, stress-response proteins, and anti-apoptotic proteins. nf-κb activity is essential for survival and activation, and for initiating and propagating optimal immune responses. 42 by contrast, the constitutive activation of the nf-κb pathway is often associated with inflammatory diseases, such as rheumatoid arthritis and asthma. notably, the exacerbation of nf-κb activation has been reported to be implicated in lung inflammatory immunopathology induced by respiratory viruses, including sars-cov. 43, 44 moreover, wang and collaborators demonstrated that, in murine macrophages cell line (raw264.7), the exposure to recombinant sars-cov spike protein induced a massive protein release of il-6 and tnfα in a time-and concentration-dependent manner in the supernatants and that such increase in il-6 and tnfα secretion relies on the activation of nf-κb signaling pathway. 45 in fact, sars-cov spike protein has been associated with an increase in iκbα degradation, an essential step required for the activation of nf-κb signaling pathway. 45 accordingly, transfection with dominantnegative nik, which inhibits nf-κb activation, produced a strong reduction in spike protein il-6 and tnfα release in raw264.7 cells, thus demonstrating that nf-κb is required for the induction of il-6 and tnfα by sars-cov spike protein. 45 such in vitro data were consistent with results obtained in vivo, where treatments with drugs inhibiting nf-κb activation (such as caffeic acid phenethyl ester (cape), bay 11-7082, and parthenolide) reduced inflammation by suppressing the mrna expression of tnfα, cxcl2, and mcp-1 in the lung of sars-cov-infected mice. moreover, pharmacological inhibition of nf-κb protected against pulmonary pathology and enhanced mice survival after sars-cov infection. 43 in line with these findings, smits et al. demonstrated that sars-cov-infected aged macaques show in the lungs an increase in nf-κb nuclear translocation, as a result of nf-κb activation, and developed a stronger host response to virus infection compared with young adult macaques, with a significant increase in the expression of pro-inflammatory genes mainly regulated by nf-κb. 44 taken together these data suggest that nf-κb inhibition might be an effective strategy to counteract pathogenic sars-cov. however, targeting nf-κb is an approach strongly limited by intrinsic pathways complexity. molecules blocking nf-κb lack for specificity and interfere with nf-κb physiological roles in cellular homeostasis, resulting in increased risk of undesired side effects, such as a broad suppression of innate immunity. 46 moreover, within the context of viral infection, a major limitation of targeting nf-κb signaling depends on the ability of viruses to efficiently escape, by encoding proteins specifically blocking this pathway. 46 thus, a promising strategy may rely on directly targeting the downstream effectors of the pathway, such as tnfα, whose expression is mainly controlled by nf-κb transcriptional activity. while tnfα is known to play a key role in the coordination and development of the inflammatory response, especially in the acute phase, long-lasting and excessive production of tnfα may become less effective by possibly altering tnf/tnf receptor signaling threshold which, after an initial wave of nf-κb activation, favors sustained basal nf-κb activity. 47 in addition, despite many other pro-inflammatory cytokines and mediators are involved in the cytokine storm, specific blockade of tnfα has been reported to be clinically effective in several pathological conditions. accordingly, tnfα blockers, such as infliximab and adalimumab, have been successfully used for the treatment of several immunemediated disorders, such as psoriasis, rheumatoid arthritis, inflammatory bowel diseases and ankylosing spondylitis. 48, 49 hence, anti-tnfα monoclonal antibodies are likely to attenuate inflammatory processes occurring in covid-19, reducing the release of other inflammatory-exacerbating mediators. indeed, when an anti-tnfα is administrated in patients with active rheumatoid arthritis, it has been demonstrated to induce a rapid decrease of a broad spectrum of cytokines (e.g. il-6 and il-1), as well as of others acute-phase related proteins and vascular permeability factor. [50] [51] [52] furthermore, the envelope viral spike protein of sars-cov has been found to promote the activity of tnfα-converting enzyme (tace)-dependent shedding of ace2 receptor, which is a fundamental step for virus entry into the cell. 53 thus, tnfα blockers represent effective therapeutic tools to counteract sars-cov infection by exerting a dual mechanism of action: attenuation of inflammation and inhibition of viral infection. 45 however, warnings about the potential increased risk of bacterial and fungal superinfections due to anti-tnfα therapy have to be taken into account. 54 taking into account the sequence similarities between sars-cov and sars-cov-2 and the strong limitation in directly inhibiting nf-κb, to date, a clinical trial investigating adalimumab for the management of covid-19 has been registered in the chinese clinical trial registry (chictr2000030089) and is expected to run until august 2020. however, further investigations concerning the use and safety of tnfα-blockers in covid-19 patients are urgently needed.in addition, concerning a potential intervention on nf-κb signaling pathway, serine protease inhibitors of trypsin-like serine proteases (e.g. camostat mesylate, nafamostat mesylate, gabexate mesylate, ulinastatin), used for the treatment of pancreatitis, disseminated intravascular coagulation, and anticoagulant for hemodialysis, 55, 56 have been found to inhibit viral replication 57, 58 and to attenuate inflammatory processes in different pathological contexts, such as asthma, chronic allergic pulmonary inflammation, and inflammatory myocardial injury. [59] [60] [61] [62] for instance, nafamostat mesylate and gabexate mesylate have been demonstrated to attenuate allergen-induced airway inflammation and eosinophilia in mouse model of allergic asthma, 61 thus reducing mast cell activation, eosinophils infiltrations in the lung, and dermatophagoides pteronyssinus-driven il-4 and tnfα production in bronchoalveolar lavage fluid. 61 furthermore, treatment with nafamostat mesylate downregulated the expression of il-1β, tnfα, il-6, eotaxin, inducible no synthase (inos), cd86, and nf-κb activation, but enhanced the expression of il-12 and il-10 in dermatophagoides pteronyssinus-driven il-4 and tnfα production in bronchoalveolar lavage fluid. 61 moreover, gabexate mesylate has been found to inhibit lps-induced tnfα production in human monocytes by blocking both nf-κb and mitogen-activated protein kinase activation. 63 thus, the pharmacological profile of serine protease inhibitors, as inhibitors of complement pathways and broad-spectrum anti-inflammatory agents, provide a strong rationale for their use in the management of covid-19. however, the specific mechanism of action through which serine protease inhibitors induce their anti-inflammatory effects is still unknown.the il-6/jak/stat signaling pathway first discovered as the primary mediator of intracellular signaling induced by ifn in hematopoietic and immune cells, the jak/stat signaling is a key pathway transducing extracellular signals transmitted by a large number of cytokines, lymphokines and growth factors. in particular, a subset of cytokines employs the jak/stat signaling pathway in order to induce their biological effects. notably, one of the major activators of jak/stat signaling is the cytokine il-6, which has been reported to be dramatically increased in covid-19 patients, 20,22 with a strong implication in acute inflammation and cytokine storm. in particular, il-6 has been reported to activate numerous cell types expressing the glycoprotein (gp130) receptor and the membrane-bound il-6 receptor, as well as a soluble form of il-6 receptor interacting with gp130, thereby promoting the downstream activation of jak/stat signaling. 64 in turn, the activation of jak/stat pathway has been reported to stimulate the production of il-6. 65 such signaling pathway has been reported to be aberrantly activated in patients with chronic inflammation conditions, such as arthritis rheumatoid, and it is likely that its excessive overactivation may also occur in covid-19 patients, thereby exacerbating the host inflammatory response. noteworthy, chronic elevation of circulating il-6 has been widely recognized as a predictor for increased risk of cardiovascular events. 66, 67 consistently, il-6 is produced from several tissues, including activated macrophages and endothelial and smooth muscle cells, where it promotes the secretion of other cytokines and, among others, it stimulates mcp-1 secretion from macrophages to promote atherogenesis, 68 increases the expression of cell adhesion molecules, 69, 70 and stimulates the proliferation and migration of vascular smooth muscle cells. 71 thus, the abnormal increase in il-6 levels may be implicated, at least in part, in the occurrence cardiovascular diseases (e.g. coronary atherosclerosis, inflammation in the vascular system resulting in diffuse microangiopathy with thrombosis) observed in covid-19 patients. 72 accordingly, the synthesis and secretion of il-6 has been demonstrated to be induced by angiotensin ii, which is locally produced by the inflamed vessels in a jak/stat-dependent manner. 73 in particular, angiotensin ii binding to angiotensin ii receptor type 1 (at 1 receptor) has been found to activate jak/ stat pathway and to promote the downstream production of il-6. 73, 74 increased angiotensin ii enhances il-6 production in at 1 / jak/stat-dependent manner, thus establishing a positive inflammatory feedback loop. interestingly, the spike protein of sars-cov has been demonstrated to downregulate ace2 expression, thus resulting in over-production of angiotensin ii by the related enzyme ace. 75, 76 in a similar way, it could be hypothesized that sars-cov-2 may downregulate ace2 receptors, thus leading to an over-production of angiotensin ii, in turn enhancing il-6 production in at 1 /jak/stat-dependent manner, and ultimately driving to vascular inflammation and lung injury, clinical signatures of covid-19 (fig. 2) . moreover, the angiotensin ii/at 1 receptor axis has been reported to also activate both nf-κb and adam17. 77 notably, an important substrate for adam17 is ace2, whose cleavage by adam17 has been reported to inactivate it, enhancing angiotensin ii retention, thus leading to hypertension, cardiovascular remodeling, and other types of pathophysiology associated with enhancement of the renin-angiotensin system. 77 beside its implication in the shedding of ace2 receptor, fundamental for virus entry, 53 adam17 induction has been found to process the membrane form of il-6 receptor α (il-6rα) to the soluble form (sil-6rα), followed by the gp130-mediated activation of stat3 via the sil-6rα-il-6 complex in a variety of il-6rαnegative non-immune cells. 78 the activation of stat3 has been reported to be required for the complete induction of nf-κb pathway. 78 thus, sars-cov-2 infection may activate both nf-κb and stat3 signaling, which in turn can promote the il-6 amplifier mechanism, required for the hyper-activation of nf-κb by stat3, thereby inducing multiple inflammatory and autoimmune diseases. 78 the il-6 amplifier promotes the production and secretion of several pro-inflammatory cytokines and chemokines, such as il-6, and the recruitment of lymphoid and myeloid cells, sustaining the il-6 amplifier-driven positive feedback loop (as proposed by hirano and murakami) 79 (fig. 2) . furthermore, the metalloprotease adam17 has been found to mediate angiotensin ii-induced egfr (epidermal growth factor receptor) transactivation by generating the mature form of heparin-binding egf-like growth factor in vascular smooth muscle cells, thus leading to vascular remodeling. 77 notably, egfr transactivation is critical for angiotensin iimediated cardiovascular complications. 77 in this regard, the egfr kinase inhibitor erlotinib has been recently repurposed for the treatment of covid-19, based on its capability to reduce the infectivity of a wide range of viruses. [80] [81] [82] beside its antiviral activity, the implication of egfr transactivation in cardiovascular complications represent another theoretical foundation for the use of erlotinib in the management of covid-19 patients.moreover, given the importance of angiotensin ii/at 1 receptor axis, the attempt to use angiotensin ii-receptor blockers as a therapeutic benefit in covid-19 by targeting the host response to the virus has been made. 83 however, their use needs to be deepened, since ace inhibitors and angiotensin ii-receptor blockers have been suggested to further increase the risk of covid-19 infection by up-regulating ace2. 84 whether patients fig. 2 hypothetical mechanism by sars-cov-2 in establishing an inflammatory feedback loop between il-6 and angiotensin ii. cytokine il-6 has been found increased in covid-19 patients, thus suggesting a direct role of sars-cov-2 in a massive cytokine release. il-6 is able to activate a soluble form of il-6 receptor interacting with gp130, thereby promoting the downstream activation of jak/stat signaling, and thely production of il-6. moreover, sars-cov-2 has been directly related with the occurrence of cardiovascular implications, such as coronary atherosclerosis, inflammation in the vascular system and diffuse microangiopathy with thrombosis. synthesis and secretion of il-6 are directly implicated in cardiovascular damages. indeed, il-6 production is also induced by angiotensin ii in at 1 /jak/stat-dependent manner. as observed in sars-cov, also sars-cov-2 may be hypothesized to downregulate ace2 expression, thus resulting in over-production of angiotensin ii by the related enzyme ace. in turn, increased angiotensin ii enhances il-6 production via jak/stat pathway, thus establishing a positive inflammatory feedback loop, ultimately resulting in the exacerbation of vascular and lung injuries. moreover, the angiotensin ii/at 1 receptor axis activates adam17 that cleavages and inactivates ace2, enhancing angiotensin ii retention. in addition, adam17 induction has been found to process the membrane form of il-6rα to the soluble form (sil-6rα), followed by the gp130-mediated activation of stat3 via the sil-6rα-il-6 complex in a variety of il-6rα-negative non-immune cells. the il-6 amplifier promotes the production and secretion of several pro-inflammatory cytokines and chemokines, such as il-6, sustaining the il-6 amplifier-driven positive feedback. sars-cov-2, severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2; il-6, interleukin 6; ace2, angiotensin-converting enzyme 2; at 1 , angiotensin ii receptor type 1; jak, janus kinase; stat, signal transducer and activator of transcription; adam17, a disintegrin and metalloproteinase domain-containing protein 17 affected by covid-19 and hypertension, taking an ace inhibitors or angiotensin ii-receptor blockers, should switch to another antihypertensive drug is still a matter of debate, and further evidence is required.since il-6 appears a key driver of cytokine storm and of its consequent detrimental effects, monoclonal antibodies against il-6, such as tocilizumab and sarilumab, have been also proposed to dampen this process. tocilizumab, a monoclonal antibody il-6 receptor antagonist, approved for the treatment of rheumatoid arthritis and crs, has been used in clinical practice in order to manage severe cases of covid-19 and it has been included in the current chinese national treatment guidelines (https://www.chinalawtranslate.com/wp-content/uploads/2020/ 03/who-translation.pdf). to date, 40 clinical trials (typing covid-19 and tocilizumab on clinicaltrials.gov and clinicaltrialsregister. eu) are underway to test tocilizumab, alone or in combination, in patients with covid-19. moreover, 18 clinical trials (typing covid-19 and tocilizumab on clinicaltrials.gov and clinicaltrialsregister.eu) will study the efficacy and safety of another il-6 receptor antagonist, sarilumab, approved for the treatment of rheumatoid arthritis in patients with covid-19.beside monoclonal antibodies specifically targeting il-6, approved drugs inhibiting il-6/jak/stat signaling may represent a valuable tool. in particular, jak signaling inhibitors, such as baricitinib, fedratinib, and ruxolitinibapproved for indications such as rheumatoid arthritis and myelofibrosishave been reported to attenuate the host inflammatory response associated with massive pro-inflammatory cytokine and chemokine release. 85 based on this anti-inflammatory effect, they are likely to be effective against the consequences of the elevated levels of cytokines typically observed in patients with covid-19. 80 among them, baricitinib, a selective inhibitor of jak 1 and 2, has been predicted by crystallographic studies to inhibit two members of the numb-associated kinase family, such as ap2-associated protein kinase 1 (aak1) and cyclin g-associated kinase (gak), thus hindering viral endocytosis into lung cells, at the concentration approved for the treatment of arthritis rheumatoid. 86 however, despite such undeniable advantages, the repurposing of baricitinib and, in general, of jak inhibitors for the management of covid-19 is debated. in particular, concerns arise mainly from evidence reporting that the activation of jak/stat pathway, mediated by ifns, is required for the induction of many ifnregulated genes, playing a pivotal role as innate early defense system against viral infections. the defensive role of jak/stat pathway is corroborated by evidence demonstrating that the majority of virus have developed escaping strategies, such as the production of viral-encoded factors blocking this pathway, which are recognized as crucial determinants of virulence. 87 therefore, inhibition of jak/stat signaling is likely to produce an impairment of ifn-related antiviral response, exacerbating sars-cov-2 infection. however, since several benefits, such as the blockage of virus entry and the attenuation of host excessive inflammatory response, as well as vascular and lung damage, provide a strong rationale for the use of baricitinib in the management of covid-19 patients, the balance between positive and negative aspects of jak/stat signaling inhibition has to be still drawn up.to date, several clinical trials are testing the efficacy and safety jak inhibitors in covid-19 patients (typing covid-19 and jak inhibitors on clinicaltrials.gov and clinicaltrialsregister.eu).the sphingosine-1-phosphate receptor 1 pathway the sphingosine-1-phosphate (s1p) 1 has emerged as a crucial signaling lipid regulator of inflammation and immune response, including lymphocyte trafficking, vascular integrity, and cytokine and chemokine production. 88 beside s1p role of second messenger during inflammation, most of s1p effects on innate and adaptive immunity are mediated by its binding to five g-proteincoupled receptors (s1prs 1-5 ), which are differentially expressed in tissues. 88 among them, s1p 1 receptor is ubiquitously expressed and coupled with a g inhibitory protein. 89 the activation of s1p 1 receptor is associated with ras/erk, pi3k/akt/enos, and plc/ca 2+ downstream pathways. 89 notably, under physiological and pathological conditions, the s1p/s1pr 1 axis has been demonstrated to regulate the trafficking and migration of numerous types of immune cells, including t and b lymphocytes, nk cells, dendritic cells. 88 moreover, the s1p 1 receptor signaling pathways have been reported to inhibit the pathological damage induced by the host innate and adaptive immune responses, thus attenuating the cytokine storm observed in influenza virus infection. 40 in particular, teijaro et al. 40 demonstrated that, in mice infected with a/wisconsin/wslh34939/09 influenza virus, s1p 1 receptor subtype regulates a crucial signaling loop fundamental for the initiation of cytokine storm in respiratory endothelial cells. the administration of s1p 1 agonist blunted cytokine storm, by significantly inhibiting secretion of cytokines and chemokines associated with influenza virus-induced pathology, such as ifn-α, ccl2, il-6, tnfα, and ifn-γ. 40 notably, in endothelial cells, suppression of early innate immune responses through s1p 1 signaling has been found to decrease mortality during influenza virus infection in mice. 40 interestingly, in a later work by the same group, activation of s1p 1 signaling has been demonstrated to block cytokine and chemokine production, as well as immune cell activation and recruitment in the lungs of mice infected with the h1n1 wsn strain of influenza virus. 90 moreover, s1p 1 agonism has been found to reduce cytokine storm independently of tlr3 and tlr7 signaling, as well as of multiple endosome and cytosolic innate pathogen-sensing pathways. 90 in contrast, s1p 1 r agonism has been found to suppress cytokine and chemokine production by targeting myd88 (myeloid differentiation primary response gene 88)/trif (tir-domain-containing adapter-inducing ifn-β) signaling, two common actors with nf-κb pathway. 90 however, s1p 1 r agonism is likely to modulate other signaling pathways that have not yet identified.thus, based on the effects of s1p receptor signaling on multiple immunological processes indicating such pathway a promising for the modulation of harmful inflammatory responses, the application of therapies targeting s1p and s1p signaling may be repurposed for immune-mediated disorders and inflammatory conditions, such as covid-19. for instance, sp1 agonists, approved for multiple sclerosis, such as fingolimod, might be used as therapeutic tools to dampen cytokine and chemokine responses in those patients displaying excessive immune responses. to date, only one non-randomized phase ii clinical trial is underway to establish the efficacy of fingolimod in the treatment of covid-19 (nct04280588) (typing covid-19 and fingolimod on clinicaltrials.gov).the covid-19 pandemic, induced by the novel sars-cov-2, represents one of the greatest global public health emergencies since the pandemic influenza outbreak of 1918 and provides an unprecedented challenge for the identification of both preventive and therapeutic drugs. in particular, vaccines and effective therapeutics to tackle this novel virus are urgently needed. fortunately, in the last decade vaccine technology has significantly evolved, with the development of several rna and dna vaccine candidates, licensed vectored vaccines, recombinant proteins and cell culture-based vaccines for many indications. 91 moreover, given the similarities of sars-cov-2 with sars-cov, the ideal target for the vaccine, the spike s protein on the surface of the virus required for viral entry, has been quickly identified, providing a target antigen to incorporate into advanced vaccine platforms. thus, antibodies specifically targeting the s protein can block the binding of sars-cov-2 to the host ace2 receptor, thus neutralizing the virus. however, given the lesson learned from sars and mers, the development of the vaccine against sars-cov-2 is likely to be an uphill road with several obstacles. in fact, several vaccines for sars-cov, including recombinant s proteinbased vaccines, have been already developed and tested in animal models, but many did not produce sterilizing immunity in animal models and/or induced severe side effects, such as lung and liver damage. 92, 93 to date, no human cov vaccines have been approved so far. moreover, to complicate this scenario, it has to be still unveiled whether infection with covs induces long-lived antibody response protecting against the risk of relapsing infections. thus, scientific community has to overcome several issues for the development of an effective and safe sars-cov-2 vaccine. in this regard, ling et al. recently detected sars-cov-2specific humoral and cellular immunity in 8 covid-19 patients, recently become virus-free and consequently discharged. 94 in addition, the neutralizing antibody titers have been significantly correlated with the numbers of nucleocapsid protein-specific t cells. 94 such evidence indicates that both b and t cells cooperate to protect the host from viral infection. notably, despite the small sample size, this study laid a theoretical foundation for the diagnosis of infectious diseases, the tracing of past infections, as well as the development of therapeutic antibody drugs and the design of an effective vaccine. consistently, long et al. reported acute antibody responses to sars-cov-2 in a cohort of 285 patients with covid-19. 31 in particular, 19 days after symptom onset, 100% of patients have been tested positive for antiviral igg and seroconversion for igg and igm have been reported to occur simultaneously or sequentially. 31 thus, serological testing might be useful to identify suspected patients with negative rt-pcr results as well as asymptomatic infections. 31 however, the speed at which sars-cov-2 is spreading has emphasized the urgent need to identify alternative therapeutic strategies in order to contain viral infection and to attenuate the excessive host immune response during the lag of vaccine availability, especially in a scenario where the virus may become endemic and recurrent seasonal epidemics may occur. in this regard, several antiviral drugs, such as remdesivir, lopinavir and ritonavir, are currently tested in several clinical trials, either alone or in combination, and compassionate use of these drugs has already been reported for sars-cov-2. 95, 96 however, antiviral drugs might select for mutational escape, thus rendering this therapeutic approach ineffective. moreover, still unconfirmed reports indicate sufficient pre-clinical rationale and evidence regarding the use of chloroquine and hydroxychloroquine as prophylactic agent, 97 with evidence of safety from long-time use in clinical practice for the treatment of malaria and autoimmune diseases. 98 however, their use needs further evidence and clinical evaluation. chloroquine and hydroxychloroquine are known to potentially cause heart rhythm problems, that may be exacerbated whether combined with other drugs with similar effects on the heart, and induce adverse liver, kidney and cerebral effects. 99 thus, as discussed in this review, treatments addressing the immunopathology of the infection, such as immunomodulatory drugs approved for different clinical indications, have become a major focus. such approaches show the advantage to override viral mutational escape and to exert less-selective pressure on viral population. although the prospective of counteracting cytokine storm is compelling, a major limitation relies on the limited understanding of the immune signaling pathways triggering such process. hence, future dissection of immune signaling pathways triggered by sars-cov-2 will provide novel insight on the effects of the virus on human immune system and may reveal relevant biological players that can be targeted to blunt cytokine storm. notably, since it is well established that innate immune responses trigger the activation of multiple and redundant signaling pathways, an effective therapy may require to acting, at the same time, on multiple signaling pathways. in this regard, cocktails of immunomodulatory drugs, such as monoclonal antibody targeting a specific cytokine (e.g. tnf-inhibitors, il-1-inhibitors, il-6 inhibitors), corticosteroids (e.g. prednisone, methylprednisolone and dexamethasone), and s1pr 1 agonists (e.g. fingolimod), rather than a single drug, might be more effective in the management of covid-19, by exerting either synergic or additive effects. in this regard, it would be of key importance to assess whether patients with immune-mediated disorders treated with immunomodulatory drugs, such as cytokine blockers, are more resistant to the excessive immune response observed in covid-19 patients and more protected against sars-cov-2-driven pneumonia. however, to date, no evidence reporting either decreased or increased risk of sars-cov-driven pneumonia has been documented in this patients and further investigations are required to verify this hypothesis.furthermore, another aspect to better investigate concerns the possibility that the uncontrolled immune response to viral infection may cause detrimental systemic effects on several physiological systems, such as the nervous, endocrine, renal and cardiovascular systems. accordingly, it is likely that the massive cytokine and chemokine release may critically impact on these physiological systems, thereby inducing both short-and long-term detrimental effects. as an example, the neuro-invasive potential of sars-cov and mers-cov has been previously reported. 100 thus, given the high similarity between sars-cov and sars-cov-2, it is likely that this latter displays a similar potential. 101-103 as a matter of fact, a study carried out in 214 covid-19 patients reported that about 88% of severe covid-19 cases showed neurologic manifestations, such as acute cerebrovascular diseases and impaired consciousness. 104 finally, beside the putative long-term effects directly induced by sars-cov-2 infection, another key issue to address concerns the long-term effects of empirical and experimental treatments in covid-19 patients. in this regard, a study carried out in 25 recovered sars patients, recruited 12 years after the viral infection, reported significant differences in the serum metabolomes in recovered sars patients compared with controls. 105 in particular, a significant metabolic alterationincreased levels of phosphatidylinositol and lysophosphatidylinositolhas been found to coincide with the effect of methylprednisolone administration, 105 thus suggesting that high-dose pulses of steroid treatment may induce long-term systemic damage associated with serum metabolic alterations. 105 therefore, all the challenges discussed above highlight some of the major gaps in our knowledge of covid-19 clinical spectrum, underlying immune signaling pathways, systemic effects, and long-term pathological signatures, which need to be urgently fulfilled by future investigations.the coronavirus disease 2019 (covid- 19) is an acute respiratory disease caused by a novel coronavirus (severe acute respiratory syndrome-coronavirus-2, sars-cov-2), identified in wuhan, china in december 2019 (1) . since then, the covid-19 outbreak has spread worldwide, becoming a pandemic, causing a public health emergency, according to the world health organization (who), and resulting in thousands of deaths (1) . sars-cov-2 is a β-coronavirus, an enveloped non-segmented positive-sense rna virus, which could be transmitted from bats via unknown intermediate hosts to infect humans, using the angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ace2) receptor (2) . the latter, is more expressed in adults than children, and thus possibly explains why the disease is more aggressive in older patients (3) . covid-19 shows a heterogeneous course, from patients affected by mild flu-like symptoms to patients with unremitting fever and severe respiratory involvement. on this basis, markers of poor prognosis have recently been investigated to effectively prioritize resources to patients with more severe symptoms (4) . interestingly, this study identified hyperferritinemia and interleukin (il)-6, as predictors of poor outcome, thus suggesting a hyper-inflammatory process as the major cause of death (4, 5) . in severe covid-19, a specific cytokine profile resembling the pattern of a secondary hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis (hlh) has been shown, due to significant increases of il-2, il-7, granulocyte colony stimulating factor (gcsf), interferon-γ inducible protein 10 (ip-10), monocyte chemoattractant protein 1 (mcp-1), macrophage inflammatory protein 1-α, and tumor necrosis factor (tnf) (6) . contextualizing unremitting fever, hyperferritinemia, and the hyper-inflammatory process, severe covid-19 shows similarity to disorders comprised in the so-called hyperferritinemic syndrome (7) . this syndrome includes adult onset still's disease (aosd), systemic juvenile idiopathic arthritis (sjia), secondary hlh, catastrophic anti-phospholipid syndrome (caps), and septic shock (7) . hyperferritinemia is a common trait of all these forms, which could be an active pathogenic mediator and not only a consequence of the inflammation (7). on these bases, we aimed to review the similarities between severe covid-19 and diseases included in hyperferritinemic syndrome, from a pathogenic, clinical, and therapeutic point of view, thus proposing new insights to improve the management of those patients.coronavirus rnas may act as pathogen-associated molecular patterns, which are detected by the pattern recognition receptors and activate downstream cascades pro-inflammatory pathways (1, 6) . in the endosome, toll-like receptor (tlr) 3, tlr7, tlr8, and tlr9 may sense viral rna and dna (8) , whereas, in the cytoplasm, the viral rna receptor retinoic-acid inducible gene i (9), cytosolic receptor melanoma differentiation-associated gene 5, and nucleotidyltransferase cyclic guanosine monophosphateadenosine monophosphate (gmp-amp) synthase may recognize viral rna and dna (10) . consequently, downstream cascades molecules are triggered, involving adaptor molecule myeloid differentiation primary response 88 (myd88), transcription factor nuclear factor-κb (nf-κb), and interferon regulatory factor 3, leading to the production of pro-inflammatory molecules (11, 12) . in fact, plasma cytokines and chemokines were increased in covid-19 patients, including il-1β, il-2, il-4, il-7, il-10, il-12, il-13, il-17, gcsf, ip-10, interferonγ (ifn-γ), and tnf (6) . during severe covid-19, these mechanisms could be exaggerated, probably because of a specific genetic susceptibility (13) , and these patients are characterized by very high blood levels of pro-inflammatory mediators and ferritin (4, 5) . the latter is an iron-binding molecule, which is produced after pro-inflammatory stimuli, in addition to iron availability (7) . furthermore, ferritin comprises 24 subunits, codified according to their molecular weight into heavy (feh) and light (fel) subunits. remarkably, increased expression of feh and of cd68+/feh+ macrophages may be observed in inflammatory infiltrate of aosd and secondary hlh (14, 15) . additionally, a stimulatory effect of feh on nf-kb has been described, acting as a pro-inflammatory cytokine on hepatic stellate cells (16) . in this work, ferritin was shown to regulate an iron-independent signaling pathway that resulted ultimately in nf-kb activation (16) , thus converging on the same pathway elicited by sars-cov-2 rnas (11, 12) . on the contrary, the deletion of feh reduced the inflammatory burden in the model of sepsis by lipopolysaccharide-induced endotoxemia, cecal ligation, and puncture (17) . such protection was predominantly mediated by the compensatory increase in fel, associated with an inhibitory action on nf-kb (17) . the proinflammatory cytokines, which are elevated in hyperferritinemic syndrome, have also been described in severe covid-19 (6) , and may preferentially induce the expression of feh, via fer2, a regulatory element acting as a binding site to nf-kb. the latter, in turn, stimulates the synthesis of further feh and pro-inflammatory cytokines, thus perpetuating a vicious inflammatory loop (7) . in addition, feh+/il-12+ macrophages have been shown in the infiltrate of aosd and secondary hlh (15, 18) , which may further release feh, following inflammatory stimuli (19) , and thus contributing to the inflammatory loop (20) . on these bases, we hypothesize that severe covid-19 shares common pathogenic mechanisms with other diseases of hyperferritinemic syndrome (7), with ferritin enhancing the inflammatory burden and triggering a vicious pathogenic loop.lung involvement and hyper-inflammation are at the crossroad between severe covid-19 and the hyperferritinemic syndrome. as observed in other β-coronaviruses diseases, covid-19 is characterized by fever, dry cough, increasing dyspnoea with hypoxemia, and bilateral ground-glass opacities and patchy shadowing with a peripheral or posterior distribution, mainly in the lower lobes, on chest ct scans (6) . in fact, an anatomy report of a covid-19 pneumonia cadaver showed that sars-cov-2 invades the respiratory mucosa and infects other cells, thus provoking an inflammatory response in the lower airway and causes lung injury (21) . considering that coronavirus binds to the host cells using the ace2 receptor, which is highly represented in the lower respiratory tract, a persistent and repeated stimulation of tlrs in the lung may occur, hence triggering an aberrant immune response and the production of a cytokine storm (22) . the latter is the result of overwhelming systemic inflammation with a massive release of pro-inflammatory cytokines, quickly progressing to multiple organ dysfunction syndrome and eventually to death (23) . in spite of various inflammatory etiologies, cytokine release syndrome is supported by an essential underlying hypothesis: the massive release of cytokines as a consequence of: (i) excessive and repeated inflammatory stimuli, and (ii) an inadequate regulation of inflammation, (iii) an uncontrolled release of cytoplasmic cytokines from destroyed lymphocytes after anti-cancer therapies (23, 24) . in addition, it has been shown that increased amounts of pro-inflammatory cytokines, including il-1β, il-6, il-12, ifn-γ, ip-10, and mcp1, were associated with pulmonary inflammation and extensive lung damage in sars patients (25) , thus suggesting a further pathogenic loop in inducing the cytokine storm. although the mechanisms of how covid-19 and, in other more general viral infections, would prompt the cytokine storm syndrome are not fully elucidated, it has been suggested that the ifn-γ, which is largely released by a variety of hematopoietic cells in response to viral infection, may facilitate the occurrence of hyperinflammation (23) . in patients with sjia, lung involvement may trigger systemic inflammation and the development of secondary hlh and ifn-γ plays a central pathogenic role (26, 27) . in fact, in lung biopsies in patients with sija, the analysis of expressed genes revealed that many of the up-regulated targets were in gene pathways related to an ifn-γ signature, including human leukocyte antigen (hla)-d family members and other ifnrelated genes (26, 27) . two of the most highly up-regulated non-hla genes were chemokine (c-x-c motif) cxcl9, and cxcl10 (26) , which are ifn-induced chemokines strongly correlated with the occurrence of secondary hlh (28) . in addition, the lung is one of the major physiological producers of il-1β and il-6 (29), which are also involved in pathogenic steps, leading to the occurrence of secondary hlh (30, 31) . considering all of these findings, it is possible to postulate that during the acute respiratory distress syndrome of covid-19, the sars-cov-2 may trigger a hyper-inflammatory reaction strongly resembling that observed in the lung involvement of sjia, in which the lung acts as a trigger to amplify the immune response. the final result is the uncontrolled proliferation of activated immune cells, the massive production of pro-inflammatory mediators, and the development of cytokine storm syndrome, either in severe covid-19 or sjia.from a clinical point of view, severe covid-19 and the diseases included in hyperferritinemic syndrome share a fever as the main clinical symptom. in these conditions, the analysis of fever pattern would also suggest a useful clue to assess the severity of the disease and the occurrence of complications. in sjia and aosd, a typical change from the high-spiking intermittent typical quotidian pattern, to a continuous unremitting pattern suggests the occurrence of secondary hlh, and the worsening of the clinical situation toward a life-threatening hyperinflammatory complication (32) . during covid-19, on the basis of observations from clinicians on the frontlines, the occurrence of unremitting fever would similarly identify a more aggressive subset of patients, at higher risk of a poor prognosis. in addition, in severe covid-19, hyperferritinemia is observed, suggesting a marker of severity (4, 5) . although it has poor specificity, a 5-fould increase of ferritin is strongly suggestive of the diseases included in hyperferritinemic syndrome, and is a useful marker to assess disease activity and to predict a poor prognosis (20) . in fact, hyperferritinemia is associated with increased mortality in sepsis, multiple organ dysfunction syndrome, and critical illness (33) (34) (35) . thus, the clinical phenotype, characterized by unremitting fever and hyperferritinemia, identifies the most severe subset of covid-19 as observed in the diseases included in hyperferritinemic syndrome.considering the lack of efficacy of antiviral therapy for severe coronavirus infection, it is reasonable to postulate the clinical usefulness of specific immunomodulatory therapies (figure 1) , as observed for other diseases included in hyperferritinemic syndrome such as intravenous immunoglobulins (ivigs) and tocilizumab, the humanized monoclonal antibody against il-6 receptor (7). ex juvantibus, one of the best criteria for identifying a common pathogenic mechanism, among different diseases, is that the clinical manifestations were reversed upon initiation of the same therapy. it has been shown that, after ivigs therapy, a significant reduction of hyperferritinemia, both in sepsis and secondary hlh was observed, correlating with an improvement in patients (7). considering their proposed anti-viral activity, possibly comprising many cross-reacting antiviral antibodies and per se immunomodulatory activities (36), ivigs has also been proposed to treat severe covid-19 (37) . another therapeutic immunomodulatory possibility in severe covid-19 is the administration of hydroxychloroquine (hcq). this drug, has been a licensed treatment for rheumatoid arthritis for many years, and was shown to reduce the viral load, favoring the disappearance of sars-cov-2 (38) . however, although it seems promising, a recent meta-analysis, including 1,358 patients, suggested that more data are required for a definitive conclusion on the use of hcq in this setting, since no difference was observed in virologic cure, death, or clinical worsening of disease between hcq-treated patients and control groups (39) . as far as tocilizumab is concerned, the rationale for its use in severe covid-19 derived from evidence of its beneficial effect on cytokine release syndrome. this is a clinically significant, on-target, off-tumor side effect of the chimeric antigen receptor t-cell therapies administered for treatment of malignancies (24) . characteristics of cytokinerelease syndrome include fever, encephalopathy, hypotension, and coagulopathy, leading to multiorgan failure, associated with very pronounced levels of hyperferritinemia and il-6 (24). the latter provided an effective therapeutic target in cytokine release syndrome (40) . mirroring this finding, tocilizumab has been used to treat severe covid-19 with promising results, as observed in other diseases of hyperferritinemic syndrome (7) . furthermore, a reduction of ferritin, obtained by combing immunomodulatory drugs, was associated with a lower mortality rate in caps and hlh (7), thus possibly suggesting the use of, in a more aggressive subset of covid-19, a combination therapy with both antiviral and antiinflammatory drugs, at the same time (41) . in addition, the repurposing of these drugs in severe covid-19 could benefit from the findings of previous reports, and thus, on this basis, many clinical trials are ongoing in different countries (chictr2000029765, nct04317092, nct04310228, and nct04332913). as far as other immunomodulatory strategies in covid-19 are concerned, il-1 inhibition showed benefits in sepsis, in which both hyperferritinemia and hyper-inflammation, may be observed, contributing to the dysregulation of the host immune system (42) . a post-hoc analysis of data from a phase 3 randomized controlled trial showed some improvement of patients with sepsis, following anakinra, a recombinant non-glycosylated form of human il-1 receptor antagonist, thus suggesting its possible use in those patients (42) . as a consequence, it is possible to hypothesize that anakinra may also relieve severe covid-19. reported data suggest the possible efficacy of emapalumab, a monoclonal antibody neutralizing ifn-y, approved in the treatment of hlh and its massive production of pro-inflammatory cytokines (43) . due to the important role of ifn-y in driving hyper-inflammation during viral infections, emapalumab may be an additional immunomodulatory therapy that could be employed in the treatment of severe covid-19. in addition, available literature suggests that janus kinase (jak) inhibition might affect covid-19 twice as much, by targeting both inflammation and cellular viral entry (44) . it has been proposed that baricitinib, a jak1/jak2 inhibitor, may control the hyper-inflammatory steps in those diseases, characterized by a cytokine storm, since a plethora of cytokine receptors indiscriminately use these jaks as mediators of ligands binding and consequent activation of the inflammatory cascade (45) . furthermore, the disruption of p2-associated protein kinase 1, a known regulator of viral endocytosis into the cell, by baricitinib, could possibly be an additional positive effect in covid-19, decreasing the viral entry (44) . finally, considering ferritin as a pathogenic mediator, this could also be proposed as a therapeutic target in these conditions. high-volume hemofiltration and plasma exchange, extracorporeal blood purification techniques, have been employed to treat secondary hlh to sepsis (46) (47) (48) . interestingly, in parallel with the clinical efficacy, these procedures induce a ferritin reduction (46) (47) (48) , suggesting that the mechanical removal of ferritin could have a possible therapeutic role.in this work, we discuss the similarities, from a pathogenic, clinical, and therapeutic point of view, between severe covid-19 and four conditions; secondary hlh, aosd, caps and septic shock, which are included in hyperferritinemic syndrome. all these diseases are characterized by very high levels of ferritin, which could not only be the product of the inflammation but rather may play a pathogenic role. possibly, in an inflammatory environment, as observed in these diseases, hyperferritinemia may be involved in a vicious pathogenic loop prompting its pro-inflammatory properties. in severe covid-19, ferritin could be a further possible enhancer of the cytokine storm. clinically, unremitting fever is a common feature of severe covid-19, suggesting that a change from the intermittent quotidian pattern to a continuous unremitting form would indicate a worsening toward the cytokine storm, as in aosd and sjia. the hyperferritinemia seems to be a marker of poor prognosis and response to treatment, in both severe covid-19 and hyperferritinemic syndrome. finally, the good response to immunomodulatory therapies, observed during severe covid-19, strongly supports the link between this form and other diseases included in hyperferritinemic syndrome. in addition, targeting the hyperinflammatory process, through immunomodulatory therapies, decreases the high mortality rate of all these diseases (7, (49) (50) (51) , thus proposing additional therapeutic options to improve the survival of severe covid-19 patients, the latter characterized by an over-exuberant pro-inflammatory response, in which the viral load is not correlated with the worsening of symptoms (6) .in conclusion, we hypothesize that severe covid-19 shares pathogenic mechanisms, a clinical picture, outcomes, and therapeutic strategies with disorders included in hyperferritinemic syndrome. the hyperferritinemia, characterizing all these diseases may be a pathogenic mediator, enhancing the inflammatory burden, and, as observed in aosd, caps, and secondary hlh, its reduction is associated with a lower mortality. thus, at present, severe covid-19, seems to be a new entity in hyperferritinemic syndrome. in addition, since accumulating evidence suggests that severe covid-19 is associated with a cytokine storm syndrome, therapeutic strategies combining immunomodulatory therapies, may improve the management of those patients. furthermore, in this setting, high levels of ferritin, identifying a more aggressive subset of covid-19, may drive clinicians to apply more aggressive therapies and resources in those patients, thus balancing appropriate escalation of therapy and minimizing the exposure to iatrogenic harm. sars-cov-2 and consequent covid-19 are a new and great challenge for health systems worldwide, requiring a multidisciplinary approach and a large body of knowledge.all the authors meet all criteria for authorship in the icmje recommendations, since all authors made substantial contributions to the conception or design of the work, the acquisition and interpretation of data. all authors contributed to the critical review and revision of the manuscript and approved the final version. all the authors agreed to be accountable for all aspects of the work.severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2) is the virus responsible for the infectious respiratory condition now formally known as coronavirus disease of 2019 (covid-19) [1] . this virus was first identified in wuhan, hubei province, china in december of 2019 and declared a global pandemic by the world health organization in march 2020 [2] . covid-19 symptoms (cough, fever, and shortness of breath) generally appear within 14 days of exposure and 20% of these patients progress to severe disease [3] . hallmarks and complications of severe covid-19 infection include acute respiratory distress syndrome (ards), pneumonia, sepsis and septic shock, cardiomyopathy and arrhythmia, acute kidney injury, and prolonged hospitalization [3] . based on the size and scope of the covid-19 pandemic, the disease burden on healthcare facilities and hospitals is severe, to the point that the us will continue to experience widespread shortages of critical standard of care items such as ventilators [4] .while the pathogenesis of covid-19 is still poorly defined, it is believed to involve viral-induced suppression of innate pathogen surveillance systems. under normal conditions, pathogen pattern recognition receptors (ppr) on resident innate immune cells sense viral rna molecules that trigger anti-viral, interferon (ifn) expression which prevents replication and promotes the removal of infected cells [5] . however, genomic studies conducted on the original severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus (sars-cov) demonstrate that the virus encodes for proteins that serve as innate immune antagonists by suppressing the expression of ifn and promoting evasion of viral rna from host defense mechanisms, independent of pro-inflammatory cytokine release [5] . as a result, early in infection, innate toll-like receptor (tlr) and prr signaling pathways continue to potentiate the release of pro-inflammatory mediators, such as cytokines (i.e., tnfα, il-6, ip10 or cxcl10, etc.) while viral replication remains unchecked. hence, it has been theorized, coronaviruses pathogenesis involves the delayed release of ifn and an accumulation of monocyte/macrophages together with an inappropriate t-cell response [6] . adding support to this etiology, severe cases of covid-19 appear to present with dysregulated t-cell counts and elevated inflammatory cytokine levels [7] .in the case of severe covid-19, this disruption leads to a condition described as a "cytokine storm", in which excessive amounts of pro-inflammatory cytokines are produced and may contribute to morbidity and mortality in these patients. a potential infγ-related cytokine storm was first identified in some patients suffering with sars-cov infection involving a distinct pattern of cytokines including ifnγ, cxcl10, and il-6 [8] . subsequently, clinical studies are now confirming similar responses in covid-19 patients. in a study published in the lancet, covid-19 patients exhibit increased plasma levels of cytokines and chemokines, such as ifnγ, cxcl10, il-1β, and tnfα [9] . as a result, therapeutic interventions for covid-19 must address a range of pro-inflammatory cytokines and chemokines that can direct the arrival of immune cells and the development of a late phase hyperactivation.it has been proposed this hyperinflammatory response triggers a violent attack on the body that potentiates cytokine storm development [10] . studies demonstrate that viral infections, through both the result of viralinduced cellular toxicity and the immune response itself, drive the production of damage-associated molecular pattern (damp) molecules that are recognized by innate tlrs. for example, imai et al. have demonstrated that oxidized phospholipids, generated by reactive oxygen species following exposure to inactivated influenza virus, lead to tlr4-mediated alveolar macrophage cytokine release and acute lung injury (ali) in mouse models [11] . importantly, they also found that inactivated influenza virus causes oxidative stress and tlr4 mobilization in human peripheral blood mononuclear cells (pbmc) [11] . in addition, viral infections have been shown to induce tlr4mediated release of pro-inflammatory cytokines through the release of the damp molecules s100 calcium-binding protein a9 and high mobility group box 1; proteins normally sequestered inside the cell [12, 13] . functionally, blocking tlr4 protects from and tlr−/− mice are highly resistant to influenza-induced lethality [11, 14] . it is also important to note, that tlr4 signaling may contribute to fibrosis, further complicating management of covid-19 [15] . these observations suggest that damp-mediated tlr signaling is an important therapeutic target in covid-19, to reduce feed-back loops potentially critical for cytokine storm development. interestingly, t-cells infected with sars-cov exhibit elevated expression of tlr4, 7, and 9, further demonstrating that this is a critical target for coronavirus intervention [16] .the low molecular weight fraction of commercial human serum albumin (lmwf5a), a novel biologic drug in development for the treatment of inflammation associated with osteoarthritis, exhibits mechanisms of action that may be complimentary to addressing the innate-immunemediated inflammation seen in patients suffering from covid-19. in the course of development history, the biologic effects of lmf5a have been established using a variety of human immune cell ex vivo and in vitro models stimulated using the damp, tlr4 agonist lipopolysaccharide (lps) as well as relevant barrier-function assays using human endothelial cells (table 1 ; also see review on lmwf5a mechanisms of action [25] ). thus, we hypothesize that lmwf5a could improve the clinical outcomes of covid-19 by attenuating hyperinflammation and the potential development of a cytokine storm as well as the resulting increase in vascular permeability. in this report, we discuss key findings that support the use of lmwf5a as a therapeutic agent for patients suffering from covid-19 following and provide translational links drawn from literature searches to bridge our research to modulation of key inflammatory mediators and function of the alveolar-epithelial barrier.presentation of the hypothesis lmwf5a inhibits the release of pro-inflammatory cytokines from pbmc, macrophages, and t-cellsone of the ways lmwf5a may address the excessive cytokine production seen in these patients is by suppressing pro-inflammatory cytokines released from mononuclear cells infiltrating from blood. this is reflected in the ability of lmwf5a to inhibit the release of a key set of cytokines and chemokines associated with sars-cov-2 infection in ex vivo human pbmc models activated through innate pattern recognition pathways. for example, lmwf5a reduces tnfα release by human pbmc stimulated using lps as an agonist for tlr4 signaling ( fig. 1 ) [19] . lps-stimulation mimics the pathogen-associated molecular pattern (pamp) and damp signaling seen in the end stage of disease where excessive viral loads and tissue damage trigger excessive induction of the immune response. subsequent unpublished findings show that this response extends to a reduction of cxcl10, il-1β, and il-12 as well. thus, demonstrates that lmwf5a treatment appears to target the release of a pattern of cytokines observed in covid-19 and other viral cytokine storms.tissue resident and blood-derived macrophages are key contributors in the inflammatory response to viral infections and the pro-inflammatory precursors of ards activation of transcription factor protective of fibrosis and increased cell survival.[23]primary human endothelial cell permeability models lmwf5a treatment results in: ↑ acetylation of αtubulin ↓ vascular leakage enhanced barrier function of endothelial cells with reduced vascular leakage. also, apparent stabilization of microtubule network.[24] [26] . alveolar macrophages are the predominant tissue resident immune cells found in the lung and are likely to be involved in both the early anti-viral response and trophic end-stages of tissue damage and recovery. in addition, pleiotropic monocytes, invading across the capillary-epithelial bed, will differentiate into proinflammatory m1 macrophages upon arrival and may contribute to the excessive immune response in the lung [26] . moreover, macrophages that develop into an inflammatory m1 lineage become a potent source of inflammatory cytokines (e.g., tnfα, il-1β, il-6, il-12, cxcl10), furthering inflammation [26, 27] . of note, the balance of macrophage polarization between the microbial/ifnγ-induced m1 phenotypes and the antiinflammatory m2 could dictate the amplitude of classical activation versus neutrophil efferocytosis and immune resolution, respectively, during pulmonary insult [28] .in vitro studies using human macrophages further support an immunomodulatory action with lmwf5a treatment by shifting macrophage phenotypes from an inflammatory m1 lineage to an anti-inflammatory m2 lineage [21] . in these experiments, a human thp-1 monocyte cell line was differentiated to induce macrophage-like characteristics, then treated with lmwf5a and stimulated with lps. reductions in both secreted cytokine and mrna transcription were observed for the m1 markers il-6, cxcl10, and il-12. importantly, the same cells exhibited an increase in the release of the anti-inflammatory m2 marker, il-10 with lmwf5a treatment as compared to saline controls. the reduction in inflammatory m1-type cytokine release and gene expression combined with increased antiinflammatory m2-type cytokine release indicates lmwf5a modulates the immune response by shifting the cytokine profile towards homeostasis. this shift in macrophage phenotype could reduce macrophage hyperactivity and partially address the overproduction of inflammatory cytokines observed in covid-19.although covid-19 may be characterized as an innate response, studies also indicate that adaptive cells contribute to the etiology of lung jury as well. animal models demonstrate that t-cells facilitate the release of pro-inflammatory cytokines, such as tnfα, and the arrival of neutrophils in the lung [29] . as observed with macrophage polarization, this may result from an imbalance in inflammatory and regulatory subsets. for example, the ratio of pro-inflammatory th17 to t regulatory cytokines in the peripheral blood of patients has been found to be predictive of 28-day mortality with ards [30] . in support of this evidence, activated and proliferating pro-inflammatory t-cells have been detected in bronchoalveolar lavage samples taken from ards patients [31] . moreover, lymphocyte counts have been associated with increased disease severity in covid-19 with patients who die exhibiting significant leukopenia [32] . these cells represent a potentially [19] underappreciated source of both ifnγ and proinflammatory cytokines, such as tnfα, and contributors of disease progression in covid-19. once in the lung, infγ priming of t-cells will provide for intense, superantigenlike signaling that may exacerbate autocrine and paracrine cytokine activity. while their role in covid-19 is yet to be fully elucidated, targeting persistent and longlived immune regulators, such as t cells, could prove valuable in balancing the immune response.one of the earliest documented activities of lmwf5a is its ability to reduce cytokine release from immune cells stimulated through the t-cell receptor (tcr) by cd3/28 antibody or specific antigen presentation. lmwf5a was found to reduce tnfα and ifnγ release from cd3/28-stimulated pbmc and influenza ha antigen-presented human t-cell clones [17] . this activity was attributed, in part, to an identified diketopiperazine molecule formed by the cleavage and cyclization of the two n-terminal amino acids of human serum albumin, da-dkp, present in lmwf5a. treatment of these cells with da-dkp resulted in significant reductions of tnfα and ifnγ release from antigen presented t-cells clones [18] . interestingly, this effect appears to be specific to memory (cd45ro+) but not naïve (cd45ra+) phenotypes (unpublished findings). these findings demonstrated that lmwf5a can reduce cytokine release during an adaptive immune response triggered by the presentation of antigen or activation of t-cells. therefore, with respect to covid-19, lmwf5a may shift the overall inflammatory response away from the hypercytokine production observed as the disease transitions to ards without impacting the body's ability to fight the primary viral infection.mechanistically, covid-19 pathogenesis seems to be conducted through distinct transcriptional signaling pathways. for example, activation of nf-κb appears to be a hallmark of alveolar macrophages found in patients during ards [33] . more importantly, inhibition of nf-κb has been shown to limit the production of proinflammatory cytokines like il-6 and cxcl10 in mouse models resulting in reduced mortality [34] . dysregulation of nf-κb activity has been broadly implicated in the production of inflammatory cytokines (tnfα, il-1β, il-6) and cell apoptosis [35] [36] [37] . also, it has been reported that nf-κb signaling pathways can coordinate with other hallmark pro-inflammatory transcription factors in the immune response [38] .another pro-inflammatory transcription factor associated with lung inflammation is signal transducer and activator of transcription (stat). the canonical ifnγ signaling pathway involves the activation of janus kinase and stat1 which promotes m1 polarization of macrophages and augments tcr signaling priming [39] . stat1 and stat3 activation has also been shown to be a driving factor in lps-induced lung injury by mediating the release of il-6 and tnfα [40] . supporting this mechanism, inhibition of stat3 reduces the accumulation of immune cells as well as the amount of detectable tnfα and il-1β in bronchoalveolar lavage fluid in lpsinduced mouse lung ali models [41] .several lines of preliminary evidence demonstrate that lmwf5a reduces the activity of both nf-κb and stat. nf-κb luciferase hek293 reporter cells treated with lmwf5a and then stimulated with tnfα exhibit dosedependent reductions in nf-κb expression as measured by luciferase activity. as for stat, preliminary experiments, using the lps-stimulated human pbmc model described above, indicate that lmwf5a reduces stat1 and stat3 activation as measured by dna-binding elisa in nuclear and cytoplasmic protein fractions taken from cells after 24 h in culture. while these findings need to be fully evaluated, reduction in nf-κb activity could reduce the overall inflammatory status of covid-19 patients while a reduction in stat could provide an avenue to help suppress the robust ifnγ and m1 signaling that appears to trigger the cytokine storm development in these patients.conversely, lmwf5a appears to activate the antiinflammatory and/or immunoregulatory transcription factors, aryl hydrocarbon receptor (ahr) and peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor (ppar). a source of endogenous ahr ligands are tryptophan metabolites, and one of the active ingredients in lmwf5a is nacetyl-tryptophan, suggesting that ahr activation contributes to the immunomodulatory action of lmwf5a. the effect on ahr activity was confirmed using an ahr antagonist (ch223191) in the thp-1 model described above. when an ahr antagonist was added to these macrophage-like cultures, the il-6 response was partially attenuated, demonstrating that the ahr activation plays a partial role in the reducing of cytokine observed in this model. however, ahr antagonism had no significant effect on cxcl10 inhibition, indicating other pathways are involved in lmwf5a activity as well [21] . another target pathway for activity was identified based on the fact that endogenous ppar ligands are comprised of fatty acids and their derivatives, and lmwf5a contains the fatty acid, caprylate. furthermore, 15-delta prostaglandin j2 (15d-pgj2), a resolving prostaglandin known to be a natural ligand for pparγ, is upregulated by lmwf5a (to be discussed more below). to establish the contribution of ppar in our models, dna-binding and pathway specific antagonism was evaluated. preliminary findings suggest that human pbmc treated with lmwf5a exhibited increased ppar dna binding and the addition of the pparγ antagonist gw9662 to these cultures results in the attenuation of the lps-induced tnfα inhibition. together, these data indicate that both ahr and ppar transcriptional pathways play a role in the anti-inflammatory responses observed by lmwf5a.a large body of evidence suggests that ahr and ppar signaling plays a pivotal role in immunosuppression and the direction of regulatory immune cell phenotypes. to illustrate, ahr has been shown to suppress nf-κb activity by: increasing dna binding of the nf-κb subunit p50 (p50)/p50 nf-κb homodimer to competitively inhibit the active p50/ nf-κb subunit p65 (rela) heterodimer [42] , sequestering co-regulators (rela, nf-κb subunit relb) to prevent translocation into the nucleus [43] and direct trans-repression in the presence of stat1 [44] . ahr also promotes anti-inflammatory cytokine production (il-10, il-21) and the differentiation of t-cells to regulatory phenotypes through cross-talk with the transcription factors proto-oncogene c-maf and stat3 [45, 46] . as with ahr, ppar has been shown to suppress nf-κb activity by: binding to dna and directly interacting with the rela and p50 subunits of nf-κb, inducing the expression of inhibitor nf-κb protein, sequestering coactivators required for nf-κb such as creb-binding protein, and releasing the repressor b-cell lymphoma 6 protein which redirects its activity towards nf-κb-mediated promoters [47] . this activity decreases the production of several pro-inflammatory cytokines regulated by the nf-κb pathway, including tnfα and il-6 [47, 48] . more importantly, the pparγ agonist, rosiglitazone, is protective of endotoxin induced ards in rat models with marked reductions in nitric oxide and oxidative damage observed [49] . based on these results, we suspect that activation of these pathways could help suppress the release of key cytokines, such as il-6, during covid-19, provide additional control over proinflammatory signaling pathways, and potentially rebalance inflammatory immune cells to regulatory and immunotolerant phenotypes that appear to be missing in critical stages of ards.one of the unique aspects of lmwf5a-induced immunomodulation is the suppression of pro-inflammatory cytokines concomitant with the enhancement of pro-resolving molecules. in our lps-stimulated pbmc investigations, we found that unlike the steroid dexamethasone, which reduces cytokine and prostaglandin release, lmwf5a inhibits tnfα release while potentiating the production of pro-resolving prostaglandin e2 (pge2) and 15d-pgj2 in these cultures (fig. 2) [20] . on the other hand, treatment with ibuprofen, a nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug, strongly attenuates prostaglandin release but does not result in a significant reduction in tnfα release. consequently, lmwf5a offers a distinctive immunomodulatory profile to other hallmark antiinflammatory drugs. western blot analysis shows that lmwf5a accomplishes this by upregulating prostaglandin-endoperoxide synthase 2 (cox-2) expression [20] . a similar pge2 response is observed in macrophage-like cell culture models using pmadifferentiated u937 monocytic cells stimulated with lps, suggesting that while lmwf5a can suppress proinflammatory cytokines, healing and resolution phase mediators are still produced and possibly enhanced by treatment.in regard to covid-19, it is now appreciated that cox-2 plays a critical role in protection through the resolution phase of inflammation. hangai et al. found that pge2 release from necrotic macrophages may represent a mechanism to suppress damp-induced inflammation and that inhibition of cox-2 results in elevated serum tnfα levels in liver necrotic models [50] . interestingly, studies have also shown that pge2 in the wound site is sufficient to drive the reverse migration of neutrophils as well as promote the apoptosis of neutrophils and efferocytosis critical for the resolution phase of the inflammatory process [51] . the authors further hypothesized that this activity is temporally important, in part, to allow neutrophils to perform critical functions, then provide timely resolution. while it is certain that damp signaling has evolved to help achieve homeostasis after insult or injury, excessive and/or sustained responses can exacerbate disease. as a result, compensatory mechanisms exist within the biologic milieu and it appears that lmwf5a may help drive lipidmediated feed-back loops of immunosuppression.more importantly, this pathway also appears critical to viral immunity and may afford some protection from the robust inflammation in late phase viral infection that leads to ards. for example, in some coronavirus studies, it has been shown that the virus manipulates prostaglandin release from infected cells during different phases of infection. fang et al. showed that sars-cov achieves this is by membrane protein-induced down regulation of nf-κb, with a resulting reduction in cox-2 expression [52] . the authors suggest that this is a protective measure by the virus to evade the immune response in the early stages of infection. in addition, the host response with these molecules also appears to dictate disease progression. to illustrate, in mouse studies, age-related differences in pgd2 release result in defective migration of dendritic cells and cytotoxic cd8+ t-cell activity into the lung [53] . furthermore, it has also been found that anti-inflammatory pgd2 signaling, through d-prostanoid receptor 1, reduces inflammasome-induced il-1β release and mortality in coronavirus-infected mice [54] . finally, influenza studies have established that 15d-pgj2 treatment protects mice against lethal influenza infection through a pparγdependent mechanism with a marked reduction in viral load and lung inflammation observed [55] . it has been theorized that bioactive lipids, such as arachidonic acid, may serve as endogenous anti-viral compounds, thus, together with the findings above, prostaglandins could provide a therapeutic advantage for ards secondary to viral infections such as covid-19 [56] .there are many clinical parameters that may contribute to the pathogenesis and morbidity associated with covid-19. one of these is dysregulation of the alveolar-epithelial barrier, which results in the build-up of protein-rich fluid and decreased oxygen diffusion. resolution and repair of the widespread inflammation fig. 2 differential modulation of prostaglandins from lps-stimulated pbmc pre-treated with lmwf5a and other anti-inflammatory compounds. pbmc were incubated with compounds for 1 h, followed by overnight stimulation with 100 ng/ml lps. pge 2 and 15d-pgj 2 release were determined by elisa, and percent changes are presented as mean ± sd (n = 3). (* = p < 0.05 versus saline control). adapted and modified from thomas et al. 2016 [20] characteristic of ards, depends not only on clearance of infiltrating immune cells and suppression of inflammation but also on removal of fluid and restoration of barrier function. interventions that enhance barrier function should provide a rational approach for the treatment and prevention of covid-19.research findings suggest that lmwf5a may protect barrier integrity in several ways. first, and expanding on an intrinsic ability described above, prostaglandins and cox-2-derived mediators also appear to promote the recovery of barrier function in both endothelial and epithelial cells. to illustrate, pge2 release from lpsstimulated a549 epithelial cells, acting through pge2 receptor ep4, has been shown to enhance microvascular endothelial cell barrier function [57] . moreover, murine models indicate that cox-2 derived mediators are protective of acid-induced ali and that selective inhibition delays resolution [58] . thus, the authors propose that increased cox-2 activity could provide some level of protection against the edema associated with ali [58] .equally significant, lmwf5a, and its component da-dkp, have been found to impact the activity of enzymes that link extracellular signals to cytoskeletal rearrangements known as small guanosine triphosphate hydrolases (gtpases). proteomic analysis and pulldown assays of human t-cells stimulated through the tcr shows that da-dkp elevates the phosphorylation and activity of the gtpase, ras-related protein rap-1 (rap-1), as compared to controls [18] . changes in the activity of other gtpases are also observed in bone-marrow derived mesenchymal stems cells (bmmsc) treated with lmwf5a. following treatment with lmwf5a, bmmsc exhibit a rapid reduction in the intracellular level of active ras homolog family member a (rhoa) together with an increase in rac family small gtpase 1 (rac1) [22] . finally, da-dkp treatment of human umbilical vein endothelial cells appears to reduce rhoa activation induced by thrombin (unpublished findings). this body of evidence provides support for the idea that lmwf5a treatment can rapidly regulate gtpase activity in culture.these molecular switches are intimately linked to a variety of cell processes that help regulate the barrier function of both endothelial and epithelial cells. of critical importance, specific exchange protein activated by camp (epac) activation of rap-1 both prevents and reverses dysregulation of vascular function induced by inflammatory cytokines through stabilization of cytoskeletal components [59] . as seen in endothelial cells, epithelial cell gtpase activity dictates the arrangements and status of f-actin cytoskeletal elements and cellular junction proteins [60] . it is important to note there is relevance of this finding to covid-19 as studies on the pathology of severe coronavirus-induced ards/ali hypothesize that alveolar damage is dependent on a balance between coagulation and fibrinolysin pathways [61] . interestingly, viral infection also appears to activate rhoa activity in some models [62] . because one of the underlying features of ards secondary to covid-19 is the breakdown of the endothelial-epithelial barrier in the alveoli, this activity could provide a potential avenue to reduce the influx of fluid into alveolar spaces.an ancillary cytoskeletal rearrangement has also been observed following lmwf5a treatment of human retinal endothelial cells. when treated, these cells observe a rapid increase in acetylated α-tubulin; a modification associated with stabilization and longevity of polymerized microtubules (fig. 3a) [24] . this post-translational modification, attributed to the release of ca 2+ from intracellular stores in this model, can be detected in these cells in as little as 30 min post-treatment and persists for 24 h (fig. 3b) [24] . to put this in perspective, destabilization of microtubules has been shown to be an integral endothelial barrier dysfunction as a result innate immune signaling and oxidative stress [63] . moreover, inhibition of histone deacetylase 6, resulting in the acetylation of α-tubulin, has been shown to reduce lps-induced lung injury by down regulating caspase 1 activity, resulting in lowered il-1β levels [64] . ergo, microtubule stabilization has a documented antiinflammatory and barrier enhancement effect in the lung.the potential biologic relevance of this lmwf5a activity can be seen in functional assays of barrier activity and in the microscopic examination of cytoskeletal rearrangements. treatment of both endothelial and epithelial monolayers with da-dkp increases barrier function for extended periods of time as measured by increased trans endothelial electrical resistance. moreover, da-dkp also attenuates rapid increases in permeability, promotes cortical f-actin rearrangement, and reduces stress-fiber formation following thrombin stimulation of endothelial cells; this activity is suggested to be dependent on epac1, an exchange factor for the aforementioned small gtpase rap-1, and ve-cadherin organization (unpublished findings). altogether, these data on the molecular mechanisms and more general functional effects of lmwf5a demonstrate how this biologic may prove useful for the treatment of lung vasogenic edema by enhancing the alveolar-epithelial barrier via altering gtpase activity, promoting cortical f-actin rearrangement, and stabilizing the microtubule network.to explore the use of lmwf5a for this indication, a randomized controlled trial to evaluate the safety and efficacy of nebulized lmwf5a in adults with ards secondary to covid-19 infection (supplement 1) was developed and is under review by the center for biologics evaluation and research division of the food and drug administration. briefly, this trial is designed to enroll up to ten (10) patients, randomized 1:1 to nebulized lmwf5a plus standard of care (soc) for ards (active arm, n = 5) or soc for ards (control arm, n = 5). the primary trial objective is to evaluate the safety and tolerability of nebulized lmwf5a in patients with ards secondary to covid-19 infection. the secondary trial objectives are to evaluate the efficacy of nebulized ampion versus control in improving the clinical course and outcomes of patients with ards secondary to covid-19 infection including mortality, ventilator free days and pao2/fio2 ratio.if successful, this therapy may attenuate the cytokine storm observed in these patients and potentially reduce mortality, increase ventilation free days, improve oxygenation parameters and consequently lessen the burden on patients and the intensive care unit. this initial study will be followed by larger randomized controlled trial in covid-19 positive patients exhibiting respiratory distress and might avoid the need of mechanical ventilation.in conclusion, in vitro findings suggest that the immunomodulatory effects of lmwf5a make it a viable candidate for treating cytokine storm and restoring homeostasis to the immune response in covid-19. this research did not receive any specific grant funding.the data analyzed during in this report are included in published articles or available from the corresponding author on reasonable request.all experiments referred to in this report were conducted with commercially available cell lines and/or primary human cells with all appropriate consents available from the suppliers.not applicable (e.g., this manuscript contains no personal information or data). an increase in total and perinuclear localization of acetylated αtubulin is observed following lmwf5a treatment. representative immunofluorescence staining for acetylated α-tubulin in hrec treated with saline or lmwf5a for 3 or 6 hours (h). acetylated αtubulin in saline-treated controls is primarily located in microtubule organizing centers around the nucleus. lmwf5a treated hrec exhibit elevated cytoplasmic and perinuclear staining. green represents conjugated alexa fluor 488 anti-acetylated α-tubulin staining and blue represents nuclear 4′,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole dna staining. b: rapid increase in acetylated α-tubulin is observed following lmwf5a treatment. western blot analysis of total protein extracts taken from hrec 10 min to 24 h post lmwf5a treatment as compared to total tubulin controls. adapted and modified from thomas et al 2016 [24] coronavirus is an enveloped, non-segmented, positive-sense, single-stranded rna virus that causes common colds and severe respiratory diseases, 1 such as middle east respiratory syndrome (mers) 2 and severe acute respiratory syndrome (sars) 2 . in december 2019, a series of unexplained pneumonia cases appeared in wuhan, hubei . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted april 1, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.03.28.20046144 doi: medrxiv preprint province, china, and their clinical manifestations suggested viral pneumonia. 4 deep sequencing of lower respiratory tract samples identified a novel coronavirus named sars-cov-2 and the disease it caused was named covid-19. 5 its clinical manifestations include fever, cough, sputum, chest distress or asthma, fatigue, myalgia, diarrhea, nausea, and vomiting. 6, 7, 8 severe cases may progress rapidly to acute respiratory distress syndrome, metabolic acidosis, septic shock, coagulopathy, and organ failure (e.g., liver, kidneys, and heart), which all pose a serious threat to human health.on march 11, 2020 , the world health organization (who) declared its assessment of covid-19 as a global pandemic. sars-cov-2 is characterized by a long incubation period, high infectivity, and multiple routes of transmission. 9, 10 according to real-time who statistics, the total number of confirmed cases of covid-19 worldwide as of march 28, 2020 has exceeded 600,000, with more than 28,000 deaths. however, no effective medicines are currently available, and it can only be treated symptomatically.as the worldwide patient base continues to expand and the number of severely and critically ill patients increases rapidly, determining the mechanism through which patients progress from mild to severe and from severe to critical is the main avenue for discovering effective treatment strategies.lymphopenia and inflammatory cytokine storms are typical abnormalities observed in highly pathogenic coronavirus infections (such as sars and mers), 12 and are believed to be associated with disease severity. 12, 13, 14 multiple studies have shown that cytokine storms are important mechanisms of disease exacerbation and death in patients with covid-19. 12, 13, 14 il-6 levels are significantly higher in severely ill patients with covid-19 compared to those with mild cases. 15 a cytokine storm may occur when cytokines reach a certain threshold in the body. 16 reducing the release or activity of il-6 can prevent or even reverse the cytokine storm syndrome caused by the virus, thereby improving the condition of patients with covid-19.in recent years, a large number of studies have revealed that low molecular weight heparin (lmwh) has various non-anticoagulant properties that play an anti-inflammatory role by reducing the release and biological activity of il- 6. 17,18,19 . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted april 1, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.03.28.20046144 doi: medrxiv preprint however, the anti-inflammatory effects of lmwh in covid-19 are not currently known. to the best of our knowledge, this is the first retrospective cohort study, to analyze the relieving effect of lmwh in patients with covid-19. this study aims to review and analyze the treatment course of patients with covid-19 to investigate the anti-inflammatory effects of heparin and delay disease progression to provide guidance for subsequent clinical practice.all cases in this study were located at union hospital, tongji medical college, (2) patients with liver and kidney insufficiency or congenital heart disease; (3) patients who had been treated with lmwh in the previous three months; (4) patients with a previous history of mental illness; (5) pregnant or lactating women; (6) patients clinically classified as critically ill or housed in the intensive care unit (icu); (7) patients allergic to lmwh or contraindicated for lmwh.. cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted april 1, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.03.28.20046144 doi: medrxiv preprintbasic patient information collected in this study from electronic medical records included complete blood count, coagulation function, cytokines, serum biochemical tests (including liver function, kidney function, lactate dehydrogenase, c-reactive protein (crp), and electrolytes), and disease progression. two researchers also independently reviewed the data collected forms to double check the data collected.data analysis was performed using spss 22.0 statistical software. data were expressed as mean ± standard deviation (sd). graphpad 6.0 software was used for plotting. differences between groups were evaluated using the t-test for measurement data, the chi-square test for count data, and the kruskal-wallis nonparametric test between groups (independent samples) and within groups (related samples).differences of p < 0.05 were considered statistically significant.as shown in table 2 , the heparin group consisted of 13 males and eight females aged between 42 and 91 years (median age was 69.0 years), and the control group consisted of 14 males and seven females aged between 40 and 84 years (median age was 69.0 years); there was no significant difference between the two groups. there were no significant differences in comorbidities, such as hypertension, diabetes, cardiovascular disease, and carcinomas, between the two groups. similarly, there were no significant differences in novel coronavirus pneumonia onset symptoms, including fever (body temperature ≥ 37.3°c), cough, sputum, chest distress or asthma, myalgia, fatigue, anorexia, diarrhea, and nausea and vomiting. similarly, there was no significant difference in antiviral treatment between the two groups. these results indicate that the general characteristics of the two groups of patients were consistent and comparable.lmwh has no effect on the days to conversion to negative and the duration of hospitalization of patients with covid-19as shown in table 2 , the number of days to conversion to negative (time from . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted april 1, 2020. notably, all patients showed improvement after treatment.as shown in figure 2a -f, there was no significant difference in lymphocyte percentage between the heparin and control groups before and after lmwh treatment.however, patients in the heparin group had a significantly increased percentage of lymphocytes after lmwh treatment. in addition, the changes in lymphocyte percentages in patients in the heparin group before and after lmwh treatment were significantly different to those in the control group. the results suggest that lmwh increases lymphocyte percentage in patients with covid-19, indicating that lmwh has some anti-inflammatory effects.compared with the control group, platelets were significantly increased after lmwh treatment. similarly, the changes in platelet levels before and after lmwh treatment in the heparin group were significantly different from those in the control group.however, there was no significant difference in rbc, wbc, neutrophil% and monocyte% levels between the two groups.as shown in figure 2g -n, before patients were administered lmwh, the levels of d-dimer and fibrinogen degradation products (fdp) in patients in the heparin group were significantly higher compared to those in the control group, indicating that these patients may have been in a hypercoagulable state. after the administration of lmwh, d-dimer and fdp levels in the heparin group significantly decreased, and there was no significant difference with the control group. the d-dimer and fdp levels of patients in the heparin group before and after lmwh administration were significantly different. the results indicate that lmwh improves the hypercoagulable state in patients with covid-19. however, there was no significant difference in tt, . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted april 1, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.03.28.20046144 doi: medrxiv preprint aptt, pt, fib, atⅲ and inr levels between the two groups.as shown in figure 2o , there were no significant differences in crp levels between the two groups of patients before and after lmwh treatment, and both were significantly lower compared to before treatment. similarly, there were no significant differences in crp levels between the two groups of patients.to further investigate the anti-inflammatory effects of lmwh, we performed statistical analyses on the levels of inflammatory cytokines in the two groups ( figure   3 ). there were no significant differences between the levels of il-2, il-4, il-10, tnf-α, and ifn-γ in the heparin group and those of the control group before and after lmwh treatment. similarly, the changes in il-2, il-4, il-10, tnf-α, and ifn-γ levels were not significantly different between the two groups.notably, there was no significant difference in il-6 levels between the heparin and control groups before lmwh treatment. after lmwh treatment, il-6 levels in the heparin group were significantly reduced compared to the control group. similarly, the changes in il-6 levels in the heparin group before and after lmwh treatment were significantly different to those in the control group. the results suggest that the anti-inflammatory effects of lmwh may be associated with the reduction of il-6 levels in patients with covid-19.on march 11, 2020, the who declared its assessment of covid-19 as a global pandemic. although its case fatality rate is only 2.27%, 12 the number of severely and critically ill patients is increasing rapidly as the global patient base continues to expand. studies have shown that cytokine storms are associated with deterioration in several infectious diseases, including sars and avian influenza. 20 cytokine storms are an important mechanism of exacerbation in patients. 21 in recent years, numerous studies have revealed that heparin has various non-anticoagulant properties. lmwh can exert anti-inflammatory effects by reducing the release and biological activity of il-6. however, the anti-inflammatory effects of heparin in covid-19 are not yet . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted april 1, 2020. is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted april 1, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.03.28.20046144 doi: medrxiv preprint consider this parameter as an evaluation index for disease progression. the average values of d-dimer and fdp before treatment was greater in the heparin group than in the control group (3.75,1.23,p ＜ 0.01;14.35,4.05,p ＜ 0.01). this result is consistent with the goals of lmwh treatment in the heparin group. the analysis of differences showed that lmwh has a better effect on lowering d-dimer and fdp levels.several studies have recommended crp and lymphocytes (lym%)as indices for evaluating the effectiveness of clinical drugs or treatments. 37,38, 39 in the analysis of differences in the present study, there was no statistically significant difference in crp between the groups, indicating that lmwh treatment has no effect on this parameter. in the analysis of differences of lym%, the mean value of the heparin group was higher than that of the control group (11.10% and 3.08%, respectively).lym% was higher in the heparin group after treatment compared to the control group (p < 0.001), which is consistent with the results of derhaschnig et al. 40 this suggests that lmwh can increase lym% in patients with covid-19 and improve their condition. there are two possible reasons for this; on one hand, lmwh is a glycosaminoglycan 41 that partially inhibits the sars-related coronavirus strain hsr1. 42 mycroft-west et al. also showed that lmwh can bind to the sars-cov-2 surface protein (spike) s1 receptor binding domain and block the replication of the virus, thus, showing potential antiviral effects. 43 additionally, lmwh can reduce lymphocyte death caused by the direct viral infection of lymphocytes. 13 on the other hand, preliminary research has confirmed that proinflammatory cytokines, such as tnfα and il-6, can induce lymphopenia. 14 therefore, decreases in the number or activity of relevant inflammatory factors may have some significance for the increase in lym%.studies have shown that cytokine storms are important mechanisms of exacerbation in patients. 21 il-6 levels in severely ill patients with covid-19 are significantly higher than in patients with mild cases, 15 and a cytokine storm may occur when cytokines reach a certain threshold in the body. 16 the transition from a mild to severe condition in patients with covid-19 may be caused by cytokine storms. reducing il-6 release or activity can prevent or even reverse the cytokine storm syndrome caused by the . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted april 1, 2020. 45 multiple studies have shown that lmwh may reduce the release of il-6 in the body by regulating plasma at 46 or apc 47 levels and inhibiting the expression of nuclear factor κb (nf-κb). 17, 18, 19 in the present study, we performed statistical analysis of the levels of inflammatory cytokines in two groups of patients, and the results showed that il-6 significantly decreased in the heparin group compared to the control group, whereas the changes in other inflammatory factors were not statistically significant; these results are consistent with the conclusions above. in addition, a study by mummery et al. found that lmwh can bind to il-6, competitively reduce the binding of il-6 to sil-6r and sgp130, 48 and block signal transduction, thereby inhibiting the biological activity of il-6. this indicates that lmwh reduces the release of il-6 while also reducing its biological activity, which also explains the increase of lym% in the heparin group.the present study found that under conventional antiviral treatment regimens, lmwh could improve hypercoagulability, inhibit il-6 release, and inhibit il-6 biological activity in patients. lmwh has potential antiviral effects, helps delay or block inflammatory cytokine storms, increases lym%, and may be suitable for covid-19 treatment. in addition, to further confirm the conclusions of this study, we conducted a prospective clinical study to evaluate the efficacy and safety of enoxaparin sodium in the treatment of hospitalized adult patients with covid-19 ( chinese clinical trial registry，number:chictr2000030700), with the expectation of providing a more powerful reference for treatment.this study has some limitations. first, due to the retrospective design, we were unable to control the time intervals between examinations of various indices in patients and the lmwh dosing schedule, and we could not estimate the effective dose and timing of lmwh. second, there were no critical cases in the two groups of patients in the trial; the treatment outcome of all cases was improvement and discharge and there were no deaths. therefore, the reference value for the treatment outcomes of critically ill patients was limited. finally, the sample size and single-center design may have . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted april 1, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.03.28.20046144 doi: medrxiv preprint limited our findings.cs, jp and yz conceptualized and designed the study, and cs and yz had full access to all data, and took responsibility for data integrity and accuracy of the analysis. cs, cw and hx wrote the manuscript. cy, fc and fz reviewed the manuscript. fc, yh, tt and bd performed the statistical analysis. all authors contributed to data acquisition, analysis and interpretation, and approved the final version for submission.all authors declare no competing interests.the data used to support the findings of this study are included within the article.no funding was received.this work was supported by the national key research and development plan of china (2017yfc0909900). . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted april 1, 2020. . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted april 1, 2020. . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted april 1, 2020. there were no significant differences in age, sex, comorbidities, onset symptoms, time from hospitalization to virus shedding, length of hospital stay, antiviral treatment and disease progression between the two groups. data are median (iqr) or n(%). p values are comparing heparin group and control. na=not applicable. data are expressed as mean ± standard deviation (sd) (n = 21). c1 vs. h1 or c2 vs.h2, a p < 0.05, aa p < 0.01, aaa p < 0.001; c1 vs. c2 or h1 vs. h2, b p < 0.05, bb p < 0.01, bbb p < 0.001; c3 vs. h3, c p < 0.05, cc p < 0.01, ccc p < 0.001. (c1: control group, indices at admission; c2: control group, indices at discharge; c3: control group, changes in indices during hospitalization; h1: heparin group, indices before lmwh treatment; h2: heparin group, indices after lmwh treatment; h3: heparin group, changes in indices before and after lmwh treatment.) is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted april 1, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.03.28.20046144 doi: medrxiv preprint two groups of patients with covid-19. data are expressed as mean ± standard deviation (sd) (n = 21). a p < 0.05, aa p < 0.01, aaa p < 0.001; c1 vs. c2 or h1 vs. h2, b p < 0.05, bb p < 0.01, bbb p < 0.001; c3 vs. h3, c p < 0.05, cc p < 0.01, ccc p < 0.001. (c1: control group, indices at admission; c2: control group, indices at discharge; c3: control group, changes in indices during hospitalization; h1: heparin group, indices before lmwh treatment; h2: heparin group, indices after lmwh treatment; h3: heparin group, changes in indices before and after lmwh treatment.) . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted april 1, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.03.28.20046144 doi: medrxiv preprintabstract: coronavirus disease 2019 (covid-19) could lead to a sharp increase in the levels of inflammatory cytokines. we report the efficacy of therapeutic plasma exchange in severe patients with acute respiratory distress syndrome. the results suggested tpe could be used as a strategy to attenuate circulating cytokines and inflammatory mediators.this article is protected by copyright. all rights reservedat the end of december 2019, an outbreak of coronavirus disease 2019 caused by severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2) appeared in wuhan china. after that, it became an emergency disease nationally and internationally (paules, et al 2020) . covid-19 could damage the respiratory system of patients, inducing symptoms of fever, cough and shortness of breath (huang, et al 2020) . to date, there is no specific antiviral therapeutic agent or vaccine recommended for covid-19. although most of the patients a had good prognosis after receiving antiviral, antibiotic, and oxygen therapy, some severe patients developed acute respiratory distress syndrome, among whom would die of multiple organ failure . the cause of deterioration, rapid aggravation, and even death might be related to cytokine storm (also called as inflammatory storm). there is no clear evidence that any specific treatment could be useful for cytokine storm for covid-19 patients. here, we reported the efficacy of therapeutic plasma exchange (tpe) in three severe covid-19 patients with acute respiratory distress syndrome. the results suggested that tpe could be used as a strategy to attenuate circulating cytokines and other inflammatory mediators. this study was approved by the institutional ethics board of the first affiliated hospital of bengbu medicalthree patients (male, aged 44, 55, and 64 years), with acute respiratory distress syndrome related to covid-19 confirmed by qrt-pcr and chest ct were all patients receiving therapeutic plasma exchange in the first affiliated hospital of bengbu medical college from january 22, 2020 to march 4, 2020. timelines of symptom onset, qrt-pcr testing, severe complications, plasma exchange, and outcomes of the three severe patients were shown in the figure. three patients were admitted to the hospital with fever, dry cough, fatigue, dizziness, and nausea. all three patients had received various antiviral treatment, including arbidol (200 mg three times daily) and interferon alpha-2b (atomization inhalation, 5 million units twice daily). however, despite initial antiviral treatment and other therapeutic interventions, all three patients developed respiratory distress with respiratory frequency ≥ 30/min, pulse oximeter oxygen saturation ≤ 93% at rest, or oxygenation index (pao 2 /fio 2 ) ≤ 300 mmhg. the lymphocyte counts of the patients were lower than the normal range of adults. inthis article is protected by copyright. all rights reserved contrast the contents of c-reactive protein, neutrophil count, lactate dehydrogenase, and interleukin 6 (il-6) were significantly higher than the normal reference ranges.the three severe patients were transferred to the first affiliated hospital of bengbu medical college (a designated hospital for the treatment of severe cases of . according to the suggestion of "diagnosis and treatment plan of novel coronavirus pneumonia (trial version 6)" drawn up by the national health commission of the people's republic of china, therapeutic plasma exchange was used as an emergency treatment for these three severe covid-19 patients. tpe was performed with a plasma separator multi-filtration system, and about 3000 ml of normal fresh-frozen plasma was exchanged for one person. each patient received one treatment of tpe between 1 and 3 days after transferred to the designated hospital.the pao 2 /fio 2 (mmhg) ranged from 93 to 178 at the time of 2 hours before plasma exchange and increased (improved) for all three patients within 24 hours after tpe (ranged from 259 to 319). as shown in table, the pao 2 /fio 2 was significantly improved from an average of 146 to 293 (p = 0.0103). one day after the treatment, the values of crp decreased more than > 70%, and the levels of il-6 were also declined to the normal reference range. after treatment, the values of the neutrophilto-lymphocyte ratio (nlr) were significantly decreased. four or five days after treatment, the patients all changed to receive the low-flow oxygen from high-flow oxygen. after one day with lowflow oxygen, all patients could breathe ambient air with no requirement of oxygen supplementation. about ten days later after tpe, all three patients had met the discharged criteria, including nucleic acid tests negative twice separated by at least 1day, having a normal temperature more than 3 days, showing resolved respiratory symptoms, and improved acute exudative lesions on chest computed tomography images. the lengths of hospital stay were 14, 15, and 22 days, respectively. the time from symptom onset to recovery ranged from 18 to 25 days.at present, the main reason for the severity and continuous progress of covid-19 might be cytokine storm (mehta, et al 2020) , which also might be a reason to induce the terminal stage of ebola virus disease (evd) (younan, et al 2017) and severe acute respiratory syndrome (sars) (chien, et al 2006) . in the clinic, anti-infective drugs, corticosteroid, nutritional support, artificial ventilation, and other non-specific combined treatment measures are often used for cytokine storm. however, clinicalthis article is protected by copyright. all rights reserved evidence did not support that covid-19 could benefit from corticosteroid treatment (russell, et al 2020) . therapeutic plasma exchange is effective for cytokine storm and is widely used in the treatment of a variety of severe and critical patients, such as pneumonia and respiratory failure from h1n1 influenza a virus (patel, et al 2011) . in this study, the results from three severe cases suggested that tpe had an immediate effect on the treatment of the cytokine storm, which was similar to the previous research results (hadem, et al 2014) . nlr was considered as an inflammatory marker that could reflect systemic inflammatory response, and the nlr values were found to increase significantly in patients with covid-19 with severe disease (fu, et al 2020) . in a conclusion, as an efficient and rapid method to remove the abnormally elevated inflammatory factors, to supplement albumin, to improve coagulation function, and to correct immune disorder, therapeutic plasma exchange might be a rescue therapy in a severe covid-19 patient with acute respiratory distress syndrome and cytokine storm.at the end of 2019 and the beginning of 2020, first, china and then the rest of the world have been confronted with an outbreak of a new airborne transmitted coronavirus disease 2019 (covid- 19) , a viral infection caused by severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2). just a few months later, there are already millions infected worldwide and with borders closed and strict travel bans imposed local transmission patterns are in place in most countries [1] . covid-19 mortality rate appears to be in the range of 3,4-5,5% [2] , which is significantly higher than that for seasonal flu caused by the influenza virus (1%), but lower than for both severe acute respiratory syndrome (sars) (15%) [3] and middle east respiratory syndrome (mers) (34%) [4] . at the same time, the covid-19 transmission rate is much greater than those of mers or sars, and poses a real threat to life for a large number of people worldwide, especially, in older patients with other co-morbidities [5] . thus, in the absence of effective vaccines and treatments, early detection and the ability to define prognostic parameters predicting the course of the disease appear to be of particular interest. lymphocyte reduction [29] . thus, virus infection of macrophages, firstly, enhances viral spread and, secondly, triggers destructive events in the immune organs such as spleen and lns. recent data from the experiments using sars-cov-2 capsid or live virus infection of cultured t cell lines (mt-2 and a3.01) provides first evidence that sars-cov-2 could also infects t cells. however, expression level of ace2 on t cells is low and, thus, cd147 is considered to mediate sars-cov-2 entry into t cells [17] .after virus binds to ace2 (fig.1) , serine protease, tmprss2, cleaves the viral spike protein. then another protease, furin, subsequently releases spike fusion peptide, and the virus enters the host cell through an endosomal pathway [18, 30, 31] . following viral replication, assembly and release, the infected cells may undergo apoptosis or necrosis, triggering the inflammatory response with production of pro-inflammatory cytokines and activation of macrophages and th1 cells, as well as production of ifnγ, il-17a, il-21, and il-22 by neutrophils, th17 and cd8 + cells. in turn, sars-cov-2 infection of recruited immune cells may increase their apoptosis and exacerbate lymphocytosis [32, 33] , and, finally, may lead in some patients to life-threatening conditions, such as respiratory distress syndrome, cytokine storm, and secondary hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis.covid-19 mortality is strongly associated with the development of severe respiratory distress syndrome, which requires invasive ventilation. it is important to identify those patients who are most likely to develop a severe form of the disease as early as possible. based on the existing statistics, a number of clinical predictors of the disease deterioration and mortality, including the presence of secondary infections, lymphopenia [34] , comorbidities such as cardiovascular and chronic respiratory diseases, diabetes, hypertension, obesity and cancer [35] , increased cytokine production and serum ferritin [36] have been reported. the other study showed that the elevated serum creatinine, d-dimers, lactate dehydrogenase, c-reactive protein, procalcitonin, as well as increased white blood cell counts may indicate impending respiratory failure and the need for invasive oxygen supply [37] . interestingly, in recently published reports elevated interleukin-6 (il-6) level was proposed as a relevant parameter predicting the unwanted course of the disease and the need for mechanical ventilation [38] [39] [40] . these assumptions are consistent with data from a clinical trial in china that demonstrated on a small number of patients the efficacy of il-6 neutralization during exacerbation of covid-19 associated pneumonia [41] (supplementary table 1). il-6 is a cytokine with pleotropic functions ranging from hematopoiesis and metabolic regulation to inflammation, autoimmunity and acute phase response. il-6 modulates host defense through a number of immune stimulating mechanisms: control of monocytes and their differentiation into macrophages [42] , modulation of antigen-dependent b cell differentiation [43] , increased igg production by b cells [44] , and promotion of th2 response by inhibiting th1 polarization [45] . several studies revealed strong correlation between il-6 levels in the serum and the upcoming respiratory failure [46] [47] [48] . it was shown, that even moderately elevated il-6 levels above 80 pg/ml were sufficient to identify covid-19 infected patients with a high risk of respiratory failure [37] . moreover, serum sars-cov-2 nucleic acid (rnaaemia), which is strongly associated with cytokine storm, is closely correlated with extremely high il-6 serum levels [47] . it was also suggested that serial measurement of circulating il-6 might be important in identifying disease progression or, when evaluated immediately after covid-19 diagnosis confirmation, may predict the upcoming respiratory failure or, alternatively, asymptomatic disease among sars-cov-2 infected patients [49] .therefore, it would be valuable to explore the potential contribution of il-6 in the events occurring during sars-cov-2 infection. the next section will discuss the mechanisms by which il-6 may possibly affect the disease exacerbation and the potential of therapeutic approaches based on anti-il-6 biologics.controversy concerning il-6 functions during viral lung infections il-6 is one of the key proinflammatory cytokines during infection onset, especially, at the mucosal sites [50] . however, the impact of il-6 on the disease outcome may vary significantly (fig. 2) . on one hand, il-6-dependent th17 activation and differentiation are important for effective neutrophil migration, il-6 together with il-15 modulate cytolytic capacity of cd8 + t cells [51, 52] , and, finally, il-6, as a pyrogenic cytokine, contributes to thermostatic regulation which is important for effective anti-viral response [53, 54] . studies, using il-6-deficient mice, showed that il-6 ameliorates acute lung injury in influenza a virus (iav) infection [55] . il-6deficient mice infected with influenza virus exhibited higher lethality, as well as increased weight loss and fibroblast accumulation in the lungs associated with virus-induced apoptosis of lung epithelial cells and neutrophils [56] indicating that il-6 may promote repair following virusinduced lung injury [57] . finally, early il-6 signaling promotes il-27-dependent maturation of treg cells in the lungs and resolution of viral immunopathology in mouse model of respiratory syncytial and influenza virus infection [58] .on the other hand, il-6 has been implicated in the progression of viral infections. in this regard, il-6 synergizes with il-1b and tnf to upregulate trypsin expression, which activates matrix metalloproteinases and causes the breakdown of basal membrane and extracellular matrix, which, in turn, results in increased tissue permeability and edema [59] . th1 cell-derived ifnγ is essential for effective antiviral immune response. however, il-6 may inhibit th1 polarization by stimulating cd4 + cells to differentiate into th2 cells or by suppressing ifnγ expression [60, 61] . moreover, il-6 promotes th17 cell differentiation and il-17a secretion, which, in turn, activates the expression of anti-apoptotic molecules, such as bcl-xl, favoring survival of virus-infected cells in the model of persistent viral infection [62] . at the same time, il-17 promotes the migration [63] , and survival [64] of neutrophils which, in turn, contribute to the pathogenesis of covid-19-driven ards [65] . finally, in contrast to influenza virus infection, il-6-deficient mice infected with murine pneumonia virus are characterized by better survival than wt mice with decreased lung edema and diminished neutrophil recruitment [66] .taking into account that in several experimental models of viral lung infections il-6 demonstrates either pathogenic [66] or protective [55] effects in vivo, the role of this cytokine in sars-cov-2 infection should be carefully evaluated. moreover, the consequences of il-6 induction in covid-19 may vary depending on the infection stage and on the host immune status.patients with the most severe outcome of sars-cov-2 displayed high serum levels of proinflammatory cytokines responsible for cytokine storm induction [36, 67] . interestingly, the majority of severe covid-19 cases with respiratory distress syndrome were associated with high systemic il-1b, tnf and il-6 levels, suggesting a direct connection between proinflammatory cytokine induction and adverse effects of covid-19 [34] . as sars-cov-2 shows 79% nucleotide identity to sars-cov, major pathogenic mechanisms, including cytokine storm and extensive lung damage during sars and covid-19 infection may be similar. cytokine storm is a condition caused by extensive activation of the immune system, and, as a result, extremely high production of cytokines and chemokines. since cytokine storm can lead to multiple organ failure, it is important to understand the mechanisms driving this condition.in lower respiratory tract sars-cov-2 infects predominantly type 2 alveolar epitheliocytes, the cell type which does not participate in active gas exchange. following replication and disengagement of the lung epithelial layer, virus enters the underlying tissues and infects or is being captured by macrophages, dendritic cells and neutrophils, resulting in further viral spread [29] (fig. 3 ). at the same time, damaged epitheliocytes release danger molecules which drive the activation of lung epithelium and resident immune cells. thus, even at the early onset of viral infection, its penetration of the mucosa to the epithelial layer activates the innate immune response. adaptive immunity is also activated during covid-19, mainly by antigen presenting dendritic cells, which produce large amounts of cytokines, including il-6, il-1b and tnf and migrate to the regional lymph nodes to present viral antigen to naïve t cells, pushing their differentiation and migration into the affected tissue [68] . specific humoral response represented by viral-specific antibody-producing b cells is also in place [69] . replication of the virus results in further damage of affected organs together with self-boosting immune response manifesting to uncontrolled overexpression of inflammatory mediators in severe cases. another mechanism driving cytokine storm during viral infections is increased blood vessel permeability which enables infiltration of effector cells, producing additional amounts of inflammatory molecules and exacerbating hyper cytokine production [70] . in addition, leakiness of blood vessels allows virus to spread to other tissues and organs, compromising their functions. finally, under persistence of inflammatory factors, an increased number of inflammatory exudates and erythrocytes enter the alveoli, resulting in lung damage and respiratory failure syndrome.as mentioned above, severe covid-19 induced pneumonia is marked by hyperactivation of the immune system and excessive production of il-6 [36, 67] . the main source of pathogenic il-6 appears to be myeloid cells as their number is significantly increased among pbmc [69] and in balf of severe covid-19 patients [71] . myeloid cell recruitment and activation in the lungs is associated with increased mortality and morbidity in sars-cov mouse model [72] . human primary macrophages and dendritic cells can be infected, but they fail to support productive replication of sars-cov [73, 74] , unlike alveocytes, in which virus can replicate very quickly. at the same time, sars-cov and, apparently, sars-cov-2-infected macrophages demonstrate up-regulation of il-6 production and low expression of interferons [29, 73] . interestingly, patients requiring intensive care and invasive lung ventilation display negative correlation between il-6, tnf and il-1b concentrations and cd4 + and cd8 + t cell counts [75] , confirming previous studies in animal models, which suggested that cytokine storm actually dampens adaptive immunity against sars-cov infection [76] . moreover, production of ifnγ by cd4 + t cells tended to be lower in severe as compared to moderate cases, suggesting that sars-cov-2 infection induces lymphopenia with the suppression of antiviral ifnγ production [36] . furthermore, it has been suggested that this pathogenic il-6 is likely to be produced by highly inflammatory macrophages [71] , but not by alveolar macrophages, which are almost absent in the lung aspirates of severely affected patients [77] . at the same time, it should be noted that complete ablation of il-6 at the very early stages of viral infection may result in depressed tfh cell maturation and delayed antiviral antibody response [78] .it is known that acute inflammation and cytokine storm, as its extreme manifestation, can have a significant effect on hemodynamics and also on platelets and erythrocytes. the dysregulated coagulation cascade and the subsequent formation of intra-alveolar or systemic fibrin clots are prominent findings in previous zoonotic coronavirus infections (sars and mers) orchestrated by crs [79] [80] [81] . covid-19 patients also show significant changes in coagulative status (i.e. low platelet count, increased d-dimer, fibrinogen levels) and dysfunction of microvessels in pulmonary circulation [82, 83] , thus, thrombosis of the pulmonary capillaries is believed to contribute to rapidly developing hypoxia. the role of il-6 in inflammatory hypercoagulation is controversial: il-6 can increase the rate of fibrotic clot formation in whole blood, but the effect is less pronounced than it is shown for il-1 or il-8 [84] . on the other hand, il-6 is important for thrombus formation being a regulator of mmps and other thrombolysisassociated genes in macrophages [85] .other characteristic feature of cytokine release syndrome is change in iron homeostasis and hyperferritinemia as indicated by high levels of serum ferritin [86] . in covid-19 patients ferritin elevation correlated with poor prognosis [36] , as it was an indication of hemolytic events caused by hypercoagulation and hemophagocytosis. in general, inadequate macrophage activation leads to pathologic phagocytosis of erythrocytes and reutilization of heme iron using ferritin [87] . in line with this, high systemic ferritin may serve as an indicator of developing macrophage activation syndrome, rather than a factor driving covid-19 pathogenesis.another key proinflammatory cytokine, tnf, is also released abundantly during cytokine storm, caused by sars-cov-2 infection. serum tnf levels were found to be elevated in severely affected covid-19 patients [34] . previously, it was shown for sars-cov that its spike protein is able to modulate tnf converting enzyme (tace)-dependent shedding of the ace2 ectodomain [88] . tace expression is coupled to tnf production. therefore, it is hypothesized that the use of tnf inhibitors may also show some efficacy in preventing viral entry [89] , as well as in decreasing immunopathology associated mortality, as it was shown in preclinical studies in mice infected with severe respiratory syncytial virus [90] . moreover, anti-tnf therapy was effective in decreasing the il-6 and il-1b serum levels in lethal bacteremia, suggesting that such treatment may provide complex anti-inflammatory effect [91] . data obtained from covid-19 infected patients with inflammatory bowel diseases undergoing anti-tnf therapy support safety of such intervention in the context of sars-cov-2 treatment [92, 93] . these findings argue for a potentially protective effect of tnf inhibition in covid-19 and further studies are needed to address this possibility.hypertension has been suggested as a risk factor for severe covid-19 outcomes [94] . early data from the literature already assumed an association between blood pressure and circulating il-6 levels in otherwise healthy individuals [95] . moreover, several studies reported an increased il-6 expression in patients with hypertension [96, 97] . il-6-transgenic mice, characterized by elevated plasma il-6 levels, displayed pulmonary hypertension [98, 99] . taken together, this data suggest that il-6 might be connected with increased risk of respiratory failure in hypertensive patients with covid-19.one of the mechanisms regulating blood pressure and electrolyte balance is angiotensin-renin system. it is comprised of two pathways, which are normally functioning in the state of dynamic equilibrium: ace2-angiotensin ii-angiotensin 1 receptor axis, activating vasoconstriction and inflammatory response, and ace2-angiotensin 1-7-mas receptor axis, supporting vasodilation and suppression of inflammation (fig. 4, a) [100] . changes in reninangiotensin system activity are related to the pathogenesis of hypertension and of inflammatory lung diseases, in particular, acute lung injury caused by viral infections [15, 101] .sars-cov2 uses ace2 as an entry site, thus, reducing ace2 availability, promoting an imbalance between the ace2-angiotensin ii-angiotensin 1 receptor axis and the ace2-angiotensin 1-7-mas receptor axis [15, 102] . in line with this, recent studies have reported that covid-19 patients have increased angiotensin ii compared to healthy individuals [103] . altogether, the abovementioned data suggests that covid-19 infection leads to imbalanced angiotensin conversion and a shift towards pro-inflammatory signaling mediated by angiotensin 1 receptor axis [104] (fig. 4, b) .angiotensin ii is known to significantly increase the expression of il-6 in a dosedependent manner [105] through pleiotropic activation of nf-kb transcription factors [106] , [107] . angiotensin 1 receptor downstream activation of nadph oxidase results in elevated oxidative stress, in particularly, superoxide that activates transcriptional mechanisms that directly promotes il-6 gene expression. in turn, plasma il-6 concentrations correlate with blood pressure, plasma angiotensin ii levels and vascular hypertrophy, suggesting an important role of il-6 in the development and maintenance of hypertension, specifically, that mediated by angiotensin ii [108, 109] . il-6 promotes angiotensin 1 receptor expression sensitizing the vascular wall to angiotensin ii-dependent signaling mechanisms. activated cells can release j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f cytokines, including il-6, which promote expression of adhesion molecules and induce endothelial activation, inflammatory cell infiltration and vascular inflammation [110] . this further drives oxidative stress and il-6 expression. therefore, it is plausible that il-6 and angiotensin ii activate each other through a positive feedback mechanism. in support of this hypothesis, ace2 protects against lethal avian influenza a h5n1 infection [111] through prevention of oxidative stress and acute respiratory distress syndrome. moreover, it was recently reported that in covid-19 patients with hypertension angiotensin receptor blockade attenuated the inflammatory response, possibly through il-6 inhibition [102, 112] . taking together, angiotensin ii accumulation due to sars-cov-2-mediated ace2 downregulation may cause angiotensin 1 receptor downstream activation of nadph oxidase, which, in turn, leads to elevated ros production and to induction of transcriptional mechanisms that directly promote il-6 expression, implicated in inflammation-induced injury and immunopathology.chronic inflammation is the one common feature of hypertension, diabetes, obesity and agethe risk factors associated with covid-19 severe outcomes. elderly, obese and diabetic persons are affected by a low-grade chronic inflammation and are characterized by systemically increased levels of proinflammatory cytokines, which may contribute to and facilitate the cytokine storm, the main cause of covid-19 mortality.among conditions, predisposing patients infected with sars-cov-2 to severe outcomes, diabetes is the most prominent. it is estimated that mortality rate of those with covid-19 and diabetes is about 16% [8] to 35% [113] . il-6 is known for its dual role in autoimmune diabetes, as it is involved in the development of insulin resistance and β-cell dysfunction and, at the same time, has anti-inflammatory effects and improves glucose metabolism [114] . recent clinical data demonstrates significantly elevated systemic il-6 in covid-19 patients with diabetes as compared to those without diabetes [115] . covid-19 may exacerbate the pre-existing diabetes, since its entry site, ace2, is expressed in the pancreas, with a potential role in the development of insulin resistance and impaired insulin secretion [116] . il-6 may be the link between diabetes and severe covid-19 outcomes through its ability to modulate t cell response. some indirect evidence to support this comes from mouse studies of closely related mers-cov infection demonstrating that abnormal elevation of il-17a produced by il-6-dependent th17 cells exacerbates disease severity in diabetic mice [117] . consistent with that finding, patients with covid-19 have a higher proportion of th17 cells in the blood [118] , suggesting that diabetics due to improper activation of th1 and th17 cells may have a compromised anti-viral immune response [31] .obese patients with covid-19 are more likely to develop severe respiratory distress syndrome [119, 120] . just as diabetics, obese patients have higher concentration of proinflammatory cytokines both in steady state [121] and, apparently, during covid-19 infection [8] . in addition to decreased anti-viral t cell response, enhanced il-6 production by adipose tissue in obese patients [122] may alter innate anti-viral immune response by neutrophils [121] and cause uncontrolled replication of the virus at the early stages of infection.from the very beginning of covid-19 pandemic, age was identified as a risk factor [38] , supporting the idea that ace2 may be a marker of cell senescence [123] . myofibroblasts, which increase in number with age, express high levels of ace2 [124] , thus, myofibroblasts are more susceptible to sars-cov-2, and elderly people, bearing higher proportion of myofibroblasts, might be more susceptible to covid-19 infection (reviewed in [125] ). il-6 is a critical inflammatory regulator of senescence-associated secretory phenotype (sasp) [126] . therefore, il-6 overexpression may correlate both with senescent status of cells and tissues, as well as with increased expression of ace2. in line with this idea, hydroxychloroquine, an anti-malaria drug, which is now approved in some countries for covid-19 treatment, effectively reduced the salivary and serum levels of il-6 in patients with sjorgen's syndrome [127] . moreover, azithromycin, prescribed together with hydroxychloroquine, can target and selectively remove senescent cells [128] and, thus, provide anti-fibrotic activity by protecting the lungs from inflammation-induced injury [129, 130] .another issue facing elderly patients with covid-19 is a compromised activation status of their effector t cells. these cells may display limited function during prolonged infection as a result of their exhaustion, associated with the surface expression of such immune-inhibitory factors as pd-1 [75] . since aging itself is a process known to promote reorganization of the t cell landscape [131] and il-6 is a sasp predictor and regulator, t cell exhaustion in the elderly patients with covid-19 is much more evident due to higher basal concentration of il-6, which can enhance the exhaustion process [132, 133] .smoking is another potential risk factor for sars-cov-2 infection. smokers are more vulnerable to influenza virus infections [134, 135] and are more likely to develop chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (copd) [136] . enhanced ace2 expression had been reported in the lungs of healthy smokers [137, 138] . in line with that, studies in mice have established that cigarette smoke can trigger the expansion of a subpopulation of respiratory epithelial cells that express ace2 in a dose-dependent manner [139] . patients with copd, as well as active smokers, have increased ace2 expression in the lungs [140] , which may potentially explain a fourfold increased risk of adverse development and severe outcome of covid-19 [141, 142] . taken together, these recent reports suggest that smokers may be at higher risk of infection. examination of factors, predisposing to severe covid-19 in wuhan, china, revealed, that 19.2% of patients with severe disease were smokers [143] . on the other hand, preliminary meta-analysis based on chinese patients suggest that active smoking was not associated with the severity of covid-19 [144] , indicating that impact of smoking on covid-19 progression is controversial and requires further assessment.intuitively, patients with pre-existing asthma should display higher proportion of covid-19 severe cases. however, the prevalence of asthma in covid-19 patients in wuhan study was markedly lower (0,9%) than that reported in the adult population of wuhan (6,4%) [143] . one possible explanation is a shift toward th2-type immune response in asthmatics as opposed to th1-associated inflammatory response induced by sars-cov-2 infection [118] . recent study reveals that tmrss2 expression in upper respiratory tract correlates positively with type 2 response genes, especially with il-13, whereas ace2 expression is suppressed by il-13. considering low numbers of cells co-expressing these proteases in the upper respiratory tract, it has been proposed that in the context of il-13-dependent reduction in ace2 expression allergy should promote resistance to infection [145] . in line with this, it was shown that ace2 expression is decreased in nasal and bronchial epithelium of allergic individuals following allergen challenge, suggesting, that asthma-associated immune response actually protects from covid-19-induced pathology [146] . nevertheless, further studies are required to reveal the impact of covid-19 severity in patients with preexisting asthma.meta-analysis studies of covid-19 cases in china from december 2019 to february 2020 report lower incidence of the disease [147] and risk of death [35] in women than in men. similar data on association of gender with poorer prognosis for males were obtained earlier for sars-cov [148] , [149] and mers-cov [150, 151] . in connection to sars-cov-2, the x-linked ace2 gene is of a particular interest. significant fraction of genes encoded on the x chromosome undergo dosage compensation, however, ace2 is located at xp22, i.e. the area in which genes may escape from x chromosome inactivation [152] , possibly contributing to gender disparity in disease susceptibility. gender differences in immune responses are known to depend not only on genetic, but also on endocrine factors [153, 154] . high doses of estradiol acting through estrogen receptors decrease production of proinflammatory cytokines via suppressing nf-kb signaling pathway [155] . in relation to covid-19 the effects of estrogens on il-6 and on disease progression is of particular interest. estrogen may suppress lps-mediated il-6 expression in mouse macrophages by both blocking of nf-kb activation [155, 156] and inhibiting p38 mapk phosphorylation [156] . furthermore, downregulation of il-6 expression in kupffer cells appears to be erα-dependent [157] . overall, immunomodulatory effects of estrogens may contribute to decreased susceptibility to sars-cov-2 infection in women and this question requires further study.one of the common complications from the respiratory viral infections, including sars [158] and covid-19 [159] , is lung fibrosis. this is characterized by alveolar epithelial cell injury, recruitment and activation of fibroblasts and subsequent production of extracellular matrix (ecm) in the presence of specifically activated immune cells. fibrosis develops as an exaggerated repair process following injury associated with abnormal immune response leading to chronic progressive disease [160] . histological examination of lung biopsies from covid-19 patients show massive apoptosis of pneumocytes, hyaline membrane formation, fibromyxoid exudates [161] which are manifestations that are characteristic for ards and represent key events preceding development of fibrosis (reviewed in [162] ). significant pro-fibrotic m2-like spp1 + macrophage infiltration was also described for covid-19 correlating with the disease severity [71] . damage to the epithelial layer caused by the virus further attracts various immune cells participating in inflammation-repair balance (monocytes, macrophages, granulocytes and t cells). in addition, some viral components, such as n-protein and papain-like protease, can directly stimulate production of tgf-β, one of the pro-fibrotic hallmarks in respiratory epithelium, similar to what has previously been reported for sars-cov [163, 164] .the role of il-6 had been extensively studied in bleomycin model of lung fibrosis in mice. bleomycin is a chemotherapeutic antibiotic which causes damage of tissues lacking bleomycin hydrolase, predominantly, in the lungs [165] . mice with genetic ablation of il-6 were characterized by impaired fibrosis [166] . however, in the same model mice with pharmacological rather than genetic inhibition of il-6 demonstrated opposing phenotypes depending on the phase of inflammation-repair cycle. specifically, il-6 neutralization at the early inflammatory phase (day 2 following bleomycin-induced lung injury) resulted in apoptosis of pneumocytes, which further contributed to pulmonary fibrosis, whereas il-6 blockade at the early fibrotic stage (day 8 following bleomycin-induced lung injury) significantly ameliorated lung fibrosis [167] . interestingly, treatment of mice with recombinant soluble gp130fc at the late stage of chronic bleomycin model attenuated lung fibrosis, emphasizing the importance of sil-6ra and il-6 trans-signaling in mediating this condition [168] . it was further suggested that m2like infiltrating macrophages are the major source of soluble il-6ra in fibrotic foci, whereas pulmonary fibroblasts are the recipient cells, which proliferate and produce extracellular matrix under trans-il-6 activation. finally, overexpression of il-6 in respiratory tract mediated by adenoviral vectors also resulted in the exacerbation of fibrosis and was associated with increased levels of m2-macrophages with pro-fibrotic features [169] . these pro-fibrotic macrophages are also characterized by increased il-6ra expression [168] . ace2 expression is reported for lung, heart, kidney, intestine, liver and brain. thus, similar fibrosis-associated complications should be expected, not just for respiratory tract, but also for other tissues and organs in correlation with viral load and severity of cytokine release syndrome. summarizing the data available at the moment from infection-free experimental models of fibrosis, one can conclude that il-6 may affect fibroblast proliferation and functions directly or through potentiation of a distinct macrophage phenotype. taking into account the importance of this cytokine at the repair stage, anti-il-6 therapy may prove beneficial not only in acute phase, but also in subacute proliferative phase of covid-19-related ards.j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f sars-cov-2 tropism to neural system is of particular interest while neurological symptoms, such as dizziness, headache, ataxia and anosmia, are often found in mild covid-19 patients and develop early in the infection [170] . ace2 expression in cns is attributed to the nuclei in brain stem and is associated with cardio-respiratory control [171, 172] . recent study based on scrna sequencing suggests co-expression of ace2 and tmprss2 in olfactory epithelial cells, but not in mature olfactory sensory neurons, which were initially considered as the most obvious target population for the virus in cns [173] . even without the understanding of the exact mechanisms of sars-cov-2 penetration and distribution in cns, it should be noted that as a result of the disseminated intravascular coagulopathy and cytokine storm caused by infection, blood-brain-barrier permeability is significantly increased, which can lead to negative consequences for cns functioning [174, 175] .an effective therapeutic approach should include a combination of specific antiviral drugs, which inhibit viral dissemination and limit direct virus-induced cytopathic effects coupled with antiinflammatory therapeutics, directed against immunopathology induced by a viral infection [176] . sars-cov-2-induced immunopathology exhibits features of systemic hyper-inflammation reminiscent both of cytokine storm or macrophage activation syndrome and secondary haemophagocytic lymphohistocytosis [177] . since overexpression of il-6 appears to be associated with severe covid-19 outcomes, neutralizing antibodies used to treat a number of autoimmune diseases by targeting exacerbated inflammatory immune response of the host may provide a life-saving approach by preventing the cytokine release syndrome. in line with that, patients responding to cd19 car t cell therapy experience cytokine release syndrome [178] , which is well managed by il-6 neutralizing antibodies [179] . in a non-randomized, open-label clinical trial, 21 patients with severe or critical covid-19 were treated with a single dose of tocilizumab, in addition to routine therapy [180] . 90% of patients recovered, suggesting that anti-il-6 might be a powerful potential rescue therapy in managing acute respiratory distress syndrome of covid-19 and inhibiting the most adverse outcome. peripheral mononuclear cell scrna-seq profiling data obtained from these patients indicate that treatment with tocilizumab does not reduce the number of cytotoxic cd8 + and plasma b cells, thus, does not interfere with robust adaptive immune response [69] . preliminary data from 21 patients with covid-19 who developed acute respiratory distress syndrome and participated in a compassionate-use program at papa giovanni xxiii hospital in bergamo, italy, indicate that intravenous introduction of siltuximab reduced c-reactive protein level in all patients and significantly improved clinical conditions with a reduced need for ventilation in 33% of patients. 43% of patients showed stabilization of their conditions, and 24% of patients experienced a worsening of the disease and required intubation [181] .sarilumab is a monoclonal antibody that works by inhibiting the il-6 pathway through binding and blocking the il-6 receptor. recently, another clinical trial was initiated, which will evaluate the effects of sarilumab in patients with severe covid-19. this u.s.-based multicenter, double-blind, phase 2/3 trial will begin at medical centers in new york and is anticipated to enroll up to 400 patients [182] .the overview of initiated clinical trials of anti-il-6 therapeutics in covid-19 patients is presented in supplementary table 1. in summary, strong scientific evidence of the beneficial impact of il-6 inhibitors in the modulation of the covid-19 infection requires further clinical data.in the face of a pandemic, affecting millions of people worldwide, the need to develop new approaches or reassess the existing ones in the treatment of severe viral infections is more j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f pressing than ever. despite the fact that humanity experienced viral infections causing deadly pneumonia twice in the past 20 years, there are still no drugs specific for coronaviruses. the evidence discussed in this review suggests that for patients with risk factors, especially those with high systemic levels of il-6, clinically approved neutralizing antibodies against il-6 or its receptor, il-6r, in combination with standard treatment protocols may provide benefit. gaining a deeper understanding of the factors that affect the immune response and mechanistic link of these factors to disease severity is crucial for effective clinical management of covid-19 in severely affected patients.this work was supported by the ministry of science and higher education of the russian federation (grant 075-15-2019-1660).the authors declare that there is no conflict of interest.binding of virion to ace2 is followed by serine protease, tmprss2, cleavage of the viral spike protein and induction of internalization of the complex with subsequent reduction of ace2 surface availability. then another protease, furin, releases spike fusion peptide, and the virus enters the host cell through an endosomal pathway.the novel human coronavirus, severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus-2 (sars-cov-2), was declared a global pandemic by the world health organization on march 11, 2020 . over 2.7 million confirmed cases and 190,890 deaths have been identified worldwide 1 . in the usa, there have been 52,400 deaths as of april 24, 2020 1 , new york state being the epicenter of pandemic 2 . hence, there is an urgency to find effective treatment. of those patients afflicted in the united states, many have required treatment with ventilator secondary to acute respiratory distress syndrome.the pathogenesis of severe acute respiratory syndrome (sars) related to coronavirus involves a cytokine storm with high serum levels of pro-inflammatory cytokines and chemokines interleukin 6 (il-6). the pro-inflammatory cytokine il-6 seems to have a prominent role in this inflammatory cascade, which may result in increased alveolar-capillary blood-gas exchange dysfunction 3, 4 . the most recent clinical experiences in china and italy 5 suggested that patients admitted to intensive care units, the cytokine storm syndrome was proportional to the severity of disease 6 , often progressing to cardiovascular collapse, multiple organ dysfunction and death rapidly 7 . therefore, early identification, treatment and prevention of the cytokine storms are of crucial importance for these patients.tocilizumab is a blocker of il-6r, which can effectively block il-6 signal transduction pathway. the safety of tocilizumab in phase iii double-blind controlled trials was studied in patients with rheumatoid arthritis. there were no complications associated with tocilizumab and no history of illness deterioration or death. overall, the risk of secondary infection with tocilizumab is not too high 8 . we recommend treatment of hyperinflammation using existing, approved therapies with proven safety profiles to address the immediate need to reduce the rising mortality. data are needed regarding the benefit of treatment and prevention of the cytokine storms in covid-19 patients with tocilizumab.currently, a small clinical trial in china has shown good efficacy in tocilizumab. after a few days of treatment, patients experienced clinical improvement, became afebrile and with gradually decreased oxygen consumption, all other symptoms were significantly improved. ct chest showed regression of the pulmonary infiltrates and ground glass appearance 9 . laboratory examination showed improvement in peripheral blood lymphocytes and c-reactive protein, suggesting that tocilizumab could be an efficient treatment for covid-19 patients. a multicenter, randomized controlled trial for the efficacy and safety of tocilizumab in the treatment of new coronavirus pneumonia (covid-19 is underway. 10, 11 secondary haemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis (shlh) is an under-recognized, characterized by a fulminant and fatal hypercytokinaemia with multiorgan failure 12 . a cytokine profile resembling shlh is associated with covid-19 disease severity. all patients with severe covid-19 should be screened for hyperinflammation using laboratory trends (eg, increasing ferritin, decreasing platelet counts, or crp) and the hscore to identify the subgroup of patients for whom immunosuppression could improve mortality. hscores greater than 169 are 93% sensitive and 86% specific for hlh 12 .orange regional medical center serves racially and ethnically diverse patient population in the hudson valley. in this study, patient data came from icu and floor during the coronavirus all rights reserved. no reuse allowed without permission.(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 16, 2020. . pandemic. we included patients who were at least 18 years old, had a laboratory confirmed covid-19 infection, and were admitted to the hospital between mar 15, 2020 to apr 20, 2020. a confirmed case of covid-19 was defined by a positive reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction (rt-pcr) assay of a specimen collected via nasopharyngeal swab. the orange regional medical center institutional review board approved this research under a regulatory protocol allowing for analysis of limited patient data.we obtained demographics, laboratory test results, diagnosis codes (international classification of diseases-10), procedures, icu and floor progress notes during hospitalization. demographics included age, sex, bmi, race, ethnic group in the electronic health records. all laboratory values (crp, il-6, tgl, ferritin, fibrinogen, ast, d-dimer/ fibrinogen, ekg) were obtained as part of indicated clinical care. treatment modalities used were also compared (tocilizumab -dose in mg/kg, one or two doses, hydroxychloroquine, azithromycin, steroids -hydrocortisone/ methylprednisolone/ dexamethasone). for patients who sustained acute kidney injury -mode of management -hemodialysis, crrt were also obtained. during icu stay ventilator setting: average peep, average fio2, average plateau pressure, average driving pressure; use of paralytic medication (cisatracurium, atracurium, rocuronium or vecuronium infusions) and proning were taken into account for data analysis.we defined co-morbidities as the presence of diagnosis codes associated with asthma, copd, diabetes, use of immunosuppressant medications.we assessed length of stay -number of days on ventilator, in-hospital and intensive care unit; mortality, survival and discharge (home, rehab, transfer to outside facility) during admission.we used descriptive statistics to summarize the data; results are reported as medians, ranges, averages and p-values as appropriate. categorical variables were summarized as counts and percentages. compared by z score and comparison of mean between tocilizumab and non-tocilizumab group within 1 standard deviation and 95% confidence interval. all statistical tests were 2-tailed, and statistical significance was defined as p <0 .05. https://www.medcalc.org/a total of 94 patients with covid-19 ards were analyzed. 44 were in the study group and 50 in the control group. we tried to match both group as close as possible in terms of age, sex, bmi and hs score-calculated using inflammatory markers-ferritin, triglycerides, ast and fibrinogen. the median age was 55.5 years in the study group and 66 in the control group, difference was not statistically significant. average hs score was 114 in the tocilizumab group and 92 in the control group, difference was statistically significant with p<0.0001. also, the patients in the study group had elevated levels of il-6, triglycerides, ast, ferritin which were statistically significant with p < 0.0001when compared to the control group. length of stay was longer, average 17.9 days in the tocilizumab. survival rate was much lower at 48 % in the control group and 61.36 % in patients who received tocilizumab with significant p value of < 0.00001. the number needed to treat (nnt) was 7.48, if we treat 8 patients with tocilizumab, 1 will not die.the covid-19 pandemic presents as a public health challenge and emergency. limited data is available in the us to guide management with effective treatment. to the best of our knowledge, no study has compared the outcome in tocilizumab patients to a control group. for covid-19 infection, clinical studies have shown that serum levels of inflammatory mediators are significantly higher in patients with severe disease. excessive immune responses can trigger cytokine storms and cause damage to multiple target organs. recent guidelines also point that a progressive rise in il-6 may be a clinical warning indicator for the deterioration of covid-19 13 . tocilizumab, a monoclonal antibody against interleukin-6, emerged as an alternative treatment for covid-19 patients with a risk of cytokine storms recently 14 . in our study, we aim to discuss the treatment response of therapy in covid-19 infected patients in terms of survival outcome.this report provides a perspective on patients admitted with confirmed covid-19 in both intensive care and floor setting. our hospital serves an ethnically and socioeconomically diverse population being close to new york city. a significant number of patients displayed abnormal laboratory measurements at the time of admission. a covid-19 laboratory order set was used in the emr to order labs at the time of hospital admission or icu transfer which included il-6, ferritin, crp, triglyceride, fibrinogen, d-dimer, cmp and cbc with differential. the majority of patients were admitted to the icu because of acute hypoxemic respiratory failure that required respiratory support. endotracheal intubation and invasive mechanical ventilation were needed in a significant proportion of the patients. several key findings were observed. several key findings were observed in the tocilizumab group laboratory values of il-6, ferritin, triglyceride and fibrinogen were significantly higher indicating that these patients demonstrated cytokine storms. early laboratory evaluation may be crucial in identifying cytokine storm, and may also aid clinicians in identifying patients at high risk of decompensation, icu admission, and potentially even death. a study from china reported that increased expression of interleukin (il)-2r and il-6 in serum appears to predict the severity and prognosis of patients with covid-19 18 . elevated levels of the inflammatory indicator il-6 in the blood have been reported to be predictive of a fatal outcome in patients with out of all patients who received tocilizumab 84.09 % were male and 15.91% were females. the overall survival rate was 61.36% in patients who received tocilizumab compared to 48% in the control group. 59.46% percentage of male patients survived compared to 71.43% females if they received tocilizumab. total 72 males and 22 females were enrolled in this study, indicating that male gender has predominance of being affected with covid-19. our study should be considered in light of several limitations. in the study group 5 patients did not have fibrinogen level tested before they received tocilizumab and in the control group 11 patients did not have the results for fibrinogen.in the context of the urgent need for effective therapies in the current pandemic, particularly in severe cases. however, there is no systematically recommended treatment for covid-19. tocilizumab is a humanized monoclonal antibody against the in-terleukin-6 receptor (il-6r) and is fda-approved for cytokine release syndrome and recently, has been administered experimentally in the treatment of severe covid-19 pneumonia in china and italy with promising results 16 . cytokine release syndrome (crs) occurs in a large number of patients with severe covid-19, which is also an important cause of death. il-6 is the key molecule of crs, so tocilizumab may be of value in improving outcomes. in our study tocilizumab group seemed to have improved survival outcome. results have to be interpreted with caution since this a retrospective study and mortality is affected by multiple, confounding factors. in the largest clinical trials database (clinicaltrials.gov) there are 35 ongoing studies registered around the world regarding the use of tocilizumab in covid-19 patients. we await the results of ongoing randomized controlled trials to definitely answer the question of whether tocilizumab improves survival in covid-19 ards patients.here we will summarize the relationship between sars-cov-2 and cardiovascular diseases, 97 and discuss possible mechanisms of action behind sars-cov-2 infection-induced damage to 98 cardiovascular system. ang ii production or indirect inhibition of ang ii through upregulation of ace2 (figure 1) . 324 in a multi-centered study involving 1128 covid-19 patients combined with hypertension, 325 administration of ace inhibitors or arbs was associated with a lower mortality rate (3.7% purpose: novel coronavirus disease 2019 (covid-19), is an acute respiratory distress syndrome (ards), which is emerged in wuhan, and recently become worldwide pandemic. strangely, ample evidences have been shown that the severity of covid-19 infections varies widely from children (asymptomatic), adults (mild infection), as well as elderly adults (deadly critical). it has proven that covid-19 infection in some elderly critical adults leads to a cytokine storm, which is characterized by severe systemic elevation of several pro-inflammatory cytokines. then, a cytokine storm can induce edematous, ards, pneumonia, as well as multiple organ failure in aged patients. it is far from clear till now why cytokine storm induces in only covid-19 elderly patients, and not in young patients. however, it seems that aging is associated with mild elevated levels of local and systemic pro-inflammatory cytokines, which is characterized by "inflamm-aging". it is highly likely that "inflamm-aging" is correlated to increased risk of a cytokine storm in some critical elderly patients with covid-19 infection. methods: a systematic search in the literature was performed in pubmed, scopus, embase, cochrane library, web of science, as well as google scholar pre-print database using all available mesh terms for covid-19, coronavirus, sars-cov-2, senescent cell, cytokine storm, inflame-aging, ace2 receptor, autophagy, and vitamin d. electronic database searches combined and duplicates were removed. results: the aim of the present review was to summarize experimental data and clinical observations that linked the pathophysiology mechanisms of "inflamm-aging", mild-grade inflammation, and cytokine storm in some elderly adults with severe covid-19 infection.the possible pathophysiology mechanism of cytokine storm in elderly adults with covid-19 infection: the contribution of "inflame-aging"summary recent studies have provided novel evidence regarding the effect of nicotine agonists on the prevention or modulation of cytokines storm and reduction of infection. in this study we tried to attempt to address these issues from a therapeutic perspective of nicotine agonists in this manner and we describe one of the most challenging theories of immunotherapy in coronavirus-19 . the analysis of the proposed mechanism goes beyond the physiological consequences of a way to design new strategies to provide anti-inflammatory drugs.keywords: covid-19, nicotinic agonist, immunotherapy.coronaviruses appear periodically and unpredictably from year 2002 with the onset of sars-cov, and then with mers-cov and now with covid-19 (sars-cov-2).this family of viruses causing infectious diseases and they became a constant threat to human health. there is no definitive and approved treatment for cardiorespiratory sequels of these cov infections. although from a pathophysiological point of view there is a deep understanding of the immune response to the virus, there is no approved treatment for immunomodulation in these patients thus it seems that treatment of immune system problems such as systemic pulmonary inflammatory responses associated with cov is necessitating. immunity based treatment can be a good alternative and savior therapy to some antiviral treatment. as we know cytokine storms in lung tissue in most deadly events in patients with cov infection. therefore, in cases of cov induced pneumonia, it is important to control cytokine production and inflammatory response. although this strategy is challenging due to a lack of clear immune response and endangering the host defense, it does not seem impossible. in an attempt to address these issues from a therapeutic perspective, we describe our hypothesis about one of the most challenging theories of immunotherapy in cov viruses.replication of rna viruses such as the cov family is accompanied by excessive production of interferons, neutrophils and macrophages which brings about a massive immune response, referred to as "cytokine storm". this overproduction negatively affects the balance of the inflammatory responses and the normal function of cytokines.this immune system disorder can lead to series of symptoms including fever, edema, and hypotension in mild cases. in severe cases it can cause systemic inflammation, heart failure, pulmonary failure which consequently led acute respiratory syndrome and eventually death. in covid-19 infection, like other coronavirus infections, a similar scenario is expected with varying degrees of immune interference.it is expected that the management of the activity and performance of the cytokines might lead to the prevention of severe endothelial dysfunctions and pulmonary fibrosis in patients affected by . previous studies have demonstrated the indicated impressive relation between the nervous system and immune system. these studies demonstrated that nervous system has modulatory effects on the production of multiple inflammatory cytokines in lung tissue. (1, 2) .the cholinergic pathway, via acetylcholine neurotransmitters, can interact with nicotinic acetylcholine receptors. further activation of these receptors can apply a suppressive effect on the production of pro-inflammatory cytokines. (3) (figure-1) . among the nicotine receptor subtypes, the subunit 7(α-7) is the most prominent due to its high expression in immune cells (b cells, macrophages, t cells, and target cells) and its association with humoral and intrinsic immunity. therefore, evaluation of pharmacological approaches to activate α-7nachr for inhibition of immunologic phenomenon such as cytokine storm can be helpful. nicotine is a nonselective agonist of this receptor that mimics acetylcholine binding to stimulate vagal activity and decrease cytokine function and block the inflammatory pathway. the general algorithm of this idea was illustrated in figure-2 . hence, comprehension of this theory can provide better therapeutic guidance for the treatment of coronavirus infections, especially covid-19.we describe one of the trends in the decline of the cytokine storm. it seems that lethality and uncontrolled complications of coronaviruses are due to the lack of control of the cytokine storms.although the pathogenesis of coronaviruses is complex and requires specific treatment, previous studies have shown the efficacy of neutralizing anti-inflammatory cytokines in inflammatory conditions caused by covid-19 (1). dose-dependent anti-inflammatory effects of the 7nachr-1 agonist have been demonstrated, and previous studies have shown that activation of this receptor can have an anti-inflammatory role and immune cells regulating (4). nicotine is agonist of mentioned receptor but cannot be used clinically due to its toxicity, addictive nature, and lack of specificity. other agonists of 7nachr-1 receptors in this group, such as gts-21, produce the same nicotine effects without nicotine problems. also some studies have reported limited use of gts-21 in the clinical phase and have shown that this agent can cause a decrease of cytokine levels and significantly reduced inflammatory biomarker after infection (3, 5) . it has been thought that a nicotine agonist compound like gts-21 is able to suppress the production of proinflammatory cytokines during infection of covid-19. in fact, these nicotine agonists can control allergic inflammation induced by innate immune and cellular immune pathways. taken together according to mentioned literature review it can be concluded that gts-21, as potent 7nachr-1 receptor agonist, will act as an anti-inflammatory agent against covid-19infection-induced cytokine storm and inflammatory disturbances in respiratory system and reduced the risk of death in infected subjects.the hypothetical cellular 'covid-19 inflammatory pathway" virus with the influx of neutrophils and monocytes/macrophages results in the hyperproduction of pro-inflammatory cytokines. and "cytokine storm" occurs, weakened by the intensification of the immune system's inflammatory response. but it seems that 'nicotinic anti-inflammatory pathway' triggered by the a7 nachr in immune cells during infection, bacterial components, or intracellular mediators trigger pro-inflammatory pathways that converge in the activation of the nf-kb, which will translocate into the nucleus and induce the transcriptional activation of a variety of inflammatory cytokines. nicotine inhibits the production of pro-inflammatory cytokines in macrophages by mechanism dependent on the a7nachr. a group of patients with pneumonia caused by severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2) were reported from china in december 2019 (tu et al. 2020; clerkin et al., 2020; guo et al., 2020) . it rapidly spread throughout the world and led to a fatal pandemic (clerkin et al., 2020; cao, 2020) . up to now, although several antiviral drugs are widely tested, none of them has been approved as specific antiviral therapy for coronavirus disease 2019 , and the mainstay of treatment is based on the management of patient's symptoms (tu et al. 2020; cao, 2020) . therefore, vaccines, monoclonal antibodies (mabs), and novel therapies are of interest worldwide (tu et al. 2020; clerkin et al., 2020; cao, 2020) .accumulating evidence established a hyperinflammatory states or cytokine storm in covid-19.elevated levels of inflammatory cytokines, including interleukin-2 (il-2), il-6, il-8, il-17, il-1β, and tumor necrosis factor-alpha (tnf-α), which damage the heart, liver, and kidneys may play a significant role in the pathogenesis of covid-19, leading to shock as well as respiratory and multiorgan failure (guo et al., 2020; cao, 2020; zhang et al., 2020) . among these cytokines, il-6 plays a key role in cytokine storm and can predict the adverse clinical outcomes and fatality in these patients (tu et al., 2020; guo et al., 2020; zhang et al., 2020) . interleukin-6 is a towfaced cytokine and considered a pro-inflammatory and anti-inflammatory cytokine, which is produced by immune cells. its serum levels in the healthy state prepare immune responses of the host and sustained overproduction of il-6 is involved in a number of inflammatory diseases (tue et al., 2020; cao, 2020; zhang et al., 2020) . a high level of il-6, which is detected in patients with severe and complicated covid-19, has a relationship with decreased lung elasticity and more severe bronchoalveolar inflammation. furthermore, elevated levels of circulating il-6 significantly correlated with the need for mechanical ventilation and poor outcome in patients with severe covid-19 which were complicated by pneumonia and acute respiratory distress syndrome (ards) (tue et al., 2020; cao, 2020; zhang et al., 2020) . interleukin-6 participates in the pathogenesis of common comorbidities of covid-19 e.g., diabetes mellitus (dm) and cardiovascular diseases (cvds) (gue et al., 2020; zhang et al., 2020) . in addition, considerably elevated levels of circulating il-6 were seen in covid-19 patients with dm and myocardial injury. the data supports the fact that dm is a risk factor for rapid deterioration and poor prognosis of covid-19 (clerkin et al., 2020; guo et al., 2020) .based on the evidence of the significant role of il-6 in cytokine storm, dm, and cvds, it seems that anti-cytokine therapy such as tocilizumab (anti-il-6r) may be useful in patients with severe covid-19 to reduce mortality (tu et al., 2020; clerkin et al., 2020; zhang et al., 2020) .the use of tocilizumab in a preliminary investigation has quickly reduced fever and improved respiratory function in these patients and there are ongoing clinical trials (tu et al., 2020; clerkin et al., 2020; cao, 2020) . recent studies demonstrated that herbal-derived natural products had immunosuppressive and anti-inflammatory properties and exhibited exceptional act on mediators of inflammation. curcuma longa, glycyrrhiza species, camellia sinensis, salvia miltiorrhiza and tanacetum parthenium, have indicated immunomodulatory properties by reducing proinflammatory cytokines and mediators (amirghofran, 2012) . tanacetum parthenium (commonly known as feverfew) prevents releasing of pro-inflammatory mediators from macrophages and lymphocytes (amirghofran, 2012; george et al., 2012) . this is a perennial plant, frequently grows in various regions of the world. the history of medical application of feverfew backs to ancient greek, dioscorides prescribed this plant for reducing fever and "all hot inflammations". therefore, it was called the "medieval aspirin" (pareek et al., 2011) . feverfew has been used in traditional and folk medicine for the treatment of fever, cold, asthma, migraine headache, arthritis, women's health issues, inflammatory conditions, etc. (george et al., 2012; pareek et al., 2011) . although the qualitative standard of many trials in the phytopharmacological field are less rigorous than the conventional pharmaceutical sector (williamson et al., 2020) , clinical evidence suggests that feverfew extract might have positive results in migraine prevention (lopresti et al., 2020) . phytochemical studies have shown the presence of many active ingredients of feverfew, including sesquiterpene lactones, flavonoid glycosides, sesquiterpenes, and monoterpenes.parthenolide is the principal sesquiterpene lactones and the main biologically active constituent in this plant (pareek et al., 2011) , which has different pharmacological properties, including antioxidant, anti-inflammatory, analgesic, antimicrobial, anti-migraine, and anticancer activities (george et al., 2012; wang et al., 2015) . moreover, parthenolide has been shown potent inhibitory effects on pro-inflammatory pathways such as nf-kb and lps pathways.interestingly, parthenolide could significantly reduce il-1, il-2, il-6, il-8, and tnf-α production pathways established in several human cell line models in vitro (monocytes, macrophages, neutrophils) and in vivo studies (wang et al., 2015; magni et al., 2012) . although specific blockade of pro-inflammatory cytokines using mabs is one of the main therapeutic this article is protected by copyright. all rights reserved.severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2) [1] has emerged recently as a new challenge for the medical sciences. although coronavirus disease 2019, covid-19, primarily causes respiratory disease, its pathogenesis is still poorly understood. covid-19 was considered a pandemic by the world health organization on march 11, 2020, because it was widely spread around the globe and presented a high rate of human-to-human transmission. it has been reported that covid-19 progression involves initial symptoms of mild chills and a dry cough, followed by fever, fatigue, and shortness of breath with dyspnea, and, in more severe cases, hypoxemia with oxygen saturation under 85%. [2] several signs and symptoms presented by patients with covid-19 have been described, from asymptomatic patients with a mild cold, to important changes in clinical and laboratory examinations, which can progress to severe organ failure and death. the changes observed include decreased total lymphocytes, prolonged prothrombin time, elevated lactate dehydrogenase, cellular immune deficiency, coagulation activation, myocardial, hepatic, and renal injury [3, 4] and endotheliitis in the lung, heart and small bowel [5, 6] although the mechanisms involved in these changes are not known, observation by the naked eye of the lungs of patients with sars-cov-2 showed pathological characteristics of exudative proteinaceous lesion, while microscopic examination showed inflammatory lymphocytic infiltrates [7] . biopsy and post-mortem studies show diffuse alveolar damage with the formation of hyaline membranes, mononuclear cells and macrophages infiltrating the air spaces, and diffuse thickening of the alveolar wall.in addition, spleen atrophy, hilar lymph node necrosis, focal hemorrhage in the kidney and, enlarged liver with inflammatory cell infiltration constitute considerable worsening during the disease [2, 8] . some patients have poor outcomes in covid-19 that mostly correlates with clinical and laboratory features of a cytokine storm. moreover, hypercoagulation and hypoxia in multiple organs are the worst scenario. oxidative stress by reactive oxygen species (ros) is related to all the main changes observed in other inflammatory and infectious diseases and could be the connecting point that unites all these events. our study focused on the host's response to viral infection, emphasizing oxidative stress rather than the virus's mechanisms of aggression.many studies have related the cytokine storm to the deterioration in the patient's condition with covid-19 infection and it is considered a major factor in the development of acute respiratory distress syndrome and multiple organ dysfunction [2, [9] [10] [11] [12] [13] [14] . a previous study demonstrated that influenza infection induced expression of cytokines via  activation of pattern recognition receptors, including the toll-like receptors tlr3, tlr7,   and tlr8, retinoic acid-inducible gene i, and the nod-like receptor family members in lung epithelial cells, macrophages, and dendritic cells [4, 15] . it is possible that the innate immune response in covid-19 infection follows the same pathways. the inflammasome is an important element in the cytokine storm [16] and studies have shown that ros is a potent ligand and direct mediator for triggering nlrp3 (nod-like receptors p3) inflammasome. additionally, tlr and nlr ligands enhanced nfκb driven transcriptional levels of nlrp3. nfκb, in turn, is activated by ros, thus direct or indirectly, inflammasome is increased by ros [17] [18] [19] . besides ros, h 2 o 2 mainly activates nfκb to produce inflammatory cytokines [20, 21] . hyperproduction of il-6, tnfα, il-1β, interferon-gamma inducible protein 10, granulocyte-colony stimulating factor, monocyte chemoattractant, macrophage inflammatory proteins 1-α and elevated blood ferritin are also observed in covid-19 patients [16] . similar to influenza infection, covid-19 infection appears to have an initial pulmonary phase that consists of virus replication and inflammation, with the involvement of ros as a direct and indirect nlrp3 inflammasome activator, and subsequent blood dissemination, possibly associated with the adaptive immune response to oxidative stress as a mechanism of systemic injury. it is important to understand the mechanism by which sars-cov-2 induces pulmonary and systemic injury, and whether the virus is solely responsible or whether there are other synergistic mechanisms that sustain and aggravate the tissue damage observed in this disease.during the disease progression, patients with covid-19 show disseminated intravascular coagulopathy, characterized by prominent elevation of fibrin/fibrinogen degradation products (d-dimer) [12, 13, 23] which can translocate to extravascular space and damage the cells in the tissue [24] hematological disorders have also been reported as inflammation biomarkers. for hemoglobin levels, a meta-analysis study of 1,210 covid-19 patients showed significant lower hemoglobin levels of 7.1 g/l or even 5.9 g/l in severe cases [24] . in another study, besides presenting decreased hemoglobin, patients with coronavirus pneumonia presented elevated serum ferritin, erythrocyte sedimentation rate, lactate dehydrogenase activity, and acidosis [16] . in addition to the inflammation markers, the disseminated intravascular coagulation contributes to the establishment of organ failure due to hypoxia [25, 26] . treatment of 27 coronavirus patients with heparin promoted recovery in all of them [27] , contributing to the proposal of a treatment protocol to be applied to hospitalized patients. another observation made about patients with severe covid-19 progression is that they developed typical clinical manifestations of shock, characteristic of the evolution to viral sepsis [4] . it has been shown that free hemoglobin and heme is augmented in the blood of patients with sepsis due to hemolysis [23] .although several mechanisms involved in hemolysis have been described in viruses infections, there are a number of studies showing that ros play a role in damaging the membrane of erythrocytes [23, 28] . the production of high ros levels in septic patients leads to alterations in the erythrocyte membrane that, in turn, induces phagocytosis in macrophages and neutrophils, perpetuating a cycle with further production of ros [29] .this may contribute to increased free hemoglobin and low levels of oxygen transport to the tissues [29, 30] . free hemoglobin is dissociated, generating heme, which then is degraded by heme oxygenase (oh-1) to produce free iron; both heme and free iron are harmful to cells [30] . a murine study of a sepsis model by cecal ligation and puncture (clp) showed increased total body free iron up to three times higher when compared to the control [31] . in addition, administration of apoferritin (ferritin that is not combined with iron) and the induction of the expression of ferritin heavy chain, decreases clp mice mortality [32] . reduced oxygen saturation leads to superoxide radical and h 2 o 2 generation by mitochondria [33] [34] [35] . superoxide anion radical reduces iron (iii) to iron (ii), which, in the presence of h 2 o 2 , also generated by phagocytic cells in the inflammatory environment, produces hydroxyl radicals ( • oh), an extremally toxic agent that promotes the formation of cell membrane lipid peroxides and protein oxidation, triggering cell death by apoptosis and/or necrosis [36] . it has also been demonstrated that iron iii induces blood coagulation [37] via hydroxyl radicals. hydroxyl radicals convert soluble plasma fibrinogen into abnormal fibrin clots in the form of dense matted deposits resistant to enzymatic degradation [37, 38] .we believe that once started, all these events occur independent of the causative agent, worsening the patient's condition.disseminated intravascular coagulopathy, sepsis, and decreased oxygen transport to the tissues are some of the main elements presented by covid-19 patients [22] .moreover, free heme in the blood decreases circulating nitric oxide (no), further worsening the ischemia of the organs [24, 39, 40] . despite hypoxemia, pulmonary compliance is preserved [27] , indicating a possible mitochondrial impairment.mitochondrial inability to produce atp [41] has been described in experimental and human sepsis in normal oxygen saturation and tension. this points to mitochondria dysfunction as a crucial role for sepsis pathogenesis [41] . the impairment of mitochondria leads to cytopathic hypoxia [40] [41] [42] that results in oxygen partial reduction with ros generation and reduced energy production.in this regard, hypoxia that accompanies sepsis is known to generate superoxide, h 2 o 2 , and other reactive species mainly by the mitochondrial respiratory chain [40, 41, 43, 44] . hydrogen peroxide triggers the expression of many genes that upregulate proinflammatory cytokines, such as il-1, il-6, and tnfα, and inducible nitric oxide synthase (inos) via activation of the nfκb pathway [20] [21] [22] . in a cyclic manner, these proinflammatory cytokines activate macrophages, neutrophils, endothelium cells via nadph oxidase (nox) to produce more superoxide and h 2 o 2 [20] . further, superoxide radical reacts with no produced by inos that is expressed via the nfκb pathway, yielding peroxynitrite. both peroxynitrite and no are toxic to mitochondria [44] . this may explain the inability of the mitochondria to utilize oxygen despite normal tissue oxygen saturation [41] . this interplay between ros and cytokines generates a self-sustaining cycle between cytokine storm and oxidative stress production that eventually leads to multiorgan failure in patients with covid-19 who progress to sepsis and shock.several in vitro and in vivo studies have highlighted the strategy of some viruses to alter the redox balance of a cell in order to survive. initiation of oxidative stress by virus infection was shown to play a key role in the activation of innate immunity via nfκb generation of cytokines to fight off pathogenic microbes [45] [46] [47] [48] . respiratory syncytial virus (rsv) infection has been shown to induce ros production that, in turn, induced the expression of pro-inflammatory cytokines and innate immune defense [49] [50] [51] .additionally, several viruses induce oxidative stress in order to facilitate their replication inside the cell [52] . as a way to control ros levels, these viruses have evolved to acquire the ability to manipulate the nrf2 pathway in their favor [52] [53] [54] . in some cases, viruses have the ability to suppress the nrf2 pathway [54] , [55] . for instance, rsv increases lipid peroxidation and decreases gsh in human alveolar type ii-like epithelial cells and small airway epithelial cells and abrogate the activation of the nrf2 pathway, resulting in a reduction in the expression of nrf2 target genes, including hemoxigenase-1 (ho-1), superoxide dismutase 1 (sod1), superoxide dismutase 3 (sod3), glutathione stransferase (gst), catalase (cat), and glutathione peroxidase (gpx) [54] . at the same time, the toll-like receptor and interferon (ifn) pathways are triggered by infectioninduced oxidative stress to combat the virus infection [56, 57] . on other hand, defective redox balance by a host cell has been shown to contribute to viral pathogenesis resulting in massive induction of cell death provoked by oxidative stress [58] . influenza virus was shown to induce apoptosis and cytotoxicity in alveolar epithelial cells that were accompanied by increased expression of caspase 1 and 3 and a proinflammatory cytokine, il-8 [59] . this virus induces oxidative stress, but at the same time facilitates the nuclear translocation of nrf2 with subsequent expression of ho-1, a protective enzyme against oxidative injury in the human alveolar epithelial cells [59] . these findings confirm the idea that oxidative stress is importantly involved in the success or failure of the response to virus infection.shaping a therapy for a disease whose pathogeny is unclear is a challenge. if oxidative stress is believed to be the link of every mechanism known for sars-cov-2 infection, the use of antioxidants, such as vitamin e, sh group donor (n-acetyl cysteine), iron complexing agents (deferoxamine), inhibitors of nfb, activators of nrf2 (curcumin, resveratrol), and the use of specific pro-inflammatory cytokine inhibitors and anticoagulants could help the recovery of patients with covid-19.it is useful to emphasize that there are clinical and experimental studies showing the effectiveness of antioxidants in the treatment of many diseases. an in vitro sepsis model showed that vitamin e (α tocopherol), trolox (soluble vitamin e), and motvit e (a polar derivative) reduced mitochondrial damage/dysfunction, nfb transcription molecule, and cytokine expression. motvit e, which accumulates inside mitochondria, had a more efficient protective effect on genes linked to tlrs [60] . the treatment of animals with vitamin e in the model of acute sepsis also showed beneficial effects [61] .triterpenoids (oltipraz (butylated hydroxyanisol), sulphoraphane and dimethyl fumarate, curcumin, silibinin, resveratrol) exert their antioxidant activity by activating nrf-2 and inhibiting nfb pathways [62] . high levels of blood peroxynitrite in 18 patients with sepsis were decreased using deferoxamine, an iron chelator used in patients with iron overload [29] . this indicates the potential application of this drug in iron complexing and peroxynitrite scavenging in patients with sepsis.glutathione (gsh) is the main antioxidant agent in mammalians and it is the most important antioxidant defense in the lungs [64] . when the balance between gsh/gssg is disrupted by an increase in h 2 o 2 , a more oxidative environment oxidizes proteins that control the activation and localization of transcription factors, such as keap-1, which regulates nrf-2, and iκb, which regulates nfκb [45] . thereby, sh group donors, activators of nrf2 and nfkb inhibitors, through their regulator molecules (keap-1 and iκb, respectively), are potential therapeutic options for sars-cov-2 infection. a case report shows that this strategy successfully reverted the severe symptoms of covid-19patients [65] . lipoic acid, also a sh donor, was used in a randomized study and reduced the mortality rate from 77.8% to 37.5% [66] .certainly, a different approach is on the table, one where we seek new drug strategies directly targeting the host response to viral aggression, rather than the sars-cov-2 virus, in which antioxidants can exert their action by breaking the cytokine storm oxidative stress cycle, decreasing hematological damage and reducing cytopathic hypoxia.it appears that oxidative stress plays a role in the pathogenesis of covid-19, perpetuates the cytokine storm cycle, blood clotting mechanism, and exacerbates hypoxia. taken together, this evidence indicates an important participation of oxidative stress in the pathogenesis of viral infection in all direct tissue injury, including mitochondrial dysfunction, and in the signaling of the process.further, it indicates an interplay between oxidative stress and the cytokine storm as a mechanism that sustains and worsens the tissue injury, which terminates in hypoxia and organ failure. moreover, it reveals that the sars-cov-2 virus may interfere with the equilibrium between the nfκb transcription molecule involved in the expression of cytokines and nrf2 activation, responsible for the expression of antioxidant enzymes (yet to be proved conclusively). we are aware of the importance of the role of oxidative stress in the pathogenesis of viral infection and sepsis, however, its participation in covid-19 disease remains unclear [63] . we believe that there is crosstalk between the cytokine storm and oxidative stress. this crosstalk may play an important role in the severity of symptoms presented by patients with covid-19 infection. thus, it is reasonable to propose a pathogenesis model of coronavirus syndrome with primary lung injury and late hematological, tissue hypoxemia (cytopathic hypoxemia), and mitochondrial dysfunction due to the involvement of oxidative stress, which is supported by robust experimental evidence presented by the scientific literature. thereby, we aim to contribute to a rational therapeutic decision. overall, low hemoglobin-carrier, high lung proteinaceous exudate leads to pulmonary hypoxia, cytopathic hypoxia and endothelium damage, and disseminated coagulation results in multiple organ collapse.recover and severe cases (approximately 15%) that develop multi organ failure, primarily respiratory failure, requiring intensive care unit (icu) admission [4, 5] . an efficient immune response against sars-cov-2 may be considered fundamental for the resolution of covid-19. however, some studies have shown a significant relationship between the disease severity and the levels of proinflammatory cytokines and subsets of immune cells [6, 7] . it has been suggested that during the response to sars-cov-2, the immune dysregulation and the high level of proinflammatory cytokines could be the main cause of tissue injury. eventually, the exact pathophysiologic mechanism of covid-19 remains still largely unknown.on the basis of genomic and phylogenetic relationship, the subfamily orthocoronavirinae is classified into four genera: alphacoronaviruses, betacoronaviruses, gammacoronaviruses, and deltacoronaviruses [8] . the alphacoronaviruses and betacoronaviruses tend to infect mammals and cause respiratory and gastrointestinal infection in humans like sars coronavirus (sars-cov), mers coronavirus (mers-cov), and sars-cov-2, while gammacoranaviruses and deltacoronaviruses have the ability to infect birds in addition to mammals [2, 9] . the betacoronaviruses comprise of sars-cov, mers-cov, human coronaviruses (hcovs), bat-sars-like (sl) coronaviruses, and lastly identified sars-cov-2. sars-cov-2 possesses nonsegmented, single-stranded positivesense rna (+ssrna) with 5'-cap structure and 3'-poly-a tail which is a typical genomic structure of covs [10] . the genome analyses have revealed that the genome sequence of sars-cov-2 is 96% and 79.5% identical to the bat coronavirus termed batcov ratg13, and sars-cov, respectively [2] .therefore, the bat has been suggested as a natural host of sars-cov-2 and the transmission route of sars-cov-2 could be through unknown intermediate hosts. the genetic analyses of sars-cov-2 genomes from 103 chinese patients demonstrated that this virus has been evolved into two main types; l type(~ 70%) and s type(~ 30 %). l type is more aggressive and infectious than s type which is the ancestral version [11] .the genome of cov contains six major open reading frames (ofrs) and numerous accessory genes. first ofrs (ofr1a/b), which encompasses the two-third of viral rna, encode two large proteins of covs, polyprotein 1a (pp1a) and pp1ab. these polyproteins are divided into 16 nonstructural proteins (nsps), responsible for viral rna replication and transcription, by virally encoded chymotrypsin-like protease (3clpro) or main protease (mpro) and papain-like protease (plpro) [12, 13] . the remaining ofrs on the one-third of the genome encode major structural proteins, including spike (s), envelope (e), membrane (m), and nucleocapsid (n) proteins, all of which are crucial for the viral infectivity as seen in figure. covs possess a lipid bilayer envelope with s, m, and e proteins [14, 15] . the n protein is composed of an amino (n)-terminal (nt) domain and acarboxy (c)-terminal cytoplasmic tail (ct) domain and located in the core of the viral particle. both domains bind to viral rna to form the helical nucleocapsid [16, 17] . besides, sars-cov n protein acts as an antagonist to the interferon pathway by regulating the signaling and synthesis of type i interferon (ifn), which is one of the most important response in the innate immunity to viral infection [18] . the m protein is the most abundant component of the viral envelope. the m protein contains a glycosylated nt ectodomain, three transmembrane (tm) domains, and a ct domain that binds to the nucleocapsid. the m protein gives the shape of the virus and promotes the membrane curvature and the virus assembly by interacting with the s protein and the ribonucleoprotein [14, 19, 20] . the e protein is a small integral membrane protein, including an nt ectodomain, a tm domain, and a ct endodomain. the e protein facilitates the assembly, the budding, and the envelope formation as well as the m protein [21] . moreover, the e protein has an ion-channel activity, contributing factor of the inflammasome activation. the animal study has shown that blocking the ion channel activity of sars-cov e protein by deletion of associated genes leads to the reduction of the edema and the level of inflammasomeactivated interleukin (il)-1β, il-6, and tumor necrosis factor (tnf) all of which have an important role in the progression of ards [22] .the s glycoproteins on the surface of covs are the receptor binding proteins which are responsible for the attachment to host cells, viral-host cell membrane fusion, and the internalization of the virus [14] . s genome of sars-cov-2 has less than 75% identical sequence with previously known sars-covs except for ratg13 which of s genome is 93.1% identical with sars-cov-2 [2] . besides, another genome analyses have elucidated that the sequence identity of s protein between sars-cov-2 and sars-cov is %76 and most variation has been seen at the n terminus [23, 24] .the s glycoprotein consists of two domains: s1 domain which includes receptor-binding domain (rbd), interacting with angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ace2) on the human host cells as sars-cov, and s2 domain which mediates virus-cell membrane fusion and viral entry [2, 25] . the s2 domain comprises of three parts; a large ectodomain; a single tm domain, and a ct domain [26] . the sequence of rbd from sars-cov and sars-cov-2 exhibits 73.5% identity [24] . the current study has indicated that the rbd of sars-cov-2 has lower affinity to ace2 than the rbd of sars-cov [27] . however the result of the another study revealed that sars-cov2-s protein binds ace2 with higher affinity than sars-cov [28] . after attachment of sars-cov-2 with s protein to ace2 on the host cells, s protein is cleaved by host cell proteases to reveal the s2 domain for viral-host membrane fusion and viral entry which is coupled with tnf-α production [10, 29, 30] .the effective antiviral responses of the host innate and adaptive immunity, including the production of various proinflammatory cytokines, the activation of t cells, cd4 and cd8+ t cells, are essential for controlling the viral replication, limiting the spread of virus, inflammation and cleaning the infected cells [31, 32] . nevertheless, the tissue s protein attaches to angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ace2) receptor on the host cell to entry. after the attachment, host endosomal proteases mediate the virus membrane-endosome fusion for the release of the viral genome. chloroquine (cq) and hydroxycloroquine (hcq) block the virus-receptor binding and virus-endosome fusion. besides cq, hcq, and intravenous immunoglobulin (ivig) inhibit the production of cytokines in macrophages and the antigen presentation in dendritic cells. in covid-19, the count of neutrophils and leukosytes increase whereas the total count of lymphocytes cd4+ t cells, cd+8 t cells, regulatory t (t reg) cells, memory t cells, natural killer cells, and b cells decrease. another beneficial effect of cq and hcq is increasing the activity of treg. the aberrant proinflammatory cytokine production is observed in covid-19. several immunomodulatory therapies including interleukin (il)-6 antagonists, granulocyte colony-stimulating factor (gm-csf) inhibitor, il-1 antagonists, il-17 antagonists, and antitumor necrosis factor (tnf) agents might be used for this cytokine storm to resolve and limit the further inflammation and tissue damage (the yellow arrow indicates a decrease in the number of cells; the blue arrow indicates and increase in the number of cells). injury caused by the virus could induce the exaggerated production of proinflammatory cytokines, the recruitment of proinflammatory macrophages and granulocytes. this results in the cytokine storm (cs) termed as a macrophage activation syndrome (mas) or secondary hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis (shlh), thus leading to further tissue damage [33] [34] [35] . data obtained from sars-cov-2 infected patients have shown that severe cases may be characterized by a cytokine storm inexorably progressing to ards [36] [37] [38] . several features of covid-19, such as the cytokine profile, serological markers, and clinical symptoms, resemble shlh most commonly triggered by viral infection [6, 34] . furthermore, another important evidence is that the severity of covid-19 is related to the level of the proinflammatory cytokines and subsets of immune cells [6, 39] .covid-19 possesses different levels of various cytokines and chemokines through the mild to severe stage of the disease. in sars-cov-2 infected patients, the retrospective analysis has demonstrated that initial plasma levels of il-1β, il-1ra, il-7, il-8, il-10, ifn-ɣ, monocyte chemoattractant peptide (mcp)-1, macrophage inflammatory protein (mip)-1a, mip-1b, granulocytecolonystimulating factor (g-csf), and tumor necrosis factor-alpha (tnf-α) are increased in patients with covid-19. the further analysis has shown that the plasma concentrations of il-2, il-7, il-17, il-10, mcp-1, mip-1a, and tnf-α in icu patients are higher than non-icu patients [36] . moreover, the plasma levels of il-2, il-6, il-8, il-10, and tnf-α, observed in severe infection, are prominently greater than those in nonsevere infection [37] . few retrospective studies have revealed that the lung injury reported with murray score is strongly associated with the level of il-1α, il-1ra, il-2, il-7, il-10, il-17, ifn-ɣ, inducible interferon protein (ip)-10, g-csf, and mcp-3 and these cytokines and chemokines excluding mcp-3 are positively related to sars-cov-2 viral load 2 [7] . the plasma level of il-6, considered as a significant cytokine contributing to mas, increases both in mild and severe patient groups of covid-19: severe patients have a significantly higher level of il-6 than mild or nonsevere patients [6, 37, 38, 40] . furthermore, based on the assessment of pulmonary infiltration in patients with ards, the large area of lung injury (≥50%) is closely correlated with the increased level of il-6 and the subgroup of lymphocytes in the peripheral blood [41] .during the infection, both innate and adaptive immune cells synergistically participate in the anti-viral response [42] .the important increment in the number of neutrophils, leukocytes, and the neutrophil-lymphocyteratio (nlr) has been observed in severe covid-19 compared to mild cases. the prominent lymphopenia, indicating an impairment of immune system, develops in most covid-19 patients especially in severe ones [4, 37] . therefore, it seems that neutrophils and leukocytes might reinforce the cs other than lymphocytes in covid-19. the level of lymphocytes and subsets of t cells which play a significant role in the balancing of immune response varies according to the type of the virus due to possible viral pathologic mechanism. previous investigations have elicited that the total count of lymphocytes and the subset of t cells are reduced in patients with sars-cov infection [43, 44] . data from recent studies have suggested that sars-cov-2 infection can lead to immune dysregulation through affecting the subsets of t cells. the significant alleviation of t cells is observed in covid-19 and more pronounced in severe cases. in patients with covid-19, the level of helper t cells (cd3+, cd4+) and cytotoxic suppressor t cells (cd3+, cd8+), and regulatory t cells are below normal level while helper t cells and regulatory t cells in severe patients are remarkably lower than nonsevere patients. regulatory t cells are responsible for the maintenance of the immune homeostasis with suppressing the activation, proliferation, and proinflammatory function of most lymphocytes including cd+4 t cells, cd+8 t cells, nk cells, and b cells [45, 46] . furthermore, the percentage of naïve helper t cells amplifies while the percentage of memory helper t cells and cd28+ cytotoxic suppressor t cells decreases in severe covid-19 [6, 37] . the equilibrium between the naïve t cells and memory t cells is fundamental for mediating the efficient immune response [47] . in addition to t cells, the reduction of b cells and nk cells are seen in covid-19. another important result is the confirmed strong relationship between inflammatory markers, including esr, crp and il-6 and the subset of lymphocytes [39] . however, previously it has been shown that there is no significant correlation between il-6 and subsets of lymphocytes [6] . although these reports have indicated that cd+4/cd+8 t cell ratio in sars-cov-2 infection is similar to the healthy group, the increase in this ratio and the decline of cd+8 t cells and b cells are considered as a poor predictor for the assessment of post-treatment clinical follow-up [6, 39] . taken together, these results indicate that sars-cov-2 is responsible for an immune dysregulation with the induction of aberrant cytokine and chemokine response, alteration in level of the subgroup of lymphocytes all of which might result in cytokine storm and further tissue damage.excessive inflammatory response with features of cytokine storm cause severe disease course and worsens the prognosis in covid-19. undoubtedly, definitive and most effective treatments for covid-19 drugs would be the antiviral agents that directly target sars-cov-2. considering the lack of proven antiviral agents and hyperinflammation caused by virus, antiinflammatory drugs used in daily rheumatology practice may constitute possible treatment options in treatment of covid-19. following antiinflammatory treatments are potential candidates for covid-19 with their preclinical or limited clinical evidence.systemic corticosteroids have broad-spectrum actions on the immune system that may suppress the exuberant systemic inflammatory response that occurs in ards. severe multi-source systemic inflammation is associated with adverse outcomes, so one may think that corticosteroids may of benefit with their broad spectrum immunosuppressive effects. however, evidence has shown that use of corticosteroids delayed viral clearance in sars and mers infections, similarly they increased secondary infection rates, mortality and complications of steroid therapy in survivors of influenza pneumonitis [48] . in a randomized controlled trial that included 16 non-icu sars patients, "early" (<7 days of illness) hydrocortisone therapy was associated with a higher subsequent plasma viral load. therefore, corticosteroids should not be used early phases of disease unless there is a clear indication for their use [49] . in sars infection, some patients showed severe inflammatory features despite reductions in viral load with subsequent seroconversion, suggestive of exuberant immune response independent of viral load [50] . in two small observational study, use of corticosteroids did not show a survival benefit in covid-19 patients even increased mortality rates when used in high doses [51] [52] [53] . moreover, corticosteroid use was prolonged sars-cov-2 rna shedding as observed in sars and mers infections [54] . in the light of preliminary data, corticosteroids are more likely to function on inflammation-mediated lung injury and interstitial fibrosis at late-stage of ards [52] . however, the dose, duration, and timing of corticosteroids must be individualized considering risk-benefit ratio, until results of ongoing well-designed prospective cohort studies obtained. at present, several studies are registered to assess the efficacy of corticosteroids in covid-19.chloroquine (cq) and hydroxychloroquine (hcq) are 4-aminoquinoline derivatives that are approved by the u.s. food and drug administration (fda) for the treatment of malaria, systemic lupus erythematosus, rheumatoid arthritis (ra) and decades of experience in use of these disorders. they are also used in q fever and porphyria cutanea tarda. hcq has a better side effect profile than cq and is strongly recommended for the long-term treatment of lupus unless the occurrence of a severe side effect. hcq does not increase the risk of infections and has lipidlowering, antithrombotic and antineoplastic properties [55] . in adult rheumatic diseases, the recommended dosage is 200 to 400 mg (155 to 310 mg base) with a cut off of 6.5 mg/kg/daily, is usually well-tolerated. the most dreaded complication is retinal toxicity which rarely occurs in long term use (five or more years). elders with kidney failure or tamoxifen users have an increased risk of retinal toxicity. cq and hcq may prolong qt interval which does not require routine ecg monitorization in recommended doses. at higher doses, these drugs have a potential risk of fatal arrhythmia or if combined with qt prolonging medications as well as those with cardiac diseases [56] . other acute notable toxicities of 4-aminoquinoline derivatives are allergic reactions and neuropsychiatric events [57] . very rarely they may cause cardiomyopathy which is thought to occur due to lysosomal accumulation with their chronic use [58] .oral absorption of cq and hcq are very good and are excreted primarily by urine. the half-lives of cq and hcq are prolonged, ranging between 40 and 50 days and have a large volume of distribution, which allows for sustained sequestration in the tissues. tissue concentrations may differ with being highest in the lung tissue about 30-fold of plasma concentrations as shown in animal models [59] .it has been known that cq and hcq have antiviral activity including hepatitis b, hiv, h1n1 and zika virus [60] . antiviral activity of hcq was first observed in hiv and the hepatitis b infections in the early 1980s. small studies showed its favorable efficacy in combination regimens of hbv, hcv and hiv infections. cq and hcq are thought to exert antiviral activity via multiple mechanisms. first, these agents interfere with glycosylation and proteolytic maturation of proteins. by interfering with terminal glycosylation of ace2, the cellular receptor for s protein, both agents block virus-receptor binding and cell entry [61, 62] . second, cq and hcq both are weak bases and concentrated in acidic, low-ph organelles, such as endosomes, golgi vesicles, and lysosomes, increasing their ph [61] . endosomal acidification is required for the activation of endosomal proteases responsible for the initiation of coronavirus/endosome fusion that releases viral particles into the infected cells [63] . therefore, cq and hcq inhibit viral release into the host cell by blocking endosomal acidification. third, hcq inhibits protein glycosylation and proteolytic maturation of viral proteins. budding of the sars-cov occurs in the golgi apparatus and results in the incorporation of the envelope spike glycoprotein into the virion [64] . studies have shown a resulting accumulation of noninfective viral particles of hiv, or an inability of viral particles to bud out of the host cell, reducing spread of infection. finally, antimalarial drugs act as protecting hemoglobin against invasion by malaria parasites with their effects on heme metabolism. there is abnormal heme metabolism in covid-19 patients. chloroquine phosphate competes with the porphyrin and binds to the viral protein, thereby inhibits the viral protein's attack on heme or binding to the porphyrin. according to a study, cq could prevent orf1ab, orf3a, and orf10 to attack the heme to form the porphyrin and inhibit the binding of orf8 and surface glycoproteins to porphyrins to a certain extent 3 .in rheumatic diseases, the exact mechanism of action of hcq and effects on the immune system are largely unknown. however, beside interfering with lysosomal activity and autophagy as mentioned above, cq and hcq interact with membrane stability and alter signaling pathways and transcriptional activity, which can result in inhibition of cytokine production and modulation of certain costimulatory molecules. both drugs inhibit antigen presentation in dendritic cells, cytokine production in macrophages, and calcium, toll-like receptor (tlr) and cgas-sting signaling in b, t and other immune cells [55, 65] . the major proposed immunomodulatory mechanisms of cq and hcq are the following: inhibition of cytokine production and release by t cells: il-1, il-2, il-6, and il-18, tnf-α and ifn-γ, reduced levels of chemokines, ccl2 and cxcl10, inhibition of micro-rna expression, decreased th17-related cytokines, increased in treg activity and upregulated levels of ifn-α and il-2 and il-10, inhibition of cytotoxic t cell and self-reactive cd4+ lymphocyte activities, decreased dna, rna and protein synthesis in thymocytes [55] . antimalarials have ironbinding and hydroxyl radical scavenging actions which may of benefit considering disrupted heme metabolism and oxidative stress [66] .a strong antiviral activity of cq by using sars-cov-2-infected vero cells has been documented [67] . in a physiologically based pharmacokinetic models (pbpk) for each drug, hcq showed five-fold more potency than cq in vitro [68] . in both studies, antiviral activity is dosedependent and can be achieved with use of routine safe dosages.although several in vitro studies report antiviral activity of cq and hcq against sars-cov-2, in vivo data are promising but have considerable limitations. an expert consensus group in china suggested that cq may improve lung involvement evaluated at imaging with a shortening of the disease course [69] . in another highly debated open-label, nonrandomized, controlled trial, a small number of patients with covid-19 were treated with hcq. nasal sars-cov-2 carriage was found to be lower on sixth day following hcq treatment as compared to non-treated patients [70] . a recent, multicenter, openlabel, randomized controlled trial from china, did not find sars-cov-2 negative conversion rates between high dose hcq and standard of care in 150 hospitalized patients, with reporting more rapid resolution of symptoms, normalization of crp and lymphopenia, however outcome data on icu need and mortality was not reported here [71] . in another study comprising 181 hypoxic pneumonia patients from france, hcq did not avert icu admission or mortality [72] .the dilemma on clinical utility of cq and hcq in covid-19 will be solved by well-designed clinical trials in near future.in several countries, despite the weakness of clinical studies, based on strong preclinic scientific rationale and multimodal antiviral and immunomodulatory actions, cq and hcq are currently recommended for the treatment of covid-19. optimal dosing is uncertain and there are several dosing regimens (400 mg to as high as 1200 mg daily) as is the treatment durations (5-10 days). hcq was found to be more potent than cq in vitro and better tolerated. based on pbpk models, a loading dose, 400 mg twice a day (bid), of hcq is given orally, followed by a maintenance dose of 200 mg bid for 4 days is the most commonly recommended strategy for sars-cov-2 infection, as it reached three times greater potency of cq when given 500 mg twice daily for 5 days in advance [68] . all hcq recommended doses for covid-19 are above the routine doses used in rheumatic diseases, hence potential adverse events could be experienced also in this brief standing treatment.in 2005 vincent et al. reported that cq has strong antiviral effects on sars-cov-1 infection of primate cells with the use of drug either before or after exposure to the virus, suggesting both prophylactic and therapeutic use [61] . animal models have shown that prophylactic use of cq may have an additional survival benefit in enteroviral infections [73] . however, there is still no robust evidence for the use of cq or hcq for pre-or postexposure prophylaxis of covid-19. there are several trials underway to evaluate the efficacy of cq or hcq in the prophylaxis of high-risk individuals (nct04303507, nct04318444).ivig is a blood product containing polyclonal immunoglobulin g isolated and pooled from healthy donors used to treat immune thrombocytopenic purpura (itp), kawasaki disease and various inflammatory neurologic and myositis syndromes. it has immunomodulatory functions with unknown mechanism of action. one of the proposed mechanisms is the interaction of igg-fc with fc gamma receptors located on almost all immune cells, resulting in pleiotropic functional consequences including the expansion of regulatory t cell population, phagocytosis, antibodydependent cellular cytotoxicity (adcc), immune cell differentiation and maturation, apoptosis, expression of proinflammatory cytokines, and antigen-presentation [74] . previous studies on sars and mers, found that ivig therapy was effective thus proposing high-dose ivig as an option for severe covid-19 patients [75] . there are a few covid-19 cases which reported efficacy of high dose ivig [76] . however, its high cost and limited supply restrict its general use. inferred from rheumatic diseases, covid-19 patients with pregnancy, secondary infections, marked thrombocytopenia, muscular, myocardial and neurologic manifestations would be better candidates for ivig treatment. there are several studies already registered for its use in covid-19.il-6 receptors ubiquitously expressed in almost all immune cells, and il-6 acts as a master player inducing proliferation and differentiation of immune cells. in healthy individuals, the il-6 levels in circulation are extremely low and are in the range of 1-5 pg/ml, marked elevations reported in many inflammatory conditions including cytokine release syndrome [77] . several therapeutic agents have been developed inhibiting the cytokine itself, the signaling via the il-6 receptor, or its postreceptor downstream signaling pathways (jak/stat). tocilizumab, sarilumab, siltuximab are il-6 antagonists with different pharmacologic properties. tocilizumab is approved for the treatment of ra, juvenile idiopathic arthritis, giant cell arteritis, cytokine release syndrome, and idiopathic multicentric castleman's disease (imcd), whereas siltuximab received approval for imcd and sarilumab for ra only [78] .covid-19 patients have high plasma il-6 levels, especially those with more severe disease presentation [37] . il-6 production can be stimulated by sars-cov-2 itself or by stimulation of other immune cells [79] . indeed, it has been shown that during covid-19, cd4 + t lymphocytes are rapidly activated to differentiate into pathogenic th1 cells, generating gm-csf and other proinflammatory cytokines, which further induced activation of monocytes with high expression of il-6 [80] . in clinical view, there is striking correlation between serum il-6 levels and sars-cov-2 rnaaemia, which strongly indicates worse outcome 4 . besides the cytokine storm, recent studies in experimentally infected animals suggest a crucial role for virus-induced immunopathological events in causing fatal pneumonia after coronavirus infections [81] . hence, blocking il-6 would potentially reduce the detrimental immune response caused by sars-cov-2.as are the other covid-19 treatments, there is no robust evidence to routinely suggest il-6 antagonists. a small clinical trial in china examined the effectiveness of tocilizumab in 21 patients who met the criteria for severe or critical covid-19, including respiratory failure, requiring mechanical ventilation, shock, or admission to the icu with multiple organ failures. tocilizumab improved hypoxemia, fever, lymphopenia, crp, and lung infiltration in most of the patients treated, without serious adverse events 5 . recently, the favorable outcome of a patient with limited cutaneous systemic sclerosis under treatment with tocilizumab was reported [82] .since there is an urgent need for the severe covid-19 treatments, based on these limited data, tocilizumab is included in the treatment algorithms of many countries. the dose and timing for infusions are not determined yet. numerous studies are ongoing to assess the efficacy of tocilizumab, sarilumab, and siltixumab in several countries. current practice is to give tocilizumab 4-8 mg/ kg (maximum 800 mg) as single infusion. after careful evaluation of disease severity and response to initial treatment a repeat infusion can be administered at the same dose after 12-24 h. il-6 antagonists increase the risk of infections, therefore must be used in severe patients and at the end of the high viral load phase of covid-19, along with antiviral treatments [75] . there are other side effects including intestinal perforation and opportunistic infections. therefore, it is prudent to monitor patients for potential side effects. [83] . jak inhibitors are currently approved for the treatment of ra and psoriatic arthritis and their use in other inflammatory disorders are continuously growing [84] . many proinflammatory cytokines involved in cytokine storm of covid-19 might be inhibited by jak inhibitors.besides above mentioned common properties of jak inhibitors, baricitinib may block ap-2-associated protein kinase 1 (aak1) and cyclin g-associated kinase (gak) which are host kinases that regulate viral endocytosis, according to an artificial intelligence search of viral characteristics of sars-cov-2. this effect is only restricted to baricitinib among other jak inhibitors and it may block viral entry and assembly of virus particles into pneumocytes in therapeutic doses used in ra [85] . however, these hypothetical views merit further evidence for clinical use both for cytokine storm and covid-19. currently, baricitinib (nct04320277, nct04340232, nct04321993), tofacitinib (nct04332042) and ruxolitinib (nct04331665) studies are ongoing.nod-like receptor family pyrin domain-containing 3 (nlrp3) is a critical inflammasome in acute protection of the body against a wide variety of noxious stimuli, including rna viruses [86] . nlrp3 activates caspase-1, a molecule responsible for the activation and exuberant release of il-1β and il-18. previously sars-cov has been shown to induce nlrp3 by its ion channel-forming m protein and orf8b [87] . it has been shown that sars-cov-2 induces many cytokines including il-1 family [36, 37] . il-1 family are pleiotropic cytokines, have roles in inflammation, hematopoiesis, and fibrosis. il-1β and tnf-α promote vascular permeability and leakage. both il-1β and il-18 fuel cytokine storm and mas and il-1 cytokines (except il-18) can be successfully inhibited by anakinra [88] .anakinra is a recombinant antagonist of human il-1 and approved for the treatment of ra and certain autoinflammatory disorders with recommended doses of 1-2 mg/kg/day with a maximum daily dose of 8 mg/kg 6 [89] . in terms of sepsis and mas, a previous, highly cited phase iii trial, anakinra did not improve 28-day survival rate in sepsis patients and terminated early [90] . however, reanalysis of data from this trial suggested significant improvement in survival in patients with hepatobiliary dysfunction and disseminated intravascular coagulation (dic) [91] . anakinra was administered intravenously at 2 mg/kg/hr for 72 h continuously in this study without safety concerns. this dose is extremely higher than those used in rheumatology routine which warrants careful monitoring. there are several anakinra studies registered for covid-19, testing 100 mg daily subcutaneous injection for 28 days to 400-600 mg/day intravenous for 5-7 days (nct04339712, nct04330638).colchicine has been approved for gout and familial mediterranean fever. in recent years, colchicine has attracted attention in the management of cardiovascular diseases by suppressing their inflammatory component [92] . its mechanism of action is thought to be the inhibition of tubulin polymerization and microtubule generation and, possibly, effects on cellular adhesion molecules, inflammatory chemokines, and the inflammasome. colchicine may inhibit activation of nlrp3 inflammasome and additionally may inhibit directly the synthesis of tnf-α and il-6 [93] . trials investigating the efficacy of conventional therapeutic doses of colchicine have been registered for the treatment of covid-19 (nct04322682, nct04328480, nct04326790).tnf-α is one of the most potent proinflammatory cytokines with broad spectrum of actions. marked elevations reported in many inflammatory conditions including cytokine release syndrome. serum tnf-α levels found elevated in covid-19 patients with being more pronounced in more severe patients [36] . sars-cov viral spike protein is able to modulate tnf-α-converting enzyme (tace)-dependent shedding of the ace2 ectodomain, required for the viral entry which is coupled to tnf-α production [94] . therefore, it is hypothesized that the use of tnf inhibitors might be effective in blocking viral entry and detrimental effects of exuberant tnf-α, as shown in preclinical studies on severe respiratory syncytial virus and influenza infections [95] . anti-tnfs enhance the risk of bacterial, viral and fungal infections. therefore, their use in covid-19 must be supported with preclinical studies.one of the cytokines found abundant in covid-19 patients is il-17 and found associated with severe lung inflammation [36] . il-17 has wide-ranging proinflammatory effects on induction of cytokines; il-1β, il-6, tnf-α; growth factors, g-csf; chemokines; and matrix metalloproteinases. in a mouse model, it was found that h1n1 cause acute lung injury in an il-17-dependent manner. it has been postulated that blocking this cytokine may be effective in reducing sars-cov-2 related organ damage [96] .as mentioned, gm-csf is one of the key molecules involved in cytokine storm which is excessively released in covid-19 patients [80] . blockage of this growth factor may halt immunopathology caused by virus. mavrilimumab is a gm-csf inhibitor developed for the refractory ra [97] and a new trial is investigating its efficacy in covid-19 (nct04337216).mmf is widely used for the treatment of severe manifestations of connective tissue disorders and vasculitis syndromes. mycophenolate exhibited strong antiviral effects on sars-cov and mers-cov as demonstrated in vitro studies, with its interaction with viral proteases [98] . a small clinical study reported efficacy of mmf in combination with ifn-β on mers patients [99] . however, considering strong immunosuppressant effects of mmf, it is likely to cause more harm than benefit in covid-19 patients.an association between ibuprofen and worse outcome in covid-19 patients was speculated, with very weak evidence [100] . another nsaid, indomethacin, reported to have direct antiviral effect on sars-cov by interfering with viral rna synthesis, independent of cyclooxygenase inhibition in an in vitro study. a registered trial, currently recruiting patients to determine efficacy of naproxen for its potential interaction with viral nucleoproteins (nct04325633). therefore, although evidence is limited, indomethacin or naproxen could be preferred over other nsaids when indicated [101] .excessive inflammatory response with features of cytokine storm cause severe disease course and worsens the prognosis in covid-19. undoubtedly, drugs that directly target sars-cov-2 would be the most effective treatments for covid-19. there are hundreds of trials ongoing to find effective treatments for covid-19 both targeting virus and consequent hyperinflammation including newly developed agents on phase studies or drugs that are approved for other indications. until an effective treatment is found, drugs that are used in daily rheumatology practice may constitute potential treatment options in covid-19 patients not only by their antiinflammatory effects but also with some of their inherent antiviral properties. hence, inclusion of rheumatologists/ immunologists into covid teams would improve patient outcomes.the covid-19 pandemic is claiming many victims among those infected worldwide. patients' prognosis depends primarily, but not exclusively on their viral load. the response of the host's immune system is partly responsible, either by default (in immunocompromised patients) or, paradoxically, by excess -when a destructive "cytokine storm" occurs in the lung as a result of an exaggerated mobilization of the host's immune cells. this cytokine storm seems to be the most serious prognostic factor because it aggravates the inflammatory, thrombophilic state, leading to a disseminated intravascular coagulation (dic) -a situation difficult to control and potentially fatal.there is no clear scientific evidence as yet to indicate what triggers a cytokine storm.a highly contagious virus like influenza a, which causes annual flu epidemics all over the world, has been known to trigger such cytokine storms too, leading to inflammation, the need for hospitalization, and even death. the mechanisms behind such cytokine storms, that make some individuals suffer more from the flu than others, remain unclear, however. a study on influenza a virus infection in mice showed that glucose metabolism was a driving force behind the onset of the often fatal inflammatory response known as a cytokine storm. mice treated with glucosamine produced significantly higher levels of inflammatory cytokines and chemokines than mice not given glucosamine. when researchers analyzed blood glucose levels in patients diagnosed with influenza a and healthy controls, they found that the hexosamine biosynthetic pathway, by means of which a 2 small portion of glucose is metabolized, plays an essential part in cytokine storms triggered by the influenza virus. these findings may partly explain why diabetics are at greater risk of serious complications and death from influenza and other infections. preliminary data indicate that this appears to be the case for covid-19 as well (1) it has been reported that hypoglycemic conditions induce an upregulation of the glut 3 glucose transporter in the plasma membrane of the monocyte-macrophage [5] , and that lps amplifies glut 3 overexpression [6]. glut 3 upregulation is a self-regulating mechanism to ensure an adequate glucose supply to the cells, and thus protect monocytes against the harmful effects of low glucose levels, thus amplifying inflammatory cell activation in the presence of lps. wright et al. showed that acute hypoglycemia induced by hyperinsulinemic clamping led to an increase in cd40 expression (an inflammatory activation index) on monocytes in type 1 diabetic patients [7] .in vivo hypoglycemia may induce an increase in counter-regulatory hormonal adrenergic activity as well, resulting in further inflammatory stress [8] . 3 hypoglycemia therefore, besides representing a risk factor of cardiovascular and total mortality (for all causes) in diabetic patients, could represent a trigger mechanism for the "cytokine storm" during covid-19 disease [9] .in the light of these experimental data, we recommend pursuing optimal glycemic control, avoiding both hyper and hypoglycemia, to prevent or mitigateany cytokine storms, and thus improve the otherwise dismal prognosis for both diabetic and not diabetic patients admitted to semi-intensive or icu with covid-19.. examples of biosensors for cytokine detection proposed in the last 5 years. previous examples can be found in biosensors and bioelectronics, 2016 79, 810-821 and references therein; ilod is the limit of detection in ideal conditions (buffered solution), mlod is the limit of detection in a real matrix. t he sars-cov-2 outbreak that originated in the province of wuhan in december 2019 has rapidly evolved into a worldwide pandemic. 1 although many patients remain asymptomatic, others develop severe pneumonia and even acute respiratory distress syndrome (ards). ards patients require mechanical ventilation, and due to the sudden spike in infections, some healthcare providers have been forced to make dire decisions about whom they connect to ventilators. 2 currently, there is a common consensus that a hyperinflammatory syndrome or "cytokine storm" is indicative of a poor prognosis for critical covid-19 cases, and that cytokines are useful prognosis biomarkers. 3−6 this has spurred an overuse of immunomodulator drugs with the hope of halting disease progression and improving outcomes. 7 the effectiveness and side effects of these treatments are still being analyzed, although preliminary reports suggest that timing and dosage will be keys for their success. 8 thus, there is an urgent need to develop methods for monitoring cytokine levels in covid-19 patients. such methods would enable detecting covid-19 patients that are worsening and to treat them before they become critically ill. this would not only improve outcomes, but also avoid oversaturation of the icu. measuring cytokine levels could also be useful for personalizing antiinflammatory treatments and monitoring their efficacy.designing and prototyping biosensors for cytokine detection in the context of covid-19 has unique technological and translational challenges. first of all, cytokines such as il-6 are intrinsically difficult to detect because they are found at low levels in serum (typically below 10 pg ml −1 in healthy individuals). 9 second, in order for point-of-care tests to be useful, rapid detection in whole blood is preferred so that information can be obtained at the bedside. the oversaturation of hospitals caused by covid-19 has forced healthcare providers in especially hard-hit areas to decentralize covid-19 care, including emergency field hospitals and home-based quarantine. patients may worsen and require urgent care in these situations where centralized facilities for biochemical testing are not available. similarly, economic factors may limit intensive care in some regions, where well equipped laboratories may not be available. thus, in order to have significant impact against this pandemic, biosensors for covid-19 management must be rapid, sufficiently sensitive to detect cytokines in whole blood, and independent of centralized equipment.below we summarize the trajectory of the covid-19 cytokine storm, including the main inflammation biomarkers linked to this syndrome. we also summarize the current therapies and identify key points where biosensors are required to manage recovery. finally, we critically review the recent literature for cytokine detection and propose future directions in the field.sars-cov-2 infects epithelial lung cells via specific interactions with the angiotensin converting enzyme 2 (ace2). 10 while efforts are being made worldwide to better understand the cytokine storm that characterizes the progression to severe pneumonia or ards, previous information from sars-cov and mers-cov infections, shown in figure 1 , indicates the main factors. 11−13 it is known that the virus replicates very quickly in the early stages of infection. this means that high levels of viral proteins known to antagonize interferon (ifn) responses are generated, which results in a strong yet delayed proinflammatory response at the site of infection. these pro-inflammatory cytokines and chemokines attract macrophages and neutrophils that also release pro-inflammatory agents. this amplifies the inflammation, giving rise to ards, sepsis, or multiorgan dysfunction syndrome (mods), all of which are associated with poor outcomes. 14 a comprehensive review of the cytokines and chemokines involved in the covid-19 cytokine storm is already available, although studies performed in large cohorts of patients have not been performed. 12 these are required in order to determine cutoff values for diagnosis and prognosis purposes.pro-inflammatory cytokines such as il-1, il-6, il-8, and tumor necrosis factor alpha (tnf-α) have been found elevated in the sera of severely and critically ill covid-19 patients. 15−24 this indicates that these cytokines could be good prognosis biomarkers; that is, they could indicate the progression to severe or critical covid-19. many recent cytokine profiling studies, however, have only been performed in small populations, and therefore cannot be broadly generalized. 17, 22 larger studies are required to establish cutoff values as well as to determine the intricate relationships between pro-and anti-inflammatory factors in covid-19 progression. based on other hyperinflammatory syndromes such as sepsis, the levels of these biomarkers will likely fluctuate rapidly. this means that patients with inflammation biomarkers below a certain threshold value may evolve quickly and require anti-inflammatory treatments even though their initial biomarker measurements indicated otherwise. a solution to this problem could be to perform periodic measurements of biomarkers in order to evaluate their kinetics. 23 this would require biosensors that are inexpensive and easy to use at the point of care in order to not overburden healthcare workers. it should also be noted that, although cytokines are also present in saliva, urine, and sputum, 24 no information is currently available about their function and usefulness as biomarkers for cytokine storm monitoring in covid-19. measuring cytokines in sputum could be particularly valuable because it would reveal information about local inflammation. however, only 30−40% of covid-19 patients produce sputum. 16 anti-inflammatory cytokines such as il-10 have also been found in the sera of covid-19 patients. 22−25 it is known from other hyperinflammatory syndromes that dysregulated inflammation is often followed by immune suppression, 26 putting these patients at high risk of opportunistic infections from bacteria, fungi, or even latent viruses such as human cytomegalovirus (cmv). 27−29 this is particularly problematic in the context of the icu, since nosocomial infections by multiresistant pathogens can be lethal if not promptly detected. because of this, we anticipate that biosensors aimed at detecting coinfections will also be required in order to manage critical covid-19 patients. for example, biosensors that detect procalcitonin (pct) could be useful to detect opportunistic bacterial infections. 30−32 procalcitonin is produced in parenchymal cells in response to bacterial toxins. in pubs.acs.org/acssensors perspective healthy individuals, pct is considered undetectable (below 0.05 ng ml −1 ). pct levels above 1−2 ng ml −1 are usually considered as a warning of potential bacterial sepsis. 33 since pct levels do not rise to such a large extent in viral infections, biosensors for this biomarker could indicate the onset of bacterial infections in covid-19 patients.■ potential biosensor-guided therapies table 1 summarizes some anti-inflammatory treatments proposed so far for ameliorating the cytokine storm in covid-19 patients. it should be noted that the evidence supporting these treatments is weak. in other words, randomized clinical trials for these drugs in the context of covid-19 care have not yet been completed. their use is not recommended in official protocols by who, only for clinical trials or compassionate motives. many are repurposed drugs already in use for other diseases and syndromes, but not for infections. 34 it is important to highlight this as many of these pharmaceuticals are immunosuppressive. since covid-19 patients are already immunosuppressed due to ifn attenuation and anti-inflammatory responses, the administration of these immunomodulators may exacerbate the risk of an opportunistic infection or reduce the effect of antiviral drugs. a good example of the polemic surrounding these antiinflammatory treatments is the use of corticosteroids. corticosteroids such as methylprednisolone are inexpensive and globally available. they are not routinely recommended for sepsis care except in cases of septic shock. previous evidence from sars-cov-1 and mers patients treated with corticosteroids yielded widely disparate outcomes, 11 and the who and idsa have discouraged the use of corticosteroids for covid-19 care. nevertheless, several authors report good outcomes when administering these drugs at cautious doses. 8, 35, 36 of those reporting good outcomes, dosing and timing have been highlighted as the key factors for successful corticosteroid therapy in the context of sars-cov infections. kinetic profiles of pro-inflammatory cytokines such as il-6 could provide crucial data to guide the onset of corticosteroid treatment and adjust doses in order to reduce inflammation while minimizing side effects. 37 other nonspecific antiinflammatory treatments that could benefit from biosensorguided administration are (hydroxy)chloroquine, 7 immunoglobulins, azithromycin, 38 and convalescent plasma therapies. 39 drugs based on monoclonal antibodies and recombinant proteins such as tocilizumab 40 or anakinra 41 have also been proposed for reducing hyperinflammation caused by covid-19. these treatments block specific pro-inflammatory signal pathways. these drugs could benefit from a "companion diagnostics" approach similar to that which is used in cancer care. that is, the administration of these drugs would be guided by measurements of the specific pro-inflammatory factors they modulate. for example, tocilizumab binds receptors of il-6 (both soluble and membrane-bound). this blocks the interaction with membrane-bound gp130, which in turn prevents the activation of a downstream janus kinase responsible for signal cascading. 42 it has been proposed that blockers of the il6-mediated inflammatory response such as tocilizumab and sarilumab should be guided by il-6 measurements with a threshold value around 20 pg ml −1 . 43, 44 these antibodies have proven to be useful to treat unwanted cytokine release syndromes in immune anticancer therapies. some early reports on the benefits of using tocilizumab are encouraging, although a clinical trial for sarilumab has recently been discontinued due to a lack of clear positive outcomes. interestingly, serial il-6 measurements have shown that after the administration of tocilizumab there is a slight increase in il-6 followed by sharp decrease over time. 43 these early reports highlight the relevance of performing kinetic measurements of biomarkers for monitoring the progress of inflammatory diseases. table s1 summarizes the main features of recent biosensor prototypes for cytokine detection. as highlighted above, timedependent pro-and anti-inflammatory responses are involved in covid-19 progression. a multisensor system capable of detecting several of these biomarkers simultaneously would provide evidence to determine disease stage and guide personalized therapies. for example, it has been reported that plasmonic nanosensor arrays can detect 6 cytokines simultaneously (il-2, il-6, il-4, il-10, ifn-γ, and tnf-α, figure 2a ). 45 these multisensors require a minute sample size (1 μl) and show an impressive dynamic range for quantification (between 10 and 10 000 pg ml −1 ). the signal transduction mechanism consists of measuring changes in the localized surface plasmon resonance (lspr) of gold nanorods with dark-field microscopy. this provides information about cytokine binding to antibodies in real time, which is more informative than traditional end-point elisa. the total time required to run the whole chip is only 40 min. the rapid analysis time makes this detection platform suitable for aiding clinical decision-making in emergency situations. another interesting multisensor platform using electrochemical transducers is shown in figure 2b . it contains 32 individually addressable electrodes, each one multiplexed with an 8-port manifold to provide 256 measurements in less than 1 h. 46 however, it also requires an off-line protein capture step on magnetic nanobeads. electrochemical immunoassays for il-6 with these devices reported a wide dynamic range between 0.1 and 10 4 pg ml −1 . multiplexed cytokine measurements with electrochemical biosensors have also been reported using graphene oxide to fabricate nanoprobes. 47 this platform detects il-6, il-1β, and tnf-α spiked into the same mouse serum sample. the multiplexed detection was achieved by using antibodies bound to three different signal reporters (nile blue (nb), methyl blue (mb), and ferrocene (fc)). covid-19 is a global challenge and requires technologies that are easy to implement in many different scenarios. the oversaturation of hospitals during the peak of the infection has forced some governments to decentralize covid-19 care and manage patients in temporary field hospitals and in-home quarantine. in these scenarios, detection systems that are not bound by centralized infrastructure play a key role. for instance, a lateral flow immunoassay has been proposed for detecting il-6 in unprocessed blood with high sensitivity. 48 the ability to detect cytokines directly from blood is extremely useful in decentralized healthcare scenarios, since purifying serum or plasma requires a centrifugation step that is difficult to perform at the bedside. however, blood contains cells like erythrocytes, which can interfere with colorimetric detection schemes. the lateral flow test used antibody-decorated nanoparticles as probes and surface-enhanced raman spectroscopy (sers) as the signal transduction mechanism. it showed a limit of detection of 5 pg ml −1 in whole blood. this limit of detection, however, was achieved with a dxr raman microscope, which is not suitable for point-of-care use. over the past decade, a growing trend in biosensors has been to interface them with mobile devices such as smartphones. 49−51 this is an appealing option because smartphones already have a high global market penetration and therefore do not require the purchase of additional readers. mobile biosensors for il-6 have been recently proposed. 52 the devices consist of a paper immunosensor for colorimetric detection using gold nanoprobes ( figure 2c ). the gold nanoprobes generate colored spots that are detected in real time with a smartphone app. instead of external attachments, the app uses an augmented reality system in order to control photographic conditions. this system also compensates for variable light conditions, allowing the user to quantify colorimetric signals using only an unmodified smartphone. the biosensor was able to detect variations in il-6 levels as small as 12.5 pg ml −1 in whole blood and with a rapid assay time of only 18 min. furthermore, the paper substrate makes it particularly useful for monitoring infectious diseases because it can be easily disposed of by incineration.biosensors capable of continuously monitoring cytokine levels would be ideal for detecting covid-19 patients progressing to severe or critical stages as well as to check the success of anti-inflammatory therapies. while to the best of our knowledge immunosensors for continuous detection of biomarkers in blood have not yet been proposed, some prototypes with the potential to achieve this feature can be found in the recent literature. for example, needle-shaped microelectrodes have been proposed for detecting alterations in il-6 levels in real time ( figure 3a) . 53 in this design, the interaction between the cytokine and antibodies bound to the pubs.acs.org/acssensors perspective electrode changes the impedance of the system without the need for detection antibodies or labels. the authors suggest that integrating the sensors with a cannula within the bloodstream could enable the real-time monitoring of il-6 levels, although the initial prototype was only tested in surrogate serum samples. recently, an electrochemical biosensor capable of continuous monitoring in blood samples has been proposed. it consists of a wire electrode modified with aptamers that change their configuration upon binding their target ( figure 3b ). 54 this changes the position of a redox active molecule (methylene blue) with respect to the electrode, which can be followed with square-wave voltammetry ( figure  3c ). the authors demonstrated that the sensors implanted in a rat could detect vancomycin as a target molecule in real time ( figure 3d ). adapting this technology for detecting cytokines could enable a precise profiling of the covid-19 inflammation. 55 finally, a wearable detection platform has also been proposed that could be a game-changer in inflammation monitoring. 56 it is based on the intradermal delivery of biocompatible near-infrared (nir) quantum dots. an array of these nanosensors is delivered using dissolvable microneedles. the fluorescence emission of the quantum dots was fine-tuned so that they would be invisible to the naked eye, but detectable upon illumination with nir light. the pattern of emitted light generated by the array can be detected with a modified smartphone and evaluated with a machine learning algorithm. while this technology has initially been demonstrated as a way to keep vaccination records, adaptation for continuous monitoring of biomarkers could revolutionize the field of personalized medicine.to date, there have been more than 264 000 deaths due to covid-19 worldwide. social distancing measures have flattened the virus propagation curve, and many countries are relaxing confinement measures. at the same time, there is also a consensus view that the virus will not be eradicated until a vaccine is developed and deployed. until then, new tools are required in order to reduce the burden of covid-19. it is imperative to avoid the progression from severe pneumonia to critical ards. measuring prognosis biomarkers and combining this knowledge with clinical observations and risk factors is a winning strategy for stratifying patients according to disease severity. biosensors have the potential to play a central role in this process by providing rapid information at the point of care. they could also provide guidance for the administration of immunomodulators, which can have deleterious effects if they are not dosed carefully. for this to happen, several translational challenges need to be met from a technological perspective. to ensure rapid measurements at the point of care, devices must be easy to use by a frontline healthcare worker. this means that analytical platforms should enable the detection of cytokines in one simple step. also, biosensors need to be inexpensive enough to enable multiple measurements. this is important because inflammatory processes evolve rapidly, and therefore it would be ideal to obtain a personalized biomarker profile for each patient. implanted biosensors could enable a continuous monitoring of patients. however, this technology still needs further development and regulatory aspects for future commercialization will be much tougher than nonimplanted biosensors. multisensors are also seen as key players in precision medicine for covid-19 because they provide information about the relative levels of different pro-and anti-inflammatory processes, which is important to design personalized therapies.all in all, we propose that the ideal device for managing the cytokine storm responsible for severe and critical covid-19 cases should encompass all the features of current biosensors; that is, they should monitor the levels of several cytokines simultaneously in raw blood samples, have a rapid turnaround time, be easy to dispose of, and use portable readers. paper biosensors can be destroyed by incineration which is important to meet biosafety regulations. readers should also be easily disinfected, especially for decentralized testing. wearable biosensors would enable the continuous monitoring of patients, a much-desired feature; however, the technology still needs further development to be ready for clinical translation. the information provided by these devices should then be combined with patient data (age, comorbidities, treatments, microbiology results) in order to assess the risk of a poor prognosis. using the information from these biosensors to train a neural network has the potential to achieve this goal.the supporting information is available free of charge at https://pubs.acs.org/doi/10.1021/acssensors.0c00979.examples of biosensors for cytokine detection proposed in the last 5 years (table s1 ) (pdf) coronavirus disease (covid-19), caused by severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2), has rapidly caused a pandemic. recent reports showed that individuals with obesity may be more vulnerable to severe complications of covid-19 by virtue of the increased risk of chronic diseases driven by obesity [1] . the reasons for this are not well known, but chronic inflammation is suspected to be one of the causes. obesity is a state of chronic low-grade systemic inflammation, which is characterized by increased proinflammatory cytokine secretion from adipose tissue and the infiltration of leukocytes, including macrophages, into the adipose tissue. thus, this chronic inflammation impairs insulin signaling in adipocytes, causing insulin resistance, and contributing to the development of metabolic disorders such as cardiovascular disease, type 2 diabetes, and hypertension [2] , which are well known comorbidities that adversely affect the outcome of patients with covid-19. in addition, patients with severe covid-19 commonly show cytokine storms, which refer to an excessive and uncontrolled release of proinflammatory cytokines such as tumor necrosis factor-α, monocyte chemotactic protein-1, and interleukin-6 (il-6). in particular, serum il-6 levels in those with severe covid-19 were significantly higher than in those with mild cases [1, 3] . although most people with covid-19 develop no symptoms or have only mild illness, the evidence shows that about 14% of covid-19 patients develop severe symptoms requiring hospitalization and oxygen support, while 5% develop acute respiratory distress syndrome, sepsis, septic shock, and multiorgan failure [4, 5] , and these are all related to inflammatory responses.individuals living with obesity have chronically higher leptin and lower adiponectin concentrations. this unfavorable hormone status leads to a dysregulation of the immune response and can contribute to the pathogenesis of obesityrelated complications [6] . in the basal state, individuals with obesity have a higher concentration of proinflammatory cytokines. under viral infection, obesity-related chronic inflammation causes reduced macrophage activation and blunts proinflammatory cytokine production upon macrophage stimulation [7] . the reduced macrophage activation by viral infection may explain the poor vaccination response in obese patients. moreover, b-and t-cell responses are impaired in individuals with obesity with numerical and functional alterations of lymphocytes, and these alterations may increase susceptibility to viral infection. thus, this dysregulated proinflammatory response contributes to the severe lung lesions seen during the covid-19 pandemic [6] . based on this mechanism, individuals with obesity who already have low-level chronic inflammation may be more vulnerable to cytokine storms by covid-19 infection.to curb these cytokine storms in covid-19 patients, anti-inflammatory treatment may be beneficial. however, the use of anti-inflammatory treatments can be a doubleedged sword. anti-inflammatory medications, such as corticosteroids, may delay the elimination of the virus and increase the risk of secondary infection, especially in those with impaired immune systems. some proinflammatory cytokine antagonists (for example, il-6 antagonists) can only inhibit specific inflammatory factors and, thus, may eliminate adverse effects of cytokine storms without preventing the effects of other inflammatory cytokines in removing sars-cov-2 from the infected organs. a recent study showed that colchicine treatment had a beneficial effect in adults with obesity and metabolic syndrome in reducing il-6 [8] , which may translate to a beneficial effect in people with obesity and covid-19 infection. however, anti-inflammatory medications, such as janus kinase inhibitors, which were recently reported to treat covid-19 patients, can inhibit a variety of inflammatory cytokines including interferon-α, which plays an important role in suppressing virus activity, and, thus, may not be suitable for treatment of inflammatory cytokine storms caused by covid-19 [9] .given the viral nature of cytokine storms and the substantial impairment of immune systems in severe cases, it is critical to strike a balance between up-and downregulation of inflammatory markers for immune homeostasis. in addition, starting anti-inflammatory treatment at the right time is of pivotal importance and should be tailored in individual patients to achieve the most favorable effects.the combined use of anti-inflammatory and antiviral drugs may be applied as well. as we mentioned above, some anti-inflammatory therapies may increase viral replication. on the other hand, antiviral treatment to inhibit sars-cov-2 replication and block sars-cov-2 infection may induce proinflammatory cytokine production [10] . therefore, additional large-cohort studies are required to substantiate or dismiss this possibility before applying clinical trials.there are a few studies suggesting that individuals with obesity may be at higher risk of poor outcomes from covid-19 by hyperinflammation. the inflammatory response may be uncontrolled due to malfunctioning or exhausted immune cells, such as b and t cells and macrophages, in those with obesity and low-level chronic inflammation [7] . therefore, further large-scale studies are needed to confirm the role of obesity-induced inflammation in the pathogenesis of covid-19. in this context, a wide variety of strategies such as increased vigilance, early detection and testing, and aggressive treatment should be established for patients with obesity and covid-19 infection.therapeutic approaches to mitigate the severe acute lung injury associated with severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2) infection have rapidly entered clinical trials primarily on anecdotal observations and few clinical studies. along with the clinical symptoms related to viral invasion, the reported molecular response known as the cytokine storm has attracted the greatest attention, in both the scientific and the lay press, as a cause of organ injury. the hypothesis that quelling this storm with anti-inflammatory therapies directed at reducing interleukin-6 (il-6), il-1, or even tumour necrosis factor α (tnfα) might be beneficial has led to several ongoing trials. anecdotal evidence from non-controlled clinical trials has suggested a possible beneficial effect, and anti-il-6 has been shown to be effective in chimeric antigen receptor t (car-t) and cytokine response syndrome (crs). 1,2 however, past attempts in randomised clinical trials to block the cytokine storm associated with other microbial infections and with sepsis have not been successful and, in some cases, have worsened outcomes. 3, 4 redundancy of cytokine action, delayed intervention, and the essential role of these cytokines in recovery and immune surveillance have all been proposed as possible explanations for these findings.the first reports from china emphasised elevated plasma concentrations of il-6 and provided a rationale for the introduction of anti-il-6 therapies (tocilizumab and sarulimab) in randomised clinical trials. 5, 6 however, closer examination of plasma il-6 concentrations has provided conflicting data. results from early studies suggested that plasma il-6 concentrations, although elevated (hundreds of picograms per µl) above values obtained from healthy control patients, were modest, especially when compared with the cytokine storm associated with septic shock, in which concentrations might be in the high hundreds to thousands of picograms per µl. although more recent controlled studies indicate that plasma il-6 concentrations can be in the range seen in bacterial infections, the time course of change is very different; in some cases, concentrations in patients with coronavirus disease 2019 (covid-19) seem to increase over time with illness severity and worsening lung function. 6 these dynamics clearly distinguish the sars-cov-2 host response from that seen in sepsis. additionally, previous sepsis studies established that il-6 concentrations might be an indicator of the magnitude of the inflammatory response rather than the cause of organ injury. 7 therefore, it is important to ask whether current therapeutic approaches are only targeting symptoms or are modulating the disease itself.little is known about the concentrations of other proinflammatory or anti-inflammatory mediators in patients with covid-19, the landscape of the cytokine storm, and especially the chemokines that regulate the distribution and activity of effector cell populations. interpreting changes in cytokine concentrations-all seem to be elevated-without additional immune cellular parameters does not provide clarity about the molecular basis of covid-19 or potential treatment strategies. indeed, when measured in patients infected with sars-cov-2, il-10 concentrations (the most immunosuppressant cytokine in the body) are also elevated, which might lead to a different conclusion for therapeutic approaches and in understanding the disease pathophysiology. similarly, there is concern that suppressing the innate and adaptive immune system to address increased cytokine concentrations, such as elevated il-6, could enable unfettered viral replication, suppress adaptive immunity, and delay recovery processes.lost in the current enthusiasm for anti-inflammatory approaches to sars-cov-2 infection is the growing recognition that potent immunosuppressive mechanisms are also prevalent in such patients. this focus is reminiscent of that seen in the early investigations of sepsis-induced inflammation, since it was nearly a decade later that the contribution of immune suppression to sepsis pathology was generally accepted. profound lymphopenia (low absolute lymphocyte counts, alc), often to levels seen in septic shock, is a near uniform finding in severely ill patients with covid-19 and correlates with increased secondary infections and mortality. 8, 9 this loss of immune effector cells occurs in all lymphocyte subsets, including cd8+ and natural killer cells, which have important antiviral roles, and b cells, which are essential for making antibodies that inactivate the virus. [10] [11] [12] autopsy results have revealed a near complete dissolution of some secondary lymphoid organs. 13 unsurprisingly, secondary nosocomial infections, often with pathogens usually associated with immune suppression, are present in up to 50% of hospitalised patients. 8 this early immunological picture of sars-cov-2 infection is one that shares many similarities with bacterial sepsis, but some unique differences should be noted (figure). in particular, the modest inflammatory response and the progressive and profound suppression of adaptive immunity in covid-19 relative to sepsis argues for perhaps a different therapeutic approach. supporting host protective immunity must be considered as an essential component of any therapeutic intervention, of equal importance to or perhaps greater importance than targeting the cytokine storm.what is the most rational approach to supporting host protective immunity? several immune stimulants in the clinical armamentarium are available for patients infected with sars-cov-2. focusing on agents that target adaptive immunity in general, and t-cell function in particular, appears to be the most rational approach, based on the observation of progressive loss of t cells. 12, 14 programmed death ligand pathway (eg, pd-1) inhibitors, such as nivolumab and pembrolizumab, have been game changers in cancer and some other viral infections. 15, 16 t cells from patients with covid-19 show evidence of t-cell exhaustion associated with increased cd279 (pd-1) expression. 11, 12 in addition to checkpoint inhibitors, the pluripotent cytokine il-7 has been effective in multiple other viral infections. [17] [18] [19] early clinical trials of both treatments have been initiated in sepsis and shown to be safe and to have biological activity. 20 il-7 has shown benefit in raising lymphocyte counts in septic patients with low alc 20 and in restoring protective immunity in jc virus-induced progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy. 18, 19, 21, 22 its effectiveness, and that of other immune stimulants, has only begun to be explored in sepsis, and should be considered in sars-cov-2 infection. although immune stimulants such as il-7 or nivolumab could theoretically feed the cytokine storm, both have been given to patients with sepsis with il-6 concentrations similar to that in patients with covid-19, without exacerbation of inflammatory responses. 15 randomised clinical trials based on the best observational findings remain paramount to moving forward, and we would propose starting with il-7. because of the complexity of the host response and the fact that monotherapies have not worked in sepsis trials in the past, we suggest that priority be given to biological response modifiers that are pluripotent (such as il-7) or combination therapies that target multiple immunological pathways simultaneously (il-7 and anti-pd-1).what has treating patients with sepsis taught us about treatment approaches for patients with covid-19? like sepsis, antimicrobials (antivirals in this case) and supportive therapies are likely to remain the bedrock of therapeutic interventions for sars-cov-2 infection. however, if sars-cov-2 infection is similar to other chronic inflammatory and immune suppressive diseases, such as sepsis, we argue that immune stimulants, and not anti-inflammatory agents, should be considered as the first-line treatment option. however, we fully recognise that the pathophysiology and mechanisms of sars-cov-2 are still being elucidated, and that there is great uncertainty in predicting the efficacy of current therapeutic approaches. we are only just starting to explore the interplay of virus-mediated endothelial damage, pathogen-receptor signalling effects (including ace2), and alterations in haemostasis and coagulation as a basis for the heterogeneous clinical pathologies seen in patients. undeniably, there might be a subset of patients with exaggerated proinflammatory cytokine release that could derive benefit from anti-il-6 or anti-il-1 therapies. however, until better methods are available to determine (among the heterogeneity in clinical phenotypes) which patients meet these criteria, it will be difficult to establish a benefit. observations from clinical centres dealing with large volumes of patients with covid-19, show compelling evidence that patient mortality is directly related to multiorgan failure, including coagulopathy and probably damage to the endothelium. these patients also have altered immune function, as shown by lymphopenia. we suspect that a balanced, biologically plausible approach would be to provide anti-inflammatory treatment early in the disease course coupled with antiviral therapies, such as remdesivir. however, as the disease transitions to a suppressed state, therapies that restore host protective immunity should be considered a high priority for patients in intensive care with progressing lung injury. what else needs to be considered? first, better methods are needed to assess the functional status of immune cells in patients with covid-19. circulating cytokine concentrations might reflect the degree of systemic inflammation but are not indicative of the functional state of individual lymphocyte and myeloid populations. readily applicable tests that inform on whether the adaptive immune system is exhausted or whether myeloid cells are activated or tolerant would better guide application of drugs that can appropriately modulate the immune response. it would also enable balanced immune therapies targeted to either innate or adaptive immune cells. this approach is being used in cancer immunotherapy today and is being tested in the treatment of sepsis. this balanced therapeutic approach will allow precise deployment of inhibitory (anti-il-6 and anti-il-1) or restorative (il-7 and checkpoint inhibitors) therapies, probably all as adjuvants to antiviral drugs.second, we need better measures of viral load with a rapid turnaround time. we recognise that our ability to identify and quantitate bacterial infections in patients with sepsis is still quite rudimentary, and quantifying viral loads by qpcr has not provided the required precision, which has hindered our ability to assess the effectiveness of interventions.most importantly, in designing and conducting interventional trials in patients with covid-19, we need to remember the lessons learned from the ongoing sepsis epidemic that kills 250 000 people annually in the usa. inflammation is often transitory, and the surviving sepsis campaign has shown that earlier recognition and more immediate implementation of best practices can reduce early mortality and organ injury due to the cytokine storm. conversely, immune suppression is prolonged, progressive, and ultimately lethal. effective treatment of patients in this pandemic needs to be balanced, to be administered with precision to individual patients, and to build on our knowledge of past failures so that we can achieve future successes. scb reports other support from revimmune and bristol myers squibb, outside of the submitted work. bf reports personal fees from biomérieux, aridis, ashai-kasai, polyphor, am-pharma, ferring, inotrem, enlivex, and transgene, outside of the submitted work. csd reports grants from national institute of general medical sciences (nigms), other support from enlivex, and non-financial support from la jolla pharmaceuticals, outside of the submitted work. rsh is the principal investigator on a clinical trial of il-7 in sepsis, has received reimbursement for travel and lodging expenses for a steering committee meeting, and reports grants from nigms. llm reports grants from nigms, outside of the submitted work. ker, rj, td, gm, and p-fl declare no competing interests.we recently read with interest the article by acharya et al. entitled "sars-cov-2 infection leads to neurological dysfunction" (acharya et al. 2020) . they have reviewed current literature on the neurological complications and manifestations of covid-19, however, they were able to identify only a very limited number of studies. in fact, in our latest paper, we have provided a deeper insight on the pathophysiology of the central nervous system involvement of covid-19 and discussed that neuropsychiatric manifestations related covid-19 might be associated with the involvement of both direct viral transmission and neuroimmune response (yesilkaya and balcioglu 2020) . latter includes heightened systemic proinflammatory response which is closely associated with so-called cytokine storm, a well-known phenomenon led by sars-cov-2 infection.as viral replication progressively decreases during the latter days of infection, the pathogenesis of covid-19 has been thought to be predominantly related to an aggressive inflammatory response. thus, the intense release of proinflammatory cytokines (viz cytokine storm) in the host leads to diffuse alveolar damage, severe hypoxemia, and promotes the development of fatal secondary sepsis (serrano-castro et al. 2020) . even though the cytokine storm has been a well-defined condition in many viral infections including influenza and coronavirus (liu et al. 2016) , our appreciation of its effects on the central nervous system (cns) has remained limited.the primary targets for sars cov-2 are respiratory epithelial cells and alveolar macrophages. following the infection of respiratory cells, rapid production and release of many chemokines and cytokines initiate. macrophages are activated by such proinflammatory chemokines and cytokines, and other key components of the innate immune system, dendritic cells, lead to a more extensive immune response that initiates the cytokine storm. circulating chemokines attract more inflammatory cells to make them migrate from blood vessels into the site of inflammation, and these cells release additional chemokines/cytokines which amplify cytokine storm (liu et al. 2016) . although tnf-α, il-1, and il-6 are primary cytokines of the acute immune response and the interferons are key cytokines for antiviral immune response, the excessive response of these proinflammatory mediators have been considered major triggers of sepsis and multiorgan failure (unal et al. 2020 ). on the other hand, the cns might be the first affected organ due to a compromised blood-brain barrier which is closely associated with increased circulating levels of cytokines. these cytokines induce the production of reactive oxygen species through a stimulation of astrocytes and glial cells (meneses et al. 2019) .reactive oxygen species and peripheral cytokines activate two different types of microglia; microglia-1 (m1) and microglia-2 (m2). while m1 involve in inflammatory processes in the cns, m2 are responsible for the antiinflammatory processes. thus, m1 activation results in an increase of proinflammatory cytokines and m2 initiate the astrogliosis in order to cns protection. all of these opposite reactions induced by sars-cov-2 may cause a cns dysfunction that becomes apparent as encephalopathy. another pathologic reaction related to sars-cov-2 might involve in sensorial (olfactory) nerves. olfactory nerves are activated by pathogen-associated molecular patterns (pamps) and inflammatory cytokines. the viral transmission in the olfactory bulb leads a neuroinflammatory response through an excessive release of cytokines to protect the cns. therefore, anosmia, an initial symptom of covid-10, might be a result of such neuroinflammatory response (meneses et al. 2019 ).despite the arguments identified above, our knowledge is still limited to what extent such neuroinflammatory reactions does sars-cov-2 associate with. we would like to emphasize the importance of long term follow-up and neuropsychiatric monitoring should be performed in patients with covid-19. psychoneuroimmunological characteristics of covid-19, which seem to be key for the neurological involvement of the disease still needs to be elucidated, indeed.conflict of interest the authors declared no potential conflicts of interest with respect to the research, authorship, and/or publication of this article.impact of sars-cov-2 infection on the onset and progression of neurodegenerative and neuropsychiatric diseases of neuroinflammatory origin should be regarded as the potential cause of a delayed pandemic that may have a major public health impact in the medium to long term. cognitive and neuropsychological function should be closely monitored in covid-19 survivors. © 2020 sociedad española de neurología. published by elsevier españa, s.l.u. this is an open access article under the cc by-nc-nd license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/ 4.0/).covid-19; sars-cov-2; neuroinflamación; enfermedades neurodegenerativas; enfermedades neuropsiquiátricas; tormenta de citoquinas influencia de la infección sars-cov-2 sobre enfermedades neurodegenerativas y neuropsiquiátricas: ¿una pandemia demorada?introducción: la infección por el coronavirus sars-cov-2 originada en diciembre de 2019 en la región china de wuhan ha adquirido proporciones pandémicas. a día de hoy ha ocasionado más de 1,7 millones de contagios y más de 100.000 muertes en todo el mundo. la investigación científica actual se centra en el mejor conocimiento de la infección aguda y de sus estrategias terapéuticas. dada la magnitud de la epidemia, planteamos una revisión especulativa sobre las posibles consecuencias en patología neurológica a medio/largo plazo, con especial atención a enfermedades neurodegenerativas y neuropsiquiátricas con base neuroinflamatoria, teniendo en cuenta la evidencia directa de afectación neurológica a causa de la infección aguda.in december 2019, a new coronavirus was detected in the q4 chinese city of wuhan in association with a life-threatening severe acute respiratory syndrome (sars). [1] [2] [3] the world health organization (who) named this novel virus sars-cov-2 due to its similarities with sars-cov in terms of virology and clinical expression. the latter virus caused a syndrome of similar characteristics and also originated in chinese animal markets, in 2003.sars-cov-2 rapidly spread across the world; as a result, the who declared the associated disease a pandemic on 11 march 2020. at the time of writing this article, sars-cov-2 has infected over 1.7 million people in more than 200 countries and has caused over 100 000 deaths; however, these figures are probably underestimated. 4 according to the who, the official name of the disease caused by sars-cov-2 is coronavirus disease .human coronaviruses whose natural reservoir or source of transmission is wild animals (e.g., bats) can be classified as low-pathogenic (hcov-229e, hcov-nl63, hcov-oc43, and hcov-hku1) or highly pathogenic. the latter category includes sars-cov, which caused the 2003 outbreak; mers-cov, which caused the 2012 outbreak of middle east respiratory syndrome (mers); and the recently described sars-cov-2. the last 3 viruses are categorised as ␤cov.␤cov have become a major public health problem due to their high pathogenicity and infectivity. during the 2002-2003 outbreak, sars-cov infected approximately 8400 people, with a mortality rate of 9.6%. 5 mers-cov infected a total of 1936 people and caused 690 deaths, which corresponds to a mortality rate of 36%. 6 sars-cov-2 infection can be asymptomatic, but certain risk groups may develop severe, highly lethal syndromes characterised by severe respiratory involvement; bilateral atypical pneumonia associated with severe respiratory dysfunction secondary to diffuse alveolar damage constitutes the pathological hallmark in these cases. sars-cov-2 can also infect other organs and cell types over the course of the disease, including intestinal mucosa cells, renal tubular cells, lymphatic cells, reticuloendothelial cells, and nervous system cells. 7the virus' capacity to infect the nervous system is the subject of the present review. we address the hypothesis that sars-cov-2 infection may cause neurological symptoms in the medium term and analyse its potential impact on neurodegenerative processes.the clinical expression of sars-cov infection, which has served as a model for understanding sars-cov-2 infection due to the similar infectivity mechanisms (e.g., angiotensinconverting enzyme 2 [ace2]), comprises 3 stages. the initial stage is characterised by high viral replication, with fever, cough, and general discomfort of several days' duration. the second stage is associated with high fever, hypoxaemia, and progression of respiratory symptoms to bilateral pneumonia, although laboratory analyses reveal lower rates of viral replication toward the end of this stage. 8 in the third stage, approximately 20% of patients develop sars, which is frequently fatal. 9,10 as viral replication progressively decreases during the final stage, the pathogenesis of sars is thought to be explained by an exacerbated inflammatory response in the host (the so-called ''cytokine storm''), which causes diffuse alveolar damage and severe hypoxaemia, promoting the development of fatal secondary sepsis.to understand the inflammatory response to cov infection, we must first understand the human immune response to viral infection. due to the very recent appearance of sars-cov-2, there is a total lack of immunological memory of this antigen in the community: the human immune system had never previously encountered this type of coronavirus. in these situations, the innate immune system is the first line of defence. in fact, it is an excessive, dysregulated innate immune response that may explain the severity of the associated symptoms. 11, 12 sars-cov invades such haematopoietic stem cells as dendritic cells, monocytes, and macrophages, inducing lowlevel expression of antiviral cytokines (eg, ifn-␣␤) and upregulation of pro-inflammatory cytokines (tnf, il-6) and inflammatory chemokines (ccl3, ccl5, ccl2, cxcl10). 13 in contrast, patients with sars-cov infection and sars show extremely low levels of anti-inflammatory cytokines such as il-10 14 and high levels of ifn-␣ and ifn-␥ and inflammatory chemokines cxcl10 and ccl2 compared to patients with pneumonia, which suggests that ifn plays a role in the immunopathogenesis of sars in humans. 14 at the time of writing, few published studies have addressed the dynamics of the cytokine storm in the context of sars-cov-2 infection. very recently, chen et al. 15 reported that severe sars-cov-2 infection is associated with lymphocytopaenia (with low levels of cd4 + and cd8 + t cells but normal b cell levels); increased levels of cytokines il-6, il-2r (soluble il-2 receptor), il-10, tnf-␣, and ccl2; and reduced expression of ifn-␥ in cd4 + t cells. il-6, il-2r, il-10, and tnf-␣ levels are slightly elevated or remain within the normal range in patients with moderate symptoms of covid-19, but are high in severe cases (fig. 1) . the researchers suggest that the cytokine storm is associated with severe covid-19, similarly to the observations reported for sars-cov infection. an important question is whether the neuroinflammatory response is a short-term occurrence, or rather it persists under certain circumstances. immune dysregulation may persist after infection in the form of persistent inflammation, immunosuppression, and catabolism syndrome (pics). this immune state is thought to be triggered by a cytokine storm during acute infection, such as covid-19, and results from continuous release of endogenous alarmins or danger-associated molecular patterns (damp) from damaged organs. this leads to chronic systemic inflammation and a shift from production of bone marrow stem cells to myeloid cells, which promotes chronic anaemia and lymphocytopaenia. 16 for obvious reasons, conclusive data on the possibility of persistent inflammation in covid-19 survivors are not available; however, this hypothesis is plausible considering that pics is associated with severity of acute infection.the cytokine storm has devastating effects on the respiratory system, and is largely responsible for the fatal outcomes of the disease. from a neurological viewpoint, however, it would be interesting to determine whether the cytokine storm occurring during the final stage of the disease may cause acute or subacute central nervous system (cns) involvement. poyiadji et al. 17 recently reported the case of a woman with covid-19 who, after several days with fever, cough, and altered mental status, presented acute necrotising haemorrhagic encephalopathy; this rare condition is associated with intracranial cytokine storm and blood-brain barrier disruption, but without direct viral invasion.the available evidence suggests that chronic neuroinflammation associated with high levels of cytokines/chemokines is involved in the pathogenesis of such neurodegenerative diseases as multiple sclerosis (ms), parkinson's disease, alzheimer disease, huntington disease, and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. 18 the immune mechanisms that trigger the cytokine storm typical of sars are frequently involved in the pathogenesis and progression of a wide range of neurodegenerative diseases.in alzheimer disease, for example, the presence of proinflammatory cytokines (mainly il-1 and il-6) inhibits beta amyloid (a␤) phagocytosis by microglial cells, which leads to pathogenic a␤ deposition. 19 this observation supports the hypothesis that the persistence and accumulation of amyloid plaques in vivo may be a direct consequence of neuroinflammation. furthermore, patients with alzheimer disease display greater numbers of il-1␣ microglial cells in cortical layers presenting amyloid plaque deposition. 20 in patients with parkinson's disease, inflammatory mediators (including tnf, il-1␤, il-6, and ifn-␥) have been found in the csf and in brain tissue studied post mortem. 21, 22 in another study, monkeys with mptp-induced parkinsonism continued to show elevated tnf levels one year after mptp administration, which suggests that tnf may play a role in neuronal death in toxic parkinsonism. 23 post mortem studies reveal increased expression of proinflammatory cytokines (ifn-␥, tnf, il-2, and il-22) and molecules involved in sustained b-cell activity and lymphoid neogenesis (cxcl13, cxcl10, lt␣, il-6, and il-10) in the meninges and csf of patients with ms displaying high levels of meningeal inflammation. a similar proinflammatory pattern (increased levels of cxcl13, tnf, ifn-␥, cxcl12, il-6, il-8, and il-10) has been observed in the csf of patients with ms showing severe grey matter damage at the time of diagnosis. these findings may support the role of neuroinflammation in the neurodegenerative phase of ms. 24 interestingly, neuroinflammation has also been found to play a major role in the pathogenesis of psychiatric diseases. neuroinflammation can induce changes in neurotransmitter metabolism, cause hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis dysregulation, activate the microglia, alter neuroplasticity, and trigger structural and functional changes in the brain that may affect cognition and behaviour. proinflammatory cytokine dysregulation constitutes the starting point for the disruption of these systems, explaining the pathogenesis of affective disorders and such other disorders as schizophrenia, bipolar disorders, and substance abuse, especially alcohol abuse. 25 the hypothesis that neuroinflammation plays a major role in the pathophysiology of acute neurological symptoms is increasingly accepted. for instance, the involvement of neuroinflammation in the pathogenesis of epileptic seizures and epileptic syndromes is widely acknowledged; in this case, it is secondary to microglial and astrocyte activation through the release of such inflammatory markers as il-1␤, il-6, and tnf in various brain regions, including the hippocampus and the neocortex. 26 lastly, neuroinflammation is known to play a role in the pathogenesis of a wide range of neurological diseases, including immune-mediated or postinfectious encephalitis, cerebrovascular disease, and peripheral nervous system disorders. strikingly, however, the immune response varies with age among patients with sars-cov-2 infection, with older individuals displaying greater severity. the innate immune response is less efficient in older age, which makes these patients more vulnerable to infection. 27 numerous studies suggest that a proinflammatory environment promotes the development of age-related diseases, and an association has been demonstrated between immunosenescence, neuroinflammation, and neurodegeneration, as is observed in alzheimer disease, where microglial dysfunction results in a␤ accumulation and the loss of peripheral immune response. 28 given all this evidence, the nervous system seems to be a target for neuroinflammatory mechanisms. in the light of the above, special emphasis should be placed on understanding the effects of sars-cov-2 infection on the development and progression of neurodegenerative diseases.we should also be aware of the possibility that in the long term, the infection may be associated with cognitive and psychiatric disorders in children and adolescents, despite its seemingly mild course in these population groups. the immunological alterations associated with sars-cov-2 infection may alter synaptic pruning during childhood and adolescence, causing problems that will only become apparent in adulthood.the question of whether sars-cov-2 is neuroinvasive is an important line of research. we are beginning to see published evidence on the subject.the molecular mechanisms underlying cell invasion by sars-cov-2 are associated with the virus' capacity to bind to ace2 receptors, similarly to sars-cov. ace2 receptors are highly expressed in epithelial cells of the respiratory and digestive systems, [29] [30] [31] [32] as well as in neurons and glial cells in the cns, which makes the cns a potential target for sars-cov-2. 33 furthermore, sars-cov has been shown to induce neuronal death in mice after invading the cns via the cribriform plate of the ethmoid bone and subsequently the olfactory neuroepithelium. 34 sars-cov-2 may also enter the cns via the haematogenous route. the virus has been detected in the general circulation. in the light of this, and given the slow flow of blood through the cerebral microcirculation, the virus may interact with ace2 receptors expressed in the capillary endothelium. 30 interestingly, this mechanism may also be involved in the endothelial damage and subsequent cerebral bleeding observed in patients with acute covid-19.furthermore, preliminary evidence suggests that the neuroinvasive potential of sars-cov-2 may have prognostic implications even in the acute phase. it has been hypothesised that death due to severe respiratory involvement is at least partially mediated by central hypoventilation syndrome secondary to invasion of the cns. 35 a retrospective review of 214 consecutive patients with covid-19 from wuhan reports neurological symptoms in 36.4% of the sample; most of the patients with neurological manifestations had severe covid-19, and the most frequently reported neurological symptoms were impaired consciousness, acute stroke (both ischaemic and haemorrhagic), and skeletal muscle damage. 36 some patients with sars-cov-2 infection have subsequently displayed evidence of cns invasion. using genome sequencing, researchers at beijing ditan hospital detected +model impact of sars-cov-2 infection on neurodegenerative and neuropsychiatric diseases 5 q1 sars-cov-2 in the csf of a patient with covid-19 and clinical encephalitis. 37 it is yet to be determined whether sars-cov-2 remains in the cns in the medium or long term. however, viral latency in the cns has been described for other viruses, including some coronaviruses. for instance, hcov-oc43 was detected in the cns over a year after inoculation in a murine model of coronavirus encephalitis. 38 the question of how the virus is able to persist in the cns is subject to debate. it has been suggested that the cytolytic and inflammatory strategies that are effective in controlling viral infection of other organs cannot be employed by the immune system in the brain due to their potentially devastating consequences. as a result, a different type of immune response is induced in the cns, favouring viral latency in the cns and reactivation in favourable situations. 39 we cannot rule out the possibility that sars-cov-2 may remain latent in the cns. if it does, we may observe delayedonset neurological symptoms due to viral reactivation in the medium or long term, which may result in reactivation of the series of neuroinflammatory processes associated with neurodegenerative disease.sars-cov-2 infection may have an indirect effect on the cns, and specifically on the development of neurodegenerative diseases. in recent years, a strong association has been described between the gut microbiota, neuroinflammation, and cns diseases. sars-cov-2 is known to infect intestinal mucosa cells, triggering inflammation and intestinal dysbiosis, potentially resulting in short-and long-term alterations in the gut microbiota that may contribute to neuroinflammation, leading to neurodegeneration and the development of neurodegenerative diseases. 40the covid-19 pandemic represents the greatest public health problem in recent history, not only due to its high spreadability and lethality but also because of its potential health consequences in the medium and long term.there is evidence that the nervous system may not escape infection, and could become a major focus in the future.a recent spanish-language review on the topic focused on conditions directly associated with sars-cov-2 infection. 41 our study provides complementary data, addressing the incidence of other neurological diseases of neuroinflammatory origin.sars-cov-2 infection triggers a cytokine storm whose effects on the cns may have unpredictable consequences in both the short and the long term. numerous neurological diseases are known to have a neuroinflammatory component involving the same factors that are stimulated during the final stage of covid-19. a matter of particular interest is the impact that these molecular mechanisms may have on the development and progression of such neurodegenerative diseases as alzheimer disease, parkinson's disease, or the neurodegenerative phase of ms, as well as on psychiatric disorders, especially affective disorders, whose pathogenesis has recently been found to involve neuroinflammatory mechanisms. surviving patients with severe covid-19 should undergo close cognitive and psychiatric follow-up; this is particularly important considering that neuroinflammatory dysregulation may persist in severe cases, leading to pics.furthermore, sars-cov-2 has a direct neuroinvasive potential. previous experience with sars-cov may help us to understand the mechanisms by which sars-cov-2 may infect the cns. special emphasis should be placed on understanding the virus' behaviour in the cns. if sars-cov-2 remains latent in the cns, as occurs with other coronaviruses, we cannot rule out the persistence or exacerbation of the inflammatory cascade, which may promote the development and progression of neurodegenerative diseases.we are aware that this review is highly speculative. however, should the hypotheses presented here prove to be true, covid-19 may lead to a neurological pandemic in the medium term: cns infection may accelerate the onset of neurodegenerative diseases in genetically or environmentally predisposed individuals and cause direct effects on the cns as a result of the neuroinflammatory response.we must not consider the pandemic to be irrelevant to the field of neurology. on the contrary, covid-19 will have a direct impact on our specialty in the near future, affecting both clinical and research work.neuro-reca has developed a prospective multicentre research project aimed at gathering cognitive, psychiatric, virological, neurophysiological, and quality of life data from patients surviving severe covid-19 during the first year after hospital discharge. this project endeavours to answer some of the questions posed in this article.the authors declare that they have no conflicts of interest. q5neuro-reca is a research network for clinical and translational neurology funded by the andalusian regional government's department of health and family services (financing programme for biomedical and health science research, development, and innovation; project no. ric-0111-2019). it includes over 90 researchers from 18 neurology healthcare and clinical research centres and preclinical neuroscience research groups from the region of andalusia. neuro-reca is supported by the andalusian molecular biology and regenerative medicine centre (cabimer), the andalusian network for the design and translation of advanced therapies, the spanish society of family and community medicine, and the spanish society of primary care physicians.each year~300 million people contract bacterial or viral pneumonia [1] , which is usually overcome by a local immune/inflammatory response. in severe cases ( figure 1a) , the pathogen overwhelms host defenses, causing massive lung damage and compromising other organs. in some patients, pathological immune activation ('hyperinflammation') occurs in the lungs and systemically [2] . infection and immune-mediated damage can compromise gas exchange, leading to acute respiratory distress syndrome (ards) and the need for mechanical ventilation;other organ systems may also fail. dysregulated immune responses contribute substantially to the global pneumonia death toll of 3 million per year [3] . the clinical picture is similar in coronavirus disease 2019 (covid-19) caused by sars-cov-2, including hyperinflammation in the lungs and other organs, ultimately compromising function and causing high morbidity and mortality [4] [5] [6] [7] . disease-modifying strategies for these conditions include targeting the virus, such as   with  antivirals,  and  preventing  hyperinflammation  with  immunomodulators  or immunosuppressors. here, we propose an approach using the latter strategy of hyperinflammation prevention [8, 9] . specialized cells of the immune/inflammatory response communicate with each other by secreting peptides called cytokines, which amplify the response and restore homeostasis after the threat has receded. however, in hyperinflammation, cytokines and other molecules trigger immune cells to produce even more cytokines, forming a 'cytokine storm' that can damage healthy tissue and overwhelm the host. some patients with covid-19 experience cytokine storm syndrome (css), which is characterized by elevated pro-inflammatory cytokines, including interleukin (il)-6, il-2r, tumor necrosis factor-α, and granulocyte-colony stimulating factor, among others [5, 7, [10] [11] [12] [13] . one proposed immunosuppressive approach to ameliorating css is blocking il-6 signaling. il-6 levels predict covid-19 severity and in-hospital mortality [4, 13, 14] ; monoclonal antibodies against il-6 (siltuximab) and its receptor (tocilizumab and sarilumab) are in clinical trials for covid-19-induced css [15] [16] [17] [18] [19] [20] [21] [22] [23] [24] [25] [26] . however, the utility of antibodies is likely to be restricted by their prohibitive costs and the risks of suppressing antiviral host responses, which include prolonged immunosuppression and potential adverse reactions.another potential target for preventing hyperinflammation is the catecholamine system.catecholamine release precedes hyperinflammation and enhances inflammatory injury by augmenting cytokine production via a self-amplifying process that requires alpha-1 adrenergic receptor ( ⍺ 1 -ar) signaling [27] . in mice, catecholamine synthesis inhibition reduced cytokine responses and increased survival after inflammatory stimuli. the ⍺ 1 -ar antagonist prazosin (at clinically realistic dosages)-but not beta-adrenergic receptor (β-ar) antagonists-offered similar protection, showing that this drug class can prevent cytokine storm syndrome [27] . these preclinical findings provide a rationale for clinical studies that assess whether ⍺ 1 -ar antagonists can prevent css and its sequelae.to date, no controlled trials have studied whether ⍺ 1 -ar antagonism reduces css, ards, or mortality in patients with acute respiratory distress or pneumonia. we therefore conducted a retrospective analysis of two cohorts of hospitalized patients from the marketscan researchdatabase (2007) (2008) (2009) (2010) (2011) (2012) (2013) (2014) (2015) . some patients were taking ⍺ 1 -ar antagonists (doxazosin, alfuzosin, prazosin, silodosin, terazosin, or tamsulosin) to treat chronic conditions unrelated to ards, such as benign prostatic hyperplasia (bph), hypertension, or post-traumatic stress disorder (ptsd). a medication was considered to be in active use on the admission date if the drug's medication possession ratio was ≥50% in the year prior to the admission. due to transitions to medicare coverage at age 65, and because over 90% of ⍺ 1 -ar antagonist users are male (due to bph), we studied 45-to 64-year-old men. we estimated odds ratios (or) and adjusted odds ratios (aor) using logistic regression to relate receipt of ⍺ 1 -ar antagonists to two outcome measures: progression to mechanical ventilation and further progression to in-hospital death.we used profile maximum likelihood to estimate confidence intervals (ci) [28] . reportedp -values use a one-sided wald statistic test with the alternative hypothesis that the treatment reduces risk. models were adjusted for age, fiscal year, prior inpatient admissions, total prior days as an inpatient, and comorbidities identified from healthcare encounters in the prior year:hypertension, ischemic heart disease, acute myocardial infarction, heart failure, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, diabetes mellitus, and ptsd.the first cohort comprised 13,125 patients diagnosed with acute respiratory distress (icd-9 code 518.82), which is often a precursor to ards ( figure 1b) . in this cohort, taking ⍺ 1 -ar antagonists, compared to non-users, was associated with a 22% lower incidence (relative risk reduction) of mechanical ventilation (p ≤ 0.009), and a 38% lower incidence of ventilation and death (p ≤ 0.023). we next specifically assessed the most commonly used ⍺ 1 -ar antagonist, tamsulosin, which is selective for ⍺ 1a and ⍺ 1d receptor subtypes. tamsulosin is used almost exclusively for bph, thus reducing the likelihood of confounding by indication. acute respiratory distress patients taking tamsulosin had a 35% lower incidence of mechanical ventilation and a 55% lower incidence of ventilation and death (p ≤ 0.002 and p ≤ 0.015, respectively). in contrast, β-ar antagonist use did not affect either clinical outcome. the second cohort was 108,956 patients diagnosed with pneumonia, identified by the agency for healthcare research and quality's (ahrq) pneumonia category ( figure 1c ). we found that taking ⍺ 1 -ar antagonists, compared to non-users, was associated with a 13% lower incidence of mechanical ventilation (p ≤ 0.001), and a 16% lower incidence of ventilation and death (p ≤ 0.040). pneumonia patients taking tamsulosin specifically had a 16% lower incidence of mechanical ventilation compared to non-users (no ⍺ 1 -ar antagonist), and a 20% lower incidence of ventilation and death (p ≤ 0.001 and p ≤ 0.042, respectively). as above, β-ar antagonist use did not affect either clinical outcome.all stated results were robust to multiple alternative analysis approaches, including 5:1propensity score matching [30] , restricting the sample to the range with propensity score overlap [29] , using a cochran-mantel-haenszel test, and using non-parametric causal forests [31, 32] .the results of this retrospective clinical study extend preclinical findings to support the hypothesis that ⍺ 1 -ar antagonists may reduce morbidity and mortality in patients at risk for developing cytokine storm syndrome [33] . the fact patients were generally on ⍺ 1 -ar antagonists for reasons unrelated to ards, and our ability to match the groups on a set of observed characteristics, leads to a particularly strong retrospective design. we believe the consequences of an unobserved confounder would be minimal, but it is possible that there are unobserved factors that differ between the exposure groups. thus, randomized prospective trials will be needed to further test this hypothesis, specifically in patients at risk of cytokine storm due to covid-19. in such trials, early administration of ⍺ 1 -ar antagonists prior to development of severe symptoms is required because the goal is to prevent, rather than treat, hyperinflammation.⍺ 1 -ar antagonists with various receptor subtype specificities have been used to treat millions of patients with benign prostatic hyperplasia, hypertension, and other disorders. this history supports their safety profile [34] , although caution is warranted in using any medication for the first time in a new disease such as covid-19. given the poorly understood relationship between covid-19 and hypertension [33] , it is important to note that non-receptor-subtype selective ( ⍺ 1a = ⍺ 1b = ⍺ 1d ) ⍺ 1 -ars, such as prazosin, are used to reduce blood pressure, whereas receptor-subtype selective drugs such as tamsulosin ( ⍺ 1a = ⍺ 1d > ⍺ 1b ) have fewer hemodynamic effects. disclosures: in 2017, the johns hopkins university (jhu) filed a patent application on the use of various drugs to prevent cytokine release syndromes, on which v.s., r.b., n.p., b.v., k.w.k., and s.z. are listed as inventors. jhu will not assert patent rights from this filing for treatment related to covid-19.the pandemic of coronavirus disease 2019 (covid-19) has emerged as a major health crisis, with the severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2) having infected over a million people around the world within a few months of its identification as a human pathogen. initially, sars-cov-2 infects cells in the since december 2019, an acute severe viral infectionivolving primarily the respiratory system has emerged with rapid transmission around the world to over a million people within a few months. named coronavirus disease 2019 by the world health organization 1 , the disease pandemic has resulted in a major health crisis. the pathogen of covid-19 has been attributed to severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2), a novel beta coronavirus closely related to severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus (sars-cov) 2 has resulted in many infections and death throughout the world 3 . unlike those seen in influenza, the morbidity and transmission modality of covid-19 appear more severe and uncontrollable 4 . the primary pulmonary injury and subsequent cardiovascular complications constitute the key pathophysiology of this deadly disease. this review updates and summarizes the pathophysiological features, possible underlying mechanisms, and clinical characteristics of pulmonary and cardiovascular injury of covid-19.the highly contagious virus, sars-cov-2, has been identified as the primary pathogen responsible for the development of covid-19. it belongs to the coronaviridae family 5 . structurally and functionally similar to most members of the betacoranavirus subgroup b, sars-cov-2 ( fig. 1 ) has thought to be descended from a bat gene pool as the seventh member of coronavirus family known to infect humans, and comprises a positive-sense single-stranded rna with 50-200nm in size 6 .among the other 6 coronaviruses capable of causing illnesses, only sars-cov and middle east respiratory syndrome coronavirus (mers-cov) reportedly cause severe disease and fatalities 7 . infection by the other 4 coronaviruses remains asymptomatic or mildly symptomatic in normal people. according to the full-length genome sequencing, sars-cov-2 is 79.5% homologous with sars-cov. like sars-cov, sars-cov-2 infects lung alveolar epithelial cells by receptor-mediated endocytosis in association with angiotensin converting enzyme ii (ace2) 8 . an epidemiological study enrolling 44672 confirmed cases in china has indicated that the overall case-fatality rate of sars-cov-2 was about 2.3% 9 , whereas it was 9.6% (774/8096) in the sars-cov epidemic 10 and 34.4% (858/2494) in the mers-cov outbreak 11 .mortality in italy, spain and france may be higher and closer to that of sars-cov. this may be due to strain variation, yet to be determined. however, in consideration of rapidly increasing numbers of confirmed cases and evidence of human-to-human transmission 12, 13 , the sars-cov-2 infectivity seems to be stronger than sars-cov and mers-cov. ultrastructural examination of sars-cov-2 by cryo-electron microscopy has demonstrated that the binding affinity of sars-cov-2 to ace2 appears approximately 10-to 20-fold higher than sars-cov, structurally explaining why sars-cov-2 has a high contagiousness 14 .in spite of the fact that sars-cov-2 has infected more than a million individuals it is largely unknown how and when the virus has been evolving and interacts with other microorganisms (table 1) in the lung and other vital organs, such as heart and brain.shen, et al. 15 has recently reported a genomic diversity of sars-cov-2 in patients with covid-19. they observed, by meta-transcriptomal sequencing for the bronchoalveolar lavage fluid samples from of covid-19, community-acquired pneumonia, and healthy individuals. they observed a limited polymorphism and diversity in the intra-host setting, and a substantial proportion of bacteria in several covid-19 patients, similar to other patients with non-coronaviral pneumonia. as a common complication of viral infection, especially for respiratory viruses, secondary bacterial infection often results in a significant increase in morbidity or even mortality.indeed, in the retrospective observational study of 85 fatal cases of covid-19, du, et al. 16 reported that in addition to sars-cov-2 infection, simultaneously or secondarily, other pathogens may participate in the covid-19 development and complications, contributing to the severity and mortality of covid-19. thus, co-infection of other pathogens certainly complicates the pathogenesis and management of covid-19.as recommended by who, most countries, including the united states, have adapted similar diagnostic procedures for covid-19 and harvest certain clinical and epidemiologic information for diagnosis ( initially, testing for all other sources of respiratory infection is implemented while assessing epidemiologic factors to assist their diagnosis, including the information as to whether the person has had close contact with a patient with laboratory-confirmed covid-19 within 14 days of symptom onset or a history of travel from affected geographic areas or epicenters within 14 days. the clinical profiles and diagnosis for covid-19 have been well documented to date.however, new evidence is now emerging that this deadly disease is far more mystery than previously thought as many cases appeared atypical and easily misdiagnostic 17 table   2 ). wang et al. 18 suggest that diagnosing the confirmed case should base on suspected case with any one item of pathogenic or serological evidence as following: (1) real-time pcr test positive for sars-cov-2; (2) viral whole genome sequencing showing high homogeneity to the known novel coronaviruses; (3) positive for the specific igm antibody and igg antibody to sars-cov-2 in serum test; or a change of the sars-cov-2-specific igg antibody from negative to positive, or titer rising ≥4 times in the recovery phase above that in the acute phase.sars-cov-2 mainly attacks the respiratory system, clinically characterized by the rapid development of pneumonia, and in severe cases, the acute respiratory distress syndrome (ards) and multiple organ dysfunction syndrome 19 . the death rate remains high in those admitted to the intensive care and on ventilator due to complications of respiratory and cardiac failure 16 in epidemiology, high prevalence of cardiovascular dysfunction has been recently reported in covid-19 patients, especially those with critical medical conditions 29 . in a study of 138 covid-19 patients, 10 patients (7.2%) were diagnosed as acute myocardial injury based on the elevation of high-sensitivity cardiac troponin i (hs-ctni), and 8 of them admitted into the intensive care unit (icu) 12 injury was independently associated with higher risk of in-hospital mortality 27 . hence, early myocardial injury in covid-19 leads to a poor prognosis in covid-19patients.changes of cardiac-specific biomarkers in the peripheral blood have been reported in patients with covid-19. as stated above, hs-ctni acts as one of the specific biomarkers of myocardial injury 37 the binding between sars-cov spike protein and ace2 on the cardiomyocyte surface also triggers the ras-erk-ap-1 pathway and activates the c-c motif chemokine ligand 2 (ccl2, a pro-fibrosis factor) 41 . the above theories are supported by an autopsy report of heart samples from sars patients, in which the presence of sars-cov in the heart was associated with marked down-regulation of ace2 expression as well as a significant increase in macrophage infiltration and interstitial fibrosis, verifying ace2 inhibition is involved in sars-cov-driven myocardial injury 49 .the specific cellular mechanism for sars-cov-2 invading and damaging cardiomyocytes has not been clearly demonstrated yet, but it is probable that sars-cov-2 shares the similar mechanism with its relative sars-cov. a recent study investigated ultrastructure of full-length human ace2 with cryo-em 51 ,indicating that sars-cov-2 also invaded host cells via spike protein trimers binding to an ace2 homodimer. in addition, the interface between the receptor binding domains of spike proteins on sars-cov-2 is quite similar to that between the sars-cov and ace2. furthermore, the serine protease tmprss2 is also indispensable for the entry of sars-cov-2 52 . given that the high similarity of cellular entry with that of sars-cov, it is reasonable to speculate that sars-cov-2 interferes in ace2 expression in the same way. however, this needs to be verified in cardiomyocytes in the further study.myocardial oxygen supply is determined by coronary blood flow and its oxygen carrying capacity while myocardial oxygen demand is determined by systolic wall tension, contractility, and heart rate 53 . this physiological mechanism may be involved in sars-cov-2-induced myocardial injury. as is well-known, pulmonary dysfunction is the primary insult of sars-cov-2, which induces hypoxemia, hypotension and, in some cases, shock 20, 39 . as a consequencet, an insufficient oxygen supply may occur in multiple organs including the heart.concomitantly, myocardial oxygen demand is increased in virus-infection states, as high metabolic rate induces an augmented burden on the myocardium 54 55, 56 . among so many cytokines, il-6 serves as the core of cytokine storm,given that il-6 not only amplifies cytokine storm by stimulating production of other pro-inflammatory cytokines, but also results in vascular leakage, interstitial edema 57 .moreover, il-6 has also been shown to weaken papillary muscle contraction, which causes myocardial dysfunction 58 . in addition, ifnγ is also regarded as a marker of cytokine storm, causing cell apoptosis through regulating jak/stat1 axis and p38-mapk1 59 . however, anti-inflammatory cytokines such as il-4 and il-10 are also increased in covid-19 patients, and their levels are also related to disease severity 55, 56 , demonstrating the close relation between pro-and anti-inflammation. cytokine storm is a clear contributor to covid-19-related myocardial injury, demonstrated by a study that revealed that increased levels of il-6 were significantly associated with high hs-tni levels 26 , a cardiac-selective biomarker of myocardial infarction and injury 37 . further studies are needed to explore the cytokine expression in cardiomyocytes, which will promote a better understanding for sars-cov-2-induced inflammation in cardiac tissue.overall, direct infection through ace2, the imbalance between myocardial oxygen supply and demand, and the abnormal immune response constitute the most plausible explanations for myocardial injury associated with covid-19. to be noted, however, the above speculation is mostly based on clinical observation of covid-19.therefore, more in-depth research is required to understand the pathophysiology of sars-cov-2-induced myocardial injury in order to contribute to the future development of effective treatment.the general clinical symptoms found in covid- 19 suggesting that myocardial inflammation occurred in covid-19 patients 30 . as the cytokine storm and consequent inflammatory response are suggested to be the mechanisms contributing to myocardial injury, low eat density showed in chest ct scan appears to be a high-risk factor for myocardial injury. however, low eat density is not the optimal imaging parameter of covid-19-related myocardial injury since it is an indirect sign of inflammation and may be substantively influenced by subjective factors in clinical practice. other imaging modalities with high sensitivity and specificity such as echocardiography and myocardial magnetic resonance imaging should be preferentially chosen if appropriate.treatment of covid-19 has been mostly restricted to supportive measures as there has been, to date, no specific therapy available to treat this disease. pre-existing poor-health conditions increase the risk of cardiovascular comorbidity, with poorer hydroxychloroquine and chloroquine are traditional anti-malarial and autoimmune disease drugs. they have been shown to control the sars-cov-2 infection in vitro 61, 68 . the underlying mechanism may involve the increase in the endosomal ph required for virus/cell fusion， interference with the glycosylation of ace2 69 the structural evidence of sars-cov-2 invasion of cells via ace2 has led to the hypothesis that acei/arb treatment potentially induces overexpression of ace2, which subsequently increases the susceptibility of host cells to sars-cov-2 invasion and the risk of infection or worsening the severity of disease 80 other therapies with less evidence-based foundation are also worth mentioning.plasma treatment means transfusing convalescent plasma containing anti-virus polyclonal antibodies, and were proved to be effective in treating sars patients and covid-19 patients in observational studies 81, 82 . although the number of patients so treated is small, this does make scientific sense. dilated horse anti-sars-cov-2 serum could cross-neutralize sars-cov-2 in an in vitro study 8  general discomforts, typically fever, fatigue, headache, muscle ache, diarrhea, etc. signs and symptoms of lung and airway abnormalities, typically cough and dyspnea. total white blood cell counts showing normal, decreased, or reduced lymphocyte count in the early onset stage, and increased neutrophils in more advanced cases. real-time pcr test positive for sars-cov-2. viral sequencing showing high homogeneity to sars-cov-2. serum test positive for sars-cov-2 specific igm and igg. chest radiography or ct scan showing multiple mottling and ground-glass opacities with or without consolidation in the lung periphery. . schematic demonstration of the viral injury to the lung and heart triggering the "lung-heart" syndromes with a combination of the respiratory and cardiovascular adverse events and conditions.i agree with the authors that the topic is very important and that there should be speed in this kind of research because covid-19 is a global urgent problem. i reasoned that i will quickly read the manuscript and send comments so that the authors can speedily improve the manuscript, but i will need more time for next reading.the major part of this kind of paper is the methods. background is relatively more important for ethical assessment, whether there is sound biological rational, but background is less essential for the statistical assessment of the protocol. i have only a few comments on the background and i focus mainly on the methods.there is also a discussion section but in my view that should be removed. discussion is needed for the consideration of the results, but there are no results and all the general consideration in this kind of paper should be in the background section.english is a second language for me and i somewhat hesitate to comment other people's language. however, in my view the language is confusing in quite a many parts and in some cases it is difficult to understand the meaning.large part of the background discusses biology. then the authors discuss previous human studies. that part is not objective. the literature description does not need to be very detailed, but it should cover relevant studies that are related to the topic. they do not mention the fujii study that was published in jama well before the submission of this manuscript. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/31950979 that study was negative: "in patients with septic shock, treatment with intravenous vitamin c, hydrocortisone, and thiamine, compared with intravenous hydrocortisone alone, did not significantly improve the duration of time alive and free of vasopressor administration over 7 days." they first describe the positive findings in the citris study on secondary outcomes and only then mention then mention the negative findings on the primary outcome. obviously, the findings on the primary outcome are more relevant and should be described first. the citris study had only 167 icu participants. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/31573637there is a recent meta-analysis that combined the results of 12 trials with 1766 patients and evidently the statistical power to observe differences between vitamin c and control are greater than in the citris trial. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/30934660 another recent meta-analysis pooled eight trials, including 685 patients in total and the power is greater than in the 167 participant citris trial. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/32047636 these three studies are relevant background.page 8, line 19. authors do not state whether 40.5 is sd or se. given the inaccuracy, there is no relevance in the decimals. giving many irrelevant decimals may give an impression that authors do not understand the meaning of the dispersion parameters. if vasopressin duration varies from 96 -40 = 56 hours to 96 + 40 = 136 hours, it is obvious that .13 and .50 and .72 and .29 are irrelevant and just make reading more difficult.objectives should be a short 1-2 (-3) sentences clear statement about what is the goal. "with the very positive results of previously performed clinical trials infusing high-dose vitamin c into patients with severe sepsis and ards, we reasoned that" etc is not relevant in "objectives" risks and adverse effects are discussed on page 10 however, that is under "methods" those issues should in under "bakcground" furthermore, personally i am convinced that vitamin c is safe, but that kind of issue does need justification. page 10 line 11 statement does not have any references line 12-13 no references that kind of statements absolutely need references and preferably more than one. there are also deaths caused by vitamin c, but none are described in the protocol eg https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/25812044 https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/1138591 and https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/31774058 https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/31748360 i do not expect a through literature search of the reported harms of vitamin c, but i dont consider it acceptable that none are cited and discussed.page 9 line 16 "two arms of vc and placebo (sterile water for injection) on the primary outcome of ventilation-free days within 28 (vfd28) observational days."first, "two arms of vitamin c" may indicate that there are two vitamin c arms. this is one example of the difficult language. that can be reordered so that it is not confusing. second, the intervention and outcomes and power calculation have their own subtitles in the methods section and they should not be repeated here. repetition makes text long and frustrating. who is the pi? that is not mentioned here and i dont see elsewhere page 1 states "these authors contributed equally to this work." and refers to 3 personsthe authors do not give any description how the random number list is transferred to the patient level. there is no description of whether there is allocation concealment. if the primary investigator both generates the list, and treats the patients, the situation is somewhat concerning in a non-blinded study.blinding i accept the reasoning that when there is need to be hasty, there is not necessarily time to organize a proper double-blind trial. however, that does not prevent consideration how to minimize the knowledge. for example, the primary investigator could collaborate with the nurses to administer the treatments and then other physicians would remain (at least somewhat) blinded. when a treatment is highly controversial, these kinds of issues are much more critical than for standard drugs. "vc injection and sterile water for injection are both colorless and transparent liquids and will be contained in the same brown syringes with different marks and without explanations on it in order to make sure that patients cannot tell" if so, why cannot the clinicians be blinded?it is difficult to understand this section."an infusion pump with a speed of 12ml/h. the total volume of vc and carrier fluids (sterile water for injection) is 50ml." infusion pump with speed 12 ml/hour and 24 hours, gives 288 ml and not 50 ml. if they use 50 ml with that speed, does that mean 4 hours? "24g vc per day" does that mean 24 grams of vitamin c per 50 ml? that is very concentrated solution."sterile water"what does that mean? essentially always people are using saline (0.9% nacl) as a placebo for vitamin c infusions. as far as i understand, no salt in a sterile water could irritate veins. why do they use such a control? my point is that why should anyone use a variable that is such ambiguous as the ventilation-free-time.why not the duration of ventilation.sample size i cannot make sense of this section. it is confusing. as far as i am used, power calculation can be based on assumed no-treatment baseline and guessed effect upon the baseline, or guessed treatment level.i cannot see what are the data on which the n = 308 is calculated. what are the assumed levels in the two groups, or what is the assumed effect of vitamin c? i cannot also see the rationale for the interim analysis. if they need 308 participants, then they have much random variation when they have just 50 participants. and what are they looking? are they looking at the control group so that they get a more accurate basis for the baseline assumption? they cannot look at the difference between the arms since there is large random variation.page 13, line 10 "the secondary analysis will be a comparison of the primary outcome and secondary outcomes between two groups" what are those two groups?page 13, line 58 "it is able to pause the trial to investigate or give suggestions on potential safety issues to improve study"poor english. does that mean "they are able to stop the trial ..."author names are severely wrong for reference 6, compare with https://jitc.biomedcentral.com/articles/10.1186/s40425-018-0343-9 i think the names are also wrong for references 7 and 21 and 24 and 25 and 32 and 33 and 35 and 36ref 34 is chinese, i dont think that is reasonable for english readers. at most the chinese names could be in brackets.spirit checklist #7 in correct the objectives are described not on 4-6, but on page 6 and the objectives should be revised to be focused #11: incorrect, see my comments abovethere is no description abut these issues in the manuscript #31a the authors write n/a first, n/a is not appropriate here second, in their abstract they do write; "findings of the trial will be disseminated through peer-reviewed journals and scientific conferences." third, why do they not write that in the text section? references 23 and 24 look like they might be the same paper as a lot of overlap in details. overall, editing for english grammar should be carried out.the major part of this kind of paper is the methods. background is relatively more important for ethical assessment, whether there is sound biological rational, but background is less essential for the statistical assessment of the protocol. i have only a few comments on the background and i focus mainly on the methods. there is also a discussion section but in my view that should be removed. discussion is needed for the consideration of the results, but there are no results and all the general consideration in this kind of paper should be in the background section. english is a second language for me and i somewhat hesitate to comment other people's language. however, in my view the language is confusing in quite a many parts and in some cases it is difficult to understand the meaning.reply: thank you for your comments. we try to keep the "discussion section" shorter and put all the related description in the "background section". we asked a native english speaker, who is a medical doctor (md) student in the university of maryland school of medicine (usa), to revise the english grammar. we attached the certificate for english-revising. background 1. the authors discuss previous human studies in the background. that part is not objective. the literature description is too detailed. the fujii study that presented negative results and was published in jama well before the submission of this manuscript was not mentioned in the manuscript. the findings of the primary outcome in the citris study should be described first. besides, two recent meta-analysis were recommended for relevant backgrounds. reply: thank you for your suggestion. we studied the comment carefully and made a large correction based on your comments. firstly, we deleted a lot of unnecessary description of literature. secondly, we have read the fujii study, which investigated the combined therapy of vitamin c, hydrocortisone and thiamine. actually, another reference (ref 29 in the previous draft) cited in this manuscript, which also investigated the combination of these three drugs, was considered as weak evidence to support using vc, and should be deleted suggested by the reviewer 2. the reason is that it is difficult to distinguish which of the components take effects in such a combination therapy. thus, we deleted the reference 29, as what the reviewer 2 suggested, and did not cite the fujii study as well.thirdly, we added the descriptions from the citris study which demonstrated the negative primary outcome, as well as the two meta-analysis (page 5, revised version of the full text). we hope all the revision will make the background more objective and persuasive. 4. risks and adverse events should be under "background" rather than "methods". reply: thank you for your valuable suggestions. we moved the most of the descriptions from "methods" on "risk and adverse events" into "background". besides, we still kept a small part of "risks, adverse events and consent" in the "methods", which is required for clinical trials. we mainly focused on the definition of adverse events and method of vitamin c's administration to minimize the possibility of side effects.5. furthermore, personally i am convinced that vitamin c is safe, but that kind of issue does need justification.page 10 of the previous draft line 11 statement does not have any references line 12-13 no references that kind of statements absolutely need references and preferably more than one. there are also deaths caused by vitamin c, but none are described in the protocol it is not acceptable that no literature of the reported harms of vitamin c is cited and discussed in the "background". reply: we added the literatures on side effects (including death) of vitamin c, and the explanations as well in one paragraph, in the "background" (page 5-6 of the revised draft). 3. why is only active kidney stone mentioned but not other kidney diseases in the exclusion criteria? reply: thank you for your question. the existed severe kidney diseases are also needed to exclude. this is what we did right now. we determined the exclusion criteria initially based on the report from jama in which only active kidney stone was excluded (ref 38 of the revised version). in addition, active kidney stone is a specific side effect of a long-term use of high-dose vitamin c infusion which has been confirmed by the drug instructions, and no any other kidney diseases are listed as side effects in the instructions for vitamin c. however, the drug instructions remind that vitamin c infusion should be applied with caution when patients are with oxalate nephropathy and other severe kidney injury. actually, we didn't take any patients with existed severe kidney injury in our study. we will add this in our exclusion criterion (page 7).4. what do the authors mean by "ae"? "adverse events (ae) and severe adverse events (sae) will be recorded" what event? reply: thank you for your comment. we added the definition of "ae", and "sae". ae is defined as any untoward medical events which occur after a human subject receives a drug. serious adverse events (sae) refers to events which occurs during a subject's participation in research and results in hospitalization, prolonged hospital length of stay, disability, a threat to life or death. both occur during a subject's participation in research and do not have to be a causal relationship with the treatment. thus, the section of ae should still be reserved to ensure the rigor and integrity of the trial. when an untoward event happens, researchers will report it to the dsmb which will define the nature of the event and make a decision to deal with it. all these are added in page 7.5. who is the pi? the authors do not give any description how the random number list is transferred to the patient level. there is no description of whether there is allocation concealment. if the primary investigator both generates the list and treats the patients, the situation is somewhat concerning in a non-blinded study. reply: thank you. the primary investigator is prof. zhiyong peng who is also the corresponding author. we have revised our manuscript and descried the procedure of allocation concealment in more details (page 8). the pi generated two independent random numeric tables, one for the icu of zhongnan hospital of wuhan university and the other for the icu of leishenshan hospital of wuhan city. these tables are kept and carried out by other investigators who are in charge of the drug assignment for participants. when a patient is transferred to the icu, other investigators will be informed by the clinician on duty, and then judge whether the patients achieves the requirement for recruitment. after the patient signs the informed consent, the clinician will get a number from investigators and prescribe the corresponding medication in the medical orders system. so, during the process, the pi does not treat patients. above all, clinician cannot predict which patient will be enrolled to which group, either. we added this in page 8.6. when a treatment is highly controversial, blinding issues are much more critical than for standard drugs. measures should be taken to minimize the knowledge. "vc injection and sterile water for injection are both colorless and transparent liquids and will be contained in the same brown syringes with different marks and without explanations on it in order to make sure that patients cannot tell". if so, why cannot the clinicians be blinded? reply: thank you for your question. in such a pandemic affair, doctors and nurses are in an overloaded state. so, there is not enough medical staff specifically assigned for this trial. however, all the research team responsible for the trial are kept blind when they collect data and run analysis. in order to minimize the bias, the policy of allocation concealment and blinding are strictly followed. the researcher generating the allocation number does not treat patients, and the attending clinician cannot predict and determine which patient will be enrolled to which group. we added this in page 8.7. it is difficult to understand "an infusion pump with a speed of 12ml/h. the total volume of vc and carrier fluids (sterile water for injection) is 50ml."and "24g vc per day". reply: thank you for your comment. we are sorry for our vague expression. each time for infusion, the total volume of 12g vitamin c and the carrier fluid (sterile water for injection) are 50ml. it will be infused through an infusion pump with a speed of 12ml/h and finish in 4 hours. vitamin c will be infused every 12 hours, so the total dosage is 24g/d. we have revised our description in a clearer way (page 8). 9. "corresponding tests should be completed within 24 hours" that is not about study interventions. it should be under some other subtitles. reply: thank you. we have deleted the sentence in "study interventions".10. "this trial lasts for 7 days" is it correct? reply: thank you for your correction. we have revised as "the intervention lasts for 7 days". (page 8)11. "vasopressor days, ventilation days, length of icu stay, length of hospital stay, icu mortality and in-hospital mortality will be recorded during the 28 observational days. afterwards, participants are scheduled for a follow-up visit at the 28th day to track their long-term prognosis, namely 28-days mortality," should be under "outcomes" and not data collection. reply: thank you for your suggestion. we found that these parameters were actually included in the section of "secondary outcomes". so, we deleted this paragraph except "participants are scheduled for a follow-up vise at the 28th day to track their long-term prognosis" (page 9).12. what is the rationale to calculate ventilation-free days rather than ventilation days? reply: thank you for your question. we referred to fowler's study (ref 38) and chose ventilation-free days (vfd28). firstly, vfd28 is proper index to reflect patients' pulmonary and respiratory function. secondly, vfd28 will be recorded in the medical system for every patient so that the data will not be missing when we collect the data of participants. actually there is no difference in clinical meaning between vfd and ventilation days (vd). however, vfd28 excludes the bias induced by the mild patients without ventilation supports (vd=0) or dead patients with short ventilation days.13. the section of sample size is confusing. how is 308 calculated? what is the rationale for the interim analysis. reply: thank you for your question. power calculation should be based on the primary endpoint. however, since this trial began at the early stage of covid-19, such data are lacked. thus, we considered three available variables when calculating the sample size: icu mortality (13.57%), the rate of noninvasive ventilation (41.7%), and the rate of invasive ventilation (47.22%). we used the non-inferiority test formula to calculate the sample size with a one-sided type error rate (α) of 2.5%, a power of 80% and a 10% withdrawal rate in each group according to the three variables respectively. finally, we chose the largest number, namely 308 which was calculated through icu-mortality (13.57), as the sample size of this trial. however, the calculated sample size is not accurate. thus, we arrange an interim analysis for a second stage of calculation. after 50 patients are enrolled and their clinical data including 28-days follow-up visits are collected, we will conduct a complete statistical analysis and get relatively accurate sample size. we think we can get the preliminary data after we have enrolled 50 patients (n=25), and then can revise the sample size based on the preliminary data. we added the explanation in page 9-10.14. "the secondary analysis will be a comparison of the primary outcome and secondary outcomes between two groups". what are those two groups? reply: thank you for your question. there is a missing of definite article "the" before "two groups". "the two groups" refers to the treatment group (vitamin c) and the control group (sterile water for injection). we are sorry for our vague expression (page 10).15. "it is able to pause the trial to investigate or give suggestions on potential safety issues to improve study". poor english. does that mean "they are able to stop the trial ..." reply: thank you for your question. we intended to express that the dsmb is able to stop the trial. "it" refers to the dsmb. we have revised our expression according to your suggestion to make our statement clear (page 11).16. author names are severely wrong for reference 6, 7, 21, 24, 25, 32, 33, 35, and 36. reference 34 is chinese. it is not reasonable for english readers. reply: thank you for your criticism. we are sorry for the typos. we have checked and revised the references. besides, we made a big revision in "background" and deleted the chinese reference.17. comments on the spirit checklist #7 incorrect. the objectives are described not on 4-6, but on page 6. and the objectives should be revised to be focused #11: incorrect. #14 incorrect description of power calculation is very confusing #16b incorrect. no description about whether there is or is not allocation concealment #16c incorrect. there is no description about these issues in the manuscript #31a n/a is not appropriate here. reply: thank you for your careful review and comment. for #7, #11, #14, #16b, #16c, we have stated our reasons or revisions in the above text. for 31a, we are sorry that we misunderstood the meaning of that column. findings of the trial will be disseminated through peer-reviewed journals and scientific conferences. we wrote this statement in the abstract. and we have added it to the "consent for publication" section of "declarations" (page 13).reviewer #2 1. "there is evidence that under some circumstances, high-dose ascorbate given by intravenous injection (hivc) can have substantial oxidant activity, rather than anti-oxidant activity" this is presumed to happen at super high doses for oncology patients rather than icu patients. thus, this statement should be deleted. reply: thank you for your suggestion. we found your comment extremely helpful. we deleted the sentence (page 2).2. the sample size, primary outcome and secondary outcomes don't match what is on clinicaltrials.gov.reply: thank you for your comment. the sample size should be calculated based on the primary endpoints. however, such data are lacked since the covid-19 is a new disease. thus, we initially chosen the sample size based on the pervious studies on ards, and registered in the clinicaltrials website. after we got the 13.57% of icu mortality data from who , we calculated the sample size based on this figure and found that a total of 308 study participants (154 in each group) would result in a power of 80% with a one-sided type-1 error rate (α) of 2.5%, allowing a 10% withdrawal rate in each group. this revised version of the protocol, as well as the first one, has been reviewed and approved by the ethics committee of zhongnan hospital of wuhan university (both were attached to the supplementary files to editors only). we added the detailed description on sample size calculation in the page 9-10.3. reference 16 and 17 are irrelevant here. some reviews would be better. reply: thank you for your suggestion. we have deleted these references and cited reviews instead in this section (page 4).4. reference 27 is not required here. reply: thank you for your correction. it mostly refers to the pharmacology of vitamin c's function of generating ascorbate radical and hydrogen peroxide, which is intended for cancer. we have deleted reference 27 (page 5).5. not sure this trial (ref 29) should be included as was not vitamin c monotherapy, but rather a combination treatment. reply: thank you. we appreciate your insightful comment. we discussed carefully, and decided to delete the study and cited two meta-analysis with large samples to make the background more persuasive.6. "this study showed that higher dosages of vc should be applied"the findings of this trial cannot be used to say that higher doses of vc are requiredthis is not a valid conclusion. reply: thank you for your comment. we revised this sentence (page 5-6).7. "with the very positive results of previously performed clinical trials" -i am not sure this is a valid statement eithershould be less strongly worded as outcomes not definitivemany meta-analyses have been carried out with different conclusions. reply: thank you for your comment. your suggestion is extremely helpful. indeed, the expression is too strongly worded. we changed, and searched more literatures and re-wrote "background" to make it more persuasive and objective. (page 5-6)8. there should only be one primary outcome. reply: thank you for your suggestion. we totally agree with you. we decided ventilation-free days within 28 days (vfd28) as the only primary outcome, because the main goal of our research is to investigate the efficacy of vitamin c on the pulmonary function of patients with covid-19. however, in the early stage of covid-19, the relative data for outcome are lack. we calculated the sample size based on the three variables for outcome (not vfd28) and chosen the appropriate one. as we mentioned in page 8, we can adjust the sample size based on the preliminary data from the trial. the detailed explanation is seen in page 9-10. the responses of authors to the reviewer comments are appropriate and the revised manuscript is satisfactory.i have few small new issues.strengths and limitations section should be independent text. people can read it before (or without) reading the abstract. therefore hivc should be defined.strengths of a trial should not be exaggerated, but neither should they be understated.in the old literature, "single blind" indicated that patients were blinded, but researchers were not. "double-blind" indicated that both researchers and patients were blinded. however, there are several roles of researchers and some of the roles can be blinded while some are not. therefore the current consort recommendations (bmj 2010;340:c869 doi: 10.1136/bmj.c869) instruct that the description of blinding should be specific.in response 6 to reviewer #1, the authors write "all the research team responsible for the trial are kept blind when they collect data and run analysis. in order to minimize the bias, the policy of allocation concealment and blinding are strictly followed. the researcher generating the allocation number does not treat patients, and the attending clinician cannot predict and determine which patient will be enrolled to which group. we added this in page 8."this is much stronger blinding than the "single-blinding" of the old literature. i encourage the authors to explicitly (briefly) describe what roles/stages of the researchers were blinded and remove the term "single-blinded" from "strengths" and also from the methods section.i happened to note that ref 39 is not correct. in the us culture, boys are sometimes given the same names as their fathers. in such case they write 2nd (ii) or 3rd (iii) to the son or grandson. in the recent jama report, the name is "alpha a fowler 3rd" (doi: 10.1001/jama.2019.11825). thus, the "iii" in ref 39 are not initials of middle names. most easy is to remove that.university of otago, christchurch new zealand review returned 08-jun-2020bottom of page 7 -"thus we wonder…" should this not be stated in the terminology of a hypothesisparticularly one that relates more directly to the primary outcome of interest? the wording of this paragraph is a little confusing -particularly the last sentence.objectives page 8 -still mentioning both ventilation free days and murray injury scores as primary outcomes. how can a major objective (#2) be "provide evidence for the treatment of other diseases characterized by cytokine storm and immune dysfunction" -wouldn't this actually have to be tested in these other diseases to provide evidence? this should be deleted as an objectivebut could perhaps be mentioned elsewhere as hypothesis generating (although not being directly tested in this study).study outcomes page 11/12 -murray lung injury score and crp levels have now been deleted as primary outcomes but not included as secondary outcomesis this correctare they no longer going to be measured as outcomes?abstract/introductionpotential attenuation of cytokine storm is mentioned as a likely mechanism of action but there are no cytokines being assessed as secondary outcomes (page 12).i, the submitting author has the right to grant and does grant on behalf of all authors of the work (as defined in the below author licence), an exclusive licence and/or a non-exclusive licence for contributions from authors who are: i) uk crown employees; ii) where bmj has agreed a cc-by licence shall apply, and/or iii) in accordance with the terms applicable for us federal government officers or employees acting as part of their official duties; on a worldwide, perpetual, irrevocable, royalty-free basis to bmj publishing group ltd ("bmj") its licensees and where the relevant journal is co-owned by bmj to the co-owners of the journal, to publish the work in this journal and any other bmj products and to exploit all rights, as set out in our licence.the submitting author accepts and understands that any supply made under these terms is made by bmj to the submitting author unless you are acting as an employee on behalf of your employer or a postgraduate student of an affiliated institution which is paying any applicable article publishing charge ("apc") for open access articles. where the submitting author wishes to make the work available on an open access basis (and intends to pay the relevant apc), the terms of reuse of such open access shall be governed by a creative commons licence -details of these licences and which creative commons licence will apply to this work are set out in our licence referred to above.other than as permitted in any relevant bmj author's self archiving policies, i confirm this work has not been accepted for publication elsewhere, is not being considered for publication elsewhere and does not duplicate material already published. i confirm all authors consent to publication of this work and authorise the granting of this licence. this is the first prospective randomized controlled trial applying hivc to treating covid- 19. hivc has advantages in terms of stability, availability, safety and cost compared to other treatments.the sample size was calculated in a two-stage way in order to ensure the calculation is reasonable, maximize the possibility to obtain significant results and provide credible data on the outcomes.the study is single-blinded since complete blinding is not feasible due to the lack of manpower and material resource in this public emergency.as the duration and distribution of infected cases are unpredictable geographically and temporally, the number of recruitments of each centre is also unpredictable, though competitive enrolment is adopted. at the end of december 2019, an unexplained pneumonia appeared in wuhan, hubei, china. on january 7, 2020, a new type of coronavirus was detected in the laboratory 1 and was later named as severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2) officially by the world health organization (who) on february 11. meanwhile, pneumonia caused by sars-cov-2 infection was named as coronavirus disease 2 . this disease is highly contagious and has been spreading inside and outside china, causing a global threat and panic. as of april 13, 1,773, 084 cases have been confirmed worldwide, 111,652 of which have died 3 .covid-19 is an acute infectious pneumonia. infected cases presented predominantly with fever and cough as well as dyspnea and myalgia. a meta-analysis 4 concluded that among the patients, 32.8% presented with ards, 20.3% of cases were transferred to the intensive care unit (icu) and 13.9% with fatal outcomes. according to our previous research 5 , patients presenting ards accounted for 66.1% in the icu and the rate of mechanical ventilation was as high as 41.7% and 47.22% of noninvasive and invasive way respectively. however, no specific treatment is available at present. it turns out that traditional antiviral drugs, as well as antibiotic therapy which is mainly intended for secondary bacterial infections, does not work well for covid-19. it is urgent to explore effective therapies considering the grim situation.cytokine storm, triggered by a variety of factors such as infections, is a potentially fatal immune reaction associated with clinical symptoms of severe inflammation and highly elevated levels of proinflammatory cytokines of which interleukin (il)-6 plays a vital role 6 7 . when the virus invades, immune cells such as macrophagocytes, lymphocytes and natural killer cells will be activated and produce a mass of cytokines including proinflammatory factors, some of which can activate more immune cells in turn, and anti-inflammatory factors. when the proinflammatory factors gain the advantage and accumulate to a certain level, cytokine storms happen and damage pulmonary capillary endothelium and alveolar structure, causing pulmonary dysfunction 8 . previous studies 9 manifested that cytokine storms may be the main pathophysiological mechanism of highly pathogenic-human coronaviruses (hcovs) infected pneumonia such as severe acute respiratory syndrome (sars) and middle east respiratory syndrome (mers). the autopsy report of a patient with critical covid-19 10 also drew similar conclusions. in the study, they discovered diffuse alveolar damage with cellular fibromyxoid exudates, evident desquamation of pneumocytes and pulmonary oedema with hyaline membrane formation. these findings indicated the patient had developed acute respiratory distress syndrome (ards). in addition, flow cytometric analysis of the peripheral blood showed that the peripheral cd4+t cells and cd8+t cells were in an exhausted state considering that their counts were substantially reduced while their status was hyperactivated, as clinical characteristics of covid-19 also support these conclusions. huang et al first reported the increase of several plasma cytokines in infected cases 11 . further comparison showed that plasma concentrations of il-1beta (β), il-2, il-7, il-10, il-18, granulocyte colony stimulating factor (gcsf), interferon-inducible protein-10 (ip10), monocyte chemotactic protein-1 (mcp1), macrophage inflammatory protein 1 alpha (mip1a), and tumor necrosis factor alpha (tnfα) were higher in icu patients than in non-icu patients, suggesting that cytokine storms may be positively related to the severity of the disease. besides, wan et al summarized 123 cases 12 and found the plasma concentration of il-6 and il-10 were higher in the patients with severe covid-19 than mild cases while the levels of cd4+ and cd8+t cells were lower. the study suggested t cell subsets and cytokines as indicators for predicting prognosis, and indicating the transition from mild to severe cytokine storm. whereafter, an immunopathology report 13 based on 33 patients with covid-19 further detected immunological indices and revealed the possible mechanism of covid-19. the study speculated th1 cell was the key cell and il-6 and granulocytemacrophage colony-stimulating factor (gm-csf) were the main cytokines in the hyper-inflammatory response caused by covid-19, especially for those who were transferred into icus. after sars-cov-2 infection, cd4+t cells are rapidly activated to become pathogenic th1 cells and generate gm-csf etc. the cytokines' environment induces inflammatory cd14+cd16+ monocytes with high expression of il-6 and accelerates the inflammation. these immune cells and cytokines pour in the pulmonary circulation and cause pulmonary dysfunction and even rapid demise.vitamin c (vc), a common and well-known necessary nutrient, is also known as an antioxidant. despite of its role in the metabolism of human body, including energy transformation, collagen biosynthesis and repair, production of adrenal steroids and catecholamines, iron absorption, etc. [14] [15] [16] [17] , it also possesses antimicrobial properties, thus reducing the risk of infections, and has immunomodulatory functions, particularly in high concentration 18 . more specifically, vc can inhibit the generation of il-6 and tnf-α 19 20 , which appeared to be a dose-dependent effect 19 , and downmodulate gm-csf signaling responses 21 , functioning as a regulator of cytokine redox-signal transduction in host defense cells and a possible role in controlling inflammatory responses. high dose of vc can disrupt important events associated with t cells such as proliferation and cytokine secretion 22 . it is verified that vc can inhibit the activation of nfκb which is a primary pro-inflammatory transcription factor and plays a pivotal role in global immunity including gene regulation of chemokines, cytokines, adhesion molecules, inflammatory mediators, and apoptosis inhibitors 23 24 . besides, it is reported that vitamin c inhibited the replication of simplex virus 1, poliovirus type 1 and influenza a virus in vitro 25 . previous research 26 27 demonstrated that intravenous vc (ivc) can achieve higher plasma concentration (millimolar) than oral vc (micromolar) due to intestinal absorption, tissue transport, and renal reabsorption. the efficacy and safety of intravenous high-dose vc (hivc) in critical patients have been validated via several clinical trials. a phase i trial of ivc in patients with severe sepsis 28 reported no side effects. participants were divided into low-ascorbic acid (asca) group (50 mg/kg/24h), high-asca group (200 mg/kg/24h), and placebo group and receive intervention every 6 hours for 4 days. it is concluded that high-dose vc can not only correct the low vc concentration of patients with severe sepsis but also reduce the extent of multiple organ failure and attenuate circulating injury biomarker levels. another phase ii placebo controlled trial 29 applied 1.5g vc every 6 hours, combined with thiamine and hydrocortisone in the management of sepsis and septic shock concluded a significant difference in decreasing the duration of vasopressor use between the control group (96.13±40.50h) and the treatment group (75.72±30.29h p value=0.01) and improving lactate clearance (41.81% in control group vs 56.83% in treatment group, p value=0.03). a case report 30 recorded a patient with virus-induced ards who was tested positive for enterovirus/rhinovirus on viral screening. treatment of high-dose vitamin c (200mg/kg/24h, every 6 hours) was onset after 12 hours following the initiation of extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ecmo). the patient recovered rapidly after vc infusion with no long-term ards sequelae, indicating intravenous high-dose vc might be new therapy for ards from many causes.the citris-ali randomized clinical trial 31 published in jama last year investigated the effect of intravenous vc infusion on the primary outcomes of organ failure scores and biological markers of inflammation and vascular injury in patients with sepsis and ards. the trial recruited 167 participants who had sepsis and were undergoing mechanical ventilation with fully developed ards. vc was intravenously infused in the treatment group at 50mg/kg every 6 hours for 4 days. this study concluded significant reduction in 28-day mortality, icu-free days to day 28 and hospital-free days to day 60, but no difference on the primary outcomes was noticed. this study showed that higher dosages of vc should be applied for a longer administration period, and the intervention should initiate at an earlier stage.with the very positive results of previously performed clinical trials infusing high-dose vitamin c into patients with severe sepsis and ards, we reasoned that infusing highdose vc to a patient with covid-19 would be safe and therapeutic. considering that the progression of covid-19 is faster and more severe, we speculated that higher dosage may be required. thus, intravenous 24g of vc for 7 days was applied tentatively in this trial. the main goal is to clarify the effect of hivc on the prognosis of patients with covid-19, especially on respiratory function assessed by ventilationfree days or murray injury scores. it is aimed to investigate a new therapy for covid- 19 . furthermore, it is also expected to provide evidence for the treatment of other diseases characterized by cytokine storm and immune dysfunction. this protocol was written in accordance with standard protocol items: recommendations for interventional trials (spirit) guidelines 32 (see attached research checklist) and summarized in fig.1 and fig.2 .the study is a multi-center, prospective, single blind, randomized, placebo-controlled trial. it is planned to be conducted in zhongnan hospital of wuhan university and leishenshan hospital of wuhan city from february 14, 2020 to september 30, 2020 . it is an interventional study with two arms of vc and placebo (sterile water for injection) on the primary outcome of ventilation-free days within 28 (vfd28) observational days. the sample size is calculated as 308 participants. the study is well-designed according to the concept of a pragmatic trial 33 with broad inclusion criteria, a reasonable sample size and study procedures embedded into clinical routine care and executed by clinical personnel.the trial is being conducted in 2 icus of zhongnan hospital of wuhan university and leishenshan hospital of wuhan city. zhongnan hospital of wuhan university, possessed with a comprehensive icu of 66 beds, is a tertiary hospital integrating clinic, scientific research and teaching. during the epidemic of the pneumonia, it takes the charge of leishenshan hospital of wuhan city (the second specialized hospital which was build up by wuhan government within half a month to only accommodate and treat patients with . each icu will enroll patients competitively for 8 months.patients admitted into the above 2 icus, consistent with the following inclusion criteria and no exclusion criteria at the time of randomization will be considered to enroll. enrollment must be completed within 12 hours of the recognized onset.participants' inclusion criteria are as follows: 1 this trial is considered to be safe. firstly, vc is an essential nutrient for human body, and ivc has been widely used in clinical practice as a drug for over 5 decades. secondly, according to its instructions, prolonged infusion of high-dose vc may induce scurvy after withdrawal, calculus of urate, cysteine or oxalate, and rapid infusion may induce syncope. to minimize these risks, in this trial, patients with these diseases will be excluded. vc infusion will be applied only for 7 days. infusion rate is as slow as 12ml/h. thirdly, high-dose vc has been used in previous studies in critically ill patients, and previous trials did not raise obvious adverse events 28-31 . adverse events (ae) and severe adverse events (sae) will be recorded during 28 days of observation from enrollment. investigators will evaluate the relationship between the events and the intervention and report it to the ethical committee and dsmb. benefits and potential risks are written in the informed consent document. patients will be informed with the purpose, intervention and benefits and possible risks of the study.each icu is assigned with an independent random numeric table generated by excel2019 of microsoft by the primary investigator alone. each table has an equal number of 1 and 2 which represents placebo group (sterile water for injection) and treatment group (vc) respectively. participants are enrolled into the corresponding group orderly.this trial is a single-blind study. the epidemic of covid-19 is a public emergency, putting the medical system in an overloaded state. thus, there is not enough manpower and material resources, such as modifying the medical orders system, connecting the ward and the pharmacy and assigning a special nurse to configure and label infusions, to implement the double-blind method. therefore, the grouping and intervention are unknown to participants but are known to investigators and clinical staff. vc injection and sterile water for injection are both colorless and transparent liquids and will be contained in the same brown syringes with different marks and without explanations on it in order to make sure that patients cannot tell. investigators, clinicians and dsmb will monitor the whole process of treatment and pause the trial if potential aes occur or participants' interests are damaged, so there is no need for unblinding for patients.this trial is an interventional study with 2 arms. the treatment group is assigned with 24g vc per day for 7 days. patients will be infused with 12g vc every 12 hours through an infusion pump with a speed of 12ml/h. the total volume of vc and carrier fluids (sterile water for injection) is 50ml. the control group is assigned with placebo (50ml sterile water). the method and speed of administration are identical to those of the treatment group. no other medications or therapeutic schedules other than standard critical supportive care will be applied in this study. the intervention should be commenced within 12 hours and corresponding tests should be completed within 24 hours after the enrollment. delivery of the assigned vc injection or placebo for injection is achieved through the medical orders system, pharmacy supply and clinical routine in each hospital. vc injection is a common and basic drug and has been widely used in the hospital, so there will not be problems of inventory and logistics.this trial lasts for 7 days and enrolled patients will be observed for 28 days. during the 7-day-trial period, interventions will be applied. baseline data including demographic characteristic, main diagnosis, assigned group, changes of acute physiology and chronic health evaluation (apache) ii scores, sequential organs failure assessment (sofa) scores, multi-organ function, especially respiratory function indices, will be collected in the first day. general vital signs, chest radiography/computed tomographic (ct) scans, respiratory and cardiac ultrasound, respiratory indices (rif and parameters of ventilation, etc.), infection indices (white blood cells count, neutrophil count, lymphocyte count, procalcitonin, c-reactive protein), cytokine test (il-6, il-10, etc.), immunologic indices (lymphocyte subpopulation), organ function indices (cardiac function, hepatic function, renal function and coagulation function), blood -gas analysis will be detected at the first, third and seventh day. vasopressor days, ventilation days, length of icu stay, length of hospital stay, icu mortality and in-hospital mortality will be recorded during the 28 observational days. afterwards, participants are scheduled for a follow-up visit at the 28th day to track their long-term prognosis, namely 28-days mortality, and sequelae.all the data will be collected from the clinical information system of the hospital and recorded in the case report format (crf). every participant will be recognized as a study identifier and initials without full name on it. an electronic password-protected document containing all the information from crfs will be set up for statistical analysis. the whole process will be executed by the primary investigator and designated teammates who are well trained for the trial, and crfs and relevant documents will be stored at the department of critical care medicine of zhongnan hospital of wuhan university after the research. the confidentiality and safety of participants' data are guaranteed. all the data will be reserved for 10 years for the purpose of another analysis and investigation by investigators.the primary outcome of this study is vfd28, changes of murray lung injury scores or c-reactive protein (crp) levels. since the epidemic of covid-19 is uncertain and unpredictable, the sample size is calculated in a two-stage way which is set to adjust statistical power and determine if there is a promising trend. at the first stage, as no data from covid-19 regarding our primary outcome is available, icu-mortality (13.57% which was reported by who on february 12 37 ) was chosen for the calculation of sample size through non-inferiority test to maximize the possibility to obtain significant results, while the rate of noninvasive ventilation (41.7%) and the rate of invasive mechanical ventilation (47.22%) reported by our previous study 5 were both taken into consideration. with an allowable error of 10%, a total of 308 study participants (154 in each group) would result in a power of 80% with a one-sided type-1 error rate (α) of 2.5%, allowing a 10% withdrawal rate in each group. after 50 patients are enrolled and completed follow-up, interim analysis will be conducted at the second stage and the sample size will be recalculated based on vfd28. during interim analysis, the data of these 50 patients will be used and processed according to the following methods. results of the analysis will be reported to the dsmb.measurement data will be described as mean with standard deviation (sd) or median with interquartile range (iqr) according to its distribution. count data will be represented as frequencies and proportions. as for univariate analysis, the difference of measurement data will be compared with t-test/mann-whitney u test between vitamin c and placebo groups. chi-square test and fisher's exact test will be applied for rate comparison. a mixed linear model will be used to assess the effect of treatment on outcomes and to fit a repeated-measures analysis of variance. kaplan-meier analysis with the wilcoxon test will be processed to show the effect of vc on patients' survival probability. the testing will be two sided, and p value <0.05 will be considered statistically significant. spss 22.0 and graphpad prism version 6.00 will be used to complete data processing and statistical analysis. the analysis is to be performed after all enrolled subjects have completed follow-up. variables will be tabulated by study groups and presented graphically. in order to describe the patients' baseline characteristics, ensure that there is no differences in distribution and eliminate the confounding factors; the primary analysis will be an intention-to-treat comparison of the general characteristics(sex, age, race, group assignment, principle diagnosis, etc)and other random effects. the secondary analysis will be a comparison of the primary outcome and secondary outcomes between two groups. statistical methods mentioned above will be applied according to the characteristics and distribution of the data.if the number of enrolled patients permits (no fewer than 5 patients in each subgroup of interest), stratified analysis will be carried out in the following subgroups, in order to further clarify the suitable population for applying hivct: 1. patients without ventilation and patients with mechanical ventilation or with a ventilation requirement within 24 hours after admission to the icu. 2. patients with high (above median) or low (below median) murray lung injury scores at the time of randomization. 3. patients with high (above median) or low (below median) apache ii scores at the time of randomization. 4. patients with different severity of ards stratified to mild, moderate and severe groups based on rif. 5. patients receiving or not receiving renal replacement therapy.days of mechanical ventilation for every patient and ventilator parameters will be recorded in the medical record system. thus, data of the primary outcome would be very unlikely to be missing. secondary outcomes might be missing due to record keeping errors. multiple imputation methods including mean completer, hot deck imputation, and regression will be used to minimize effect of missing data as much as possible. the data of patients with complete outcomes after conservative imputation will be included in the comparison between the treatment and control groups.this study follows the principles of the helsinki declaration 2013. the whole protocol has been reviewed and approved by the ethics committee of zhongnan hospital of wuhan university (identifiers: clinical ethical approval no. 2020001). of note, zhongnan hospital of wuhan university took charge of the management of leishenshan hospital of wuhan city including affairs of clinical trials, so the above ethical approval document is also applicable in leishenshan hospital.an independent data and safety monitoring board (dsmb) comprised of two academic intensivists outside the study who are experienced in the conduct of clinical trials in critical illness is monitoring the progress and safety of the trial. it is able to pause the trial to investigate or give suggestions on potential safety issues to improve study previous reports revealed that cytokine storm, which can be suppressed by vc, is believed to be the main mechanism of disease deterioration in covid-19 8 9 12 13 . vc, traditionally considered as a dietary supplement, has been proved of its properties of antimicrobial and immunomodulatory function. hivc has been proven to be safe and therapeutic in precedents of applying it in the era of critical care medicine, primarily as an adjunct to treatment of septic shock and multiple organ failure, where it has been shown to improve outcomes and reduce mortality 28-31 .to our knowledge, this is the first prospective randomized controlled study of high-dose intravenous vc treatment of covid-19. specific treatments for covid-19 are not available at present. there are several clinical trials exploring immunotherapy such as stem cell therapy and tocilizumab, an il-6 receptor antagonist 8 .documenting efficacy for any of these approaches requires time, adequate numbers of patients, and careful analysis. vaccine development for the sars-cov-2 virus will require even more time, for both safety and efficacy testing. although the blood plasma treatment for critical covid-19 patients was recommended by the national and health commission of the people's republic of china, the plasma from recovered patients is a rare resource. compared to these therapies, hivc has great advantages in terms of stability, availability, safety and cost. from this perspective, this trial is highly meaningful for potentially saving lives. it is expected to improve the pulmonary function and reduce mortality for patients with covid-19. furthermore, it can also provide a basis and evidence for applying hivc to treat other diseases with similar mechanisms.however, there are also some limitations to our study design and uncertainties during implementation that should be noted. firstly, as sars-cov-2 is a novel type of coronavirus which has never been reported before, the duration and distribution of infected cases are unpredictable geographically and temporally, so the number of recruitments in some clinical centers may be low due to the unpredictability of the disease. thus, competitive enrollment and multiple clinical trial centers are needed to ensure adequate number of subjects. secondly, as is mentioned above, due to the sudden outbreak of covid-19，complete blindness is not feasible for lack of available resources such as placebos in the same package with vc. so, the study is singleblinded. it is unblinding to dosing nurse and attending physician, but blinding will be maintained to patients and all other members of the clinical and research team such as statistical staff to minimize bias. thirdly, some patients may have received relative non-specific tentative and explorative symptomatic treatment such as interferon, chinese medicine and etcetera, as there is no effective and standardized guideline for treating covid-19 at the early stage of the eruption and even now, despite the national and health commission has issued a recommendation for the diagnosis and management of covid-19 34 which continues to be updated. these therapies are expected to be effective, but they might also act as confounding factors for the trial. it this is a revised version of the protocol which was reviewed and approved on february 19th, 2020. the first version was approved on january 31, 2020. patient recruitment has started on february 14, 2020 and will be completed on september 30, 2020. written informed consent will be obtained from all participants who will be informed about the purpose, intervention and possible risks/benefits of the study.patients or the public were not involved in the design, conduct, reporting, or dissemination plans of our research consent for publication not applicable.the crfs and final dataset will only be accessible to the study investigators.none declared.this work was supported by the science and technology department of hubei province grant number: 2020fca024. the foundation has reviewed and approved this project. the primary investigator is supposed to report the progress of this trial to the department regularly.author contributions fl, yz, jz, yl, zp designed this study; fl, yz, jz designed the statistical analysis plan; jz and yl wrote the bid for the research project and obtained permission from every ethics committee; fl, yz, jz, yl carried out this trial; fl and yz drafted this manuscript; zp, yl, jz carefully reviewed the manuscript; all authors read and approved the final manuscript. complete this checklist by entering the page numbers from your manuscript where readers will find each of the items listed below.your article may not currently address all the items on the checklist. please modify your text to include the missing information. if you are certain that an item does not apply, please write "n/a" and provide a short explanation.upload your completed checklist as an extra file when you submit to a journal.in your methods section, say that you used the spiritreporting guidelines, and cite them as: allocation: implementation #16c who will generate the allocation sequence, who will enrol participants, and who will assign participants to interventions 8-9blinding (masking) #17a who will be blinded after assignment to interventions (eg, trial participants, care providers, outcome assessors, data analysts), and how it has been reported that the mechanism of covid-19 is related to cytokine storms and subsequent immunogenic damage, especially endothelial and alveolar membrane damage. vitamin c (vc), also known as l-ascorbic acid, has been shown to have properties of antimicrobial and immunomodulatory function. high dose of intravenous vc (hivc) was proven to block several key links of cytokine storms, and it showed safety and varying degrees of efficacy in clinical trials conducted on patients with bacterial induced sepsis and acute respiratory distress syndrome (ards). therefore, we hypothesize that hivc could be added to the treatment of ards and multiorgan dysfunction (mods) related to covid-19.the investigators designed a multi-center prospective randomized placebo-controlled trial which is planned to recruit 308 adults diagnosed with covid-19 and transferred into the intensive care unit (icu). participants will randomly receive hivc diluted in sterile water or placebo for 7 days once enrolled.patients with a history of allergy to vc, end-stage pulmonary disease, advanced malignancy or glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase (g-6-pd) deficiency will be excluded. the primary outcome is ventilation-free days within 28 observational days (vfd28). this is one of the first clinical trials applying hivc to covid-19 which is supposed to provide credible data on its efficacy and safety. we presume that hivc could suppress cytokine storms caused by covid-19, help improve pulmonary function, and reduce the risk of ards of covid-19.the study protocol was approved by the ethics committee of zhongnan hospital of wuhan university (identifiers: clinical ethical approval no. 2020001). findings of the trial will be disseminated through peerreviewed journals and scientific conferences. this is one of the first prospective randomized controlled trials applying hivc to treating covid-19.hivc has advantages in terms of stability, availability, safety and cost compared to other treatments.the sample size was calculated in two stages in order to ensure the calculation is reasonable, maximize the possibility to obtain significant results, and provide credible data on the outcomes.the study is single-blinded since complete blinding is not feasible due to the lack of manpower and material resource in this public health emergency.as the duration and distribution of infected cases are unpredictable geographically and temporally, the number of recruitments of each centre is also unpredictable, though competitive enrolment is adopted. 6 , and lopinavir-ritonavir 7 had negative results. therefore, it is urgent to explore effective therapies considering the grim situation.the mechanism of covid-19 involves cytokine storm, which is a potentially fatal immune reaction triggered by a variety of factors including infections. cytokine storm is associated with clinical manifestation of severe inflammation and highly elevated levels of proinflammatory cytokines 8 . previous research 9 suggested that cytokine storms may be the main mechanism of highly pathogenic human coronaviruses (hcovs) infected pneumonia such as severe acute respiratory syndrome (sars) and middle east respiratory syndrome (mers). as a member of the coronavirus family 10 , severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2) exhibits similar clinical features. clinical characteristics of covid-19 indicated that cytokine storms may be positively correlated with the severity of the disease 2 11 12 . moreover, cytokines and t cell subsets may be indicators for predicting prognosis 12 . an immunopathology report 12 speculated that il-6 and granulocyte-macrophage colonystimulating factor (gm-csf) were the main cytokines in the hyper-inflammatory response caused by covid-19 while th1 cell was the key cell, especially for patients transferred into icus. the findings and speculations were verified by an autopsy report which confirmed that the patients with critically ill covid-19 13 had developed ards. in addition, they also found the overactivation of t cells and the decrease of the counts may verify the occurrence of cytokine storms and to some degree, explain the severe immune injury. all these indicated that decreasing cytokine storms and immunogenetic damage may be the main direction for the treatment of critically ill covid-19.vitamin c (vc), a common and necessary nutrient, is also known as an antioxidant.in addition to its role in metabolism of the human body, including energy transformation, collagen biosynthesis and repair, production of adrenal steroids and catecholamines, iron absorption, etc. [14] [15] [16] [17] [18] [19] , it also possesses antimicrobial properties, 14 . firstly, vc plays a crucial role in immunomodulation. it can inhibit the activation of nfκb which is a primary proinflammatory transcription factor and plays a pivotal role in global immunity including gene regulation of chemokines, cytokines, adhesion molecules, inflammatory mediators, and apoptosis inhibitors 20 . it is verified that vc can inhibit the generation of il-6 and tnf-α 21 22 , which appeared to be a dose-dependent effect 21 . vc can downmodulate gm-csf signaling responses 23 , functioning as a regulator of cytokine redox-signal transduction in host defense cells and having a possible role in controlling inflammatory responses. in addition, high-dose vc can regulate the proliferation and function of t cells, b cells, and nk cells 24-27 . this may help inhibit the progress of cytokine storms and improve the host's immunity. secondly, previous studies 22 demonstrated that vc can inhibit oxidative stress, an important part of innate immune response to viral respiratory infection 28 29 and contributes to lung injury and barrier dysfunction 28 . it may also play a role in the mechanism of covid-19 29 . it is reported that vc can repair the oxidative damage of human bronchial epithelial by modulating reacted oxygen (ros) generation and inflammation expressions 30 and prevent ros-induced lung damage 31 . thirdly, vc can regulate alveolar fluid clearance by enhancing lung epithelial barrier function through epigenetic and transcriptional enhancement of protein-channels which regulate alveolar fluid clearance 32 33 . it may help decrease the symptoms of ards and improve respiratory function. fourthly, vc may have anti-viral effects. it is reported that vc inhibited replication of herpes simplex virus 1, poliovirus type 1 and influenza a virus in vitro 34 .previous research 35 demonstrated that intravenous vc (ivc) can achieve higher plasma concentration than oral vc due to intestinal absorption, tissue transport, and renal reabsorption. the efficacy and safety of intravenous high-dose vc (hivc) in critical patients have been investigated via several clinical trials. a recent metaanalysis 15 , of which most included trials were about cardiac surgery, revealed that vc shortened icu length of stay and duration of mechanical ventilation in icu patients. in addition, the effect of vc was significantly greater for patients with more severe illness 15 36 . in patients with sepsis or ards, a phase i trial of ivc in patients with severe sepsis 37 reported that vc significantly reduced multi-organ failure scores and circulating injury biomarker levels. notably, the effect appeared greater in the high dose group (200mg/kg) than in the low dose group (50mg/kg). however, another study conducted on patients with sepsis and ards 38 concluded no difference on the primary outcome of organ failure scores and inflammation biomarkers, but it found a significant reduction in 28-day mortality and long-term prognosis. this study applied 50mg/kg vc intravenously at a late stage when patients were undergoing mechanical ventilation. in addition, there is also a case report 39 applying hivc (200mg/kg) to treating virus-induced ards successfully with a rapid recovery from receiving extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ecmo) and without any long-term sequelae. a major concern on the use of high dose vitamin c is the potential side effects. many reported side effects of high-dose vc were insignificant, rare, but of little consequence 40 . it was reported that high-dose vc was related to hemolysis in glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase (g-6-pd) deficiency, acute kidney injury (aki), and acute oxalate nephropathy [41] [42] [43] [44] . however, these side effects were mostly reported in a few cases, which were related to too large of doses [41] [42] [43] [44] , non-standard administration 43 , or high-risk underlying diseases 44 . clinical trials with large sample size conducted on icu patients 15 36-38 reported few adverse events. besides, a survey 45 also indicated that other than the known complications of kidney damage and g-6-pd deficiency, hivc appeared to be remarkably safe. for patients with hemochromatosis, g-6-pd deficiency, renal dysfunction, renal stone, or oxaluria, the administration of vc need to be careful; adequate hydration, appropriate dilution, and slow rate of infusion are recommended for hivc 46 .thus, we wonder whether applying hivc at an early stage of ards in covid-19 would result in better outcomes. in this trial, we will explore the safety and efficacy of hivc used in covid-19, and if it is a new therapy for ards and could be added to the treatment of viral pneumonia tentatively.the main goals are to (1) investigate a new potential therapy for covid-19 by clarifying the effect of hivc on the prognosis of patients with covid-19, especially on respiratory function assessed by ventilation-free days or murray injury scores, and (2) provide evidence for the treatment of other diseases characterized by cytokine storm and immune dysfunction.this protocol was written in accordance with standard protocol items: recommendations for interventional trials (spirit) guidelines 47 (see attached research checklist) and summarized in fig.1 and fig.2 .the study is a multi-center, prospective, single blind, randomized, placebo-controlled trial. it is an interventional study with two arms (group of vc and group of placebo). the study is well-designed according to the concept of a pragmatic trial 48 with broad inclusion criteria, a reasonable sample size, and study procedures embedded into clinical routine care and executed by clinical personnel.the patients admitted into the above 2 icus, consistent with the following inclusion criteria and no exclusion criteria at the time of randomization, will be considered to enroll. enrollment must be completed within 12 hours after patients are admitted to icu.participants' inclusion criteria are as follows: exclusion criteria are as follows: 1. history of allergy to vc; 2. dyspnea caused by cardiogenic pulmonary edema; 3. pregnant or lactating women; 4. patients with an expected survival duration of less than 24 hours; 5. previous history of end-stage pulmonary disease, end-stage malignant tumor, g-6-pd deficiency, diabetic ketoacidosis, active kidney stone disease and existed severe kidney diseases; 6. patients who are already enrolled in another clinical trial.as mentioned above, this trial is considered to be safe. firstly, vc is an essential nutrient for human body, and ivc has been widely used in clinical practice as a drug for over 5 decades 50 . secondly, patients with potential risks of side effects are excluded based on the exclusion criteria. thirdly, the rate of infusion is as slow as 12ml/h. however, adverse events (ae) and serious adverse events (sae) are needed to observe and follow in accordance with the good clinical practice (gcp) issued by the national medical products administration of the people' republic of china 51 . ae refers to any untoward medical event which occurred after a human subject receives a drug. sae includes prolonged hospital length of stay, disability, death, etc. ae and sae will be recorded during 28 days of observation from enrollment. both occur during a subject's participation in research and do not need to have a causal relationship with the treatment. investigators will evaluate the relationship between the events and the intervention and report it to the ethical committee and dsmb. benefits and potential risks are written in the informed consent document. patients will be informed of the purpose, intervention, benefits, and possible risks of the study. each icu is assigned with an independent, random numeric table which is generated by the primary investigator alone through microsoft excel2019 and carried out by other investigators. each table has an equal number of 1 and 2, which represents placebo group (sterile water for injection) and treatment group (vc), respectively. once generated, the list will stay unchanged and be reserved by the primary investigator who does not participate in the treatment of patients. when a patient is transferred to the icu and meets the enrollment criteria, the clinician on duty will inform other investigators and get a number of the list according to the chronological order of icu recruitment. then, participants are enrolled into the corresponding group. this trial is a single-blind study. the covid-19 pandemic is a public health emergency, overwhelming the medical system. thus, there is not enough manpower and material resources, such as modifying the medical orders system, connecting the ward and the pharmacy, and assigning a special nurse to configure and label infusions, to implement the double-blind method. therefore, the grouping and intervention are unknown to the participants and investigators responsible for data collection and statistical analysis but are known to the clinical staff. vc injection and sterile water for injection are both colorless and transparent liquids and will be contained in the same brown syringes with different marks and without explanations on it in order to make sure that patients cannot distinguish. investigators, clinicians, and dsmb will monitor the whole process of treatment and determine whether or not to continue the trial if potential aes occur or participants' interests are damaged, so there is no need for unblinding grouping.this trial is an interventional study with 2 arms. the intervention lasts for 7 days. each time for the treatment group, 12g vc will be diluted in sterile water with the total volume of 50ml and will be infused within 4 hours by infusion pump. this treatment will be repeated every 12 hrs. thus, the total dosage of vitamin c for the treatment group is 24g per day. the control group is assigned with placebo (50ml sterile water). the method and speed of administration are identical to those of the treatment group. sterile water is used for dilution fluid as well as the placebo fluid as the combination of vc and saline was reported to irritate the vein 52 . no other medications or therapeutic schedules other than standard critical supportive care will be applied in this study. the intervention should be commenced within 12 hours after the enrollment. delivery of the assigned vc injection or placebo for injection is achieved through the medical orders system, pharmacy supply, and clinical routine in each hospital. vc injection is a common and basic drug and has been widely used in the hospital, so there will not be problems of inventory and logistics.baseline data including demographic characteristics, main diagnosis, assigned group, changes of acute physiology and chronic health evaluation (apache) ii scores, sequential organs failure assessment (sofa) scores, multi-organ function, 1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9  10  11  12  13  14  15  16  17  18  19  20  21  22  23  24  25  26  27  28  29  30  31  32  33  34  35  36  37  38  39  40  41  42  43  44  45  46  47  48  49  50  51  52  53  54  55  56  57  58  59  60   f  o  r  p  e  e  r  r  e  v  i  e  w  o  n  l  y   9 especially respiratory function indices, will be collected on the first day. general vital signs, chest radiography/computed tomographic (ct) scans, respiratory and cardiac ultrasounds, respiratory indices (rif and parameters of ventilation, etc.), infection indices (white blood cells count, neutrophil count, lymphocyte count, procalcitonin, creactive protein), cytokine tests (il-6, il-10, etc.), immunologic indices (lymphocyte subpopulation), organ function indices (cardiac function, hepatic function, renal function and coagulation function), blood gas analysis will be detected at the first, third and seventh day. participants are scheduled for a follow-up visit on the 28th day to track their long-term prognosis and sequelae.all the data will be collected from the clinical information system of the hospital and recorded in the case report format (crf). every participant will be recognized as a study identifier and initial without full name. an electronic password-protected document containing all the information from crfs will be set up for statistical analysis. the whole process will be executed by the primary investigator and designated teammates who are well trained for the trial crfs. relevant documents will be stored at the department of critical care medicine of zhongnan hospital of wuhan university after the study. the confidentiality and safety of participants' data are guaranteed. all the data will be reserved for 10 years for the purpose of another analysis and investigation by investigators.the primary outcome of this study is ventilation-free days in 28 days (vfd28) since admitted in icu. since the covid-19 pandemic is uncertain and unpredictable, the sample size is calculated in two stages, which is set to adjust statistical power and determine if there is a promising trend. at the first stage, as no data from covid-19 regarding our primary outcome is available, icu-mortality (13.57% reported by who on february 12 55 ) was chosen instead for the calculation of sample size through non-inferiority test to maximize the possibility of significant results. with an allowable error of 10%, a total of 308 study participants (154 in each group) would result in a power of 80% with a onesided type-1 error rate (α) of 2.5%, allowing a 10% withdrawal rate in each group. of course, this calculated sample size is not accurate and needs revise based on the real situation. thus, we arranged a second-stage calculation. after 50 patients are enrolled and completed follow-up, interim analysis will be conducted at the second stage and the sample size will be recalculated. during interim analysis, the data of these 50 patients will be used and processed according to the following methods. results of the analysis will be reported to the dsmb.measurement data will be described as mean with standard deviation (sd) or median with interquartile range (iqr) according to its distribution. count data will be represented as frequencies and proportions. as for univariate analysis, the difference of measurement data will be compared with t-test/mann-whitney u test between vitamin c and placebo groups. chi-square test and fisher's exact test will be applied for rate comparison. a mixed linear model will be used to assess the effect of treatment on outcomes and to fit a repeated-measures analysis of variance. kaplan-meier analysis with the wilcoxon test will be processed to show the effect of vc on patients' survival probability. the testing will be two sided, and p value <0.05 will be considered statistically significant. spss 22.0 and graphpad prism version 6.00 will be used to complete data processing and statistical analysis.in order to describe the patients' baseline characteristics, ensure no differences in distribution, and eliminate the confounding factors, the primary analysis will be an intention-to-treat comparison of the general characteristics ( sex, age, race, group assignment, principle diagnosis, etc. ) and other random effects. the secondary analysis will be a comparison of the primary outcome and secondary outcomes between the treatment group and the control group. statistical methods mentioned above will be applied according to the characteristics and distribution of the data.if the number of enrolled patients permits (no fewer than 5 patients in each subgroup of interest), stratified analysis will be carried out in the following subgroups, in order to further clarify the suitable population for applying hivc: 1. patients without ventilation and patients with mechanical ventilation or with a ventilation requirement within 24 hours after admission to the icu. 2. patients with high (above median) or low (below median) murray lung injury scores at the time of randomization. 3. patients with high (above median) or low (below median) apache ii scores at the days of mechanical ventilation for every patient and ventilator parameters will be recorded in the medical record system. thus, data of the primary outcome would be very unlikely to be missing. secondary outcomes might be missing due to record keeping errors. multiple imputation methods including mean completer, hot deck imputation, and regression will be used to minimize effect of missing data as much as possible. the data of patients with complete outcomes after conservative imputation will be included in the comparison between the treatment and control groups.this study follows the principles of the helsinki declaration 2013. the whole protocol has been reviewed and approved by the ethics committee of zhongnan hospital of wuhan university (identifiers: clinical ethical approval no. 2020001). zhongnan hospital of wuhan university also took charge of the management of leishenshan hospital of wuhan city including affairs of clinical trials, so the above ethical approval document is also applicable to leishenshan hospital.an independent data and safety monitoring board (dsmb) comprised of two academic intensivists outside the study who are experienced in conducting clinical trials in critical illness is monitoring the progress and safety of the trial. dsmb is able to pause the trial to investigate or give suggestions on potential safety issues to improve study design and implementation.previous reports revealed that cytokine storm, which can be suppressed by vc, is believed to be the main mechanism of disease deterioration in covid-19 9 11-13 . vc, traditionally considered as a dietary supplement, has properties of antimicrobial and immunomodulatory function. hivc has been proven to be safe and therapeutic in critical care medicine, primarily as an adjunct to treatment of septic shock and multiple organ failure, where it has been shown to improve outcomes and reduce mortality 15 36-39 .to our knowledge, this is one of the first prospective randomized controlled studies of high-dose intravenous vc treatment of covid-19. specific treatments for covid-19 are not available at present. there are several clinical trials exploring immunotherapy 10 . documenting efficacy for any of these approaches requires time, adequate numbers of patients, and careful analysis. vaccine development will require even more time, for both safety and efficacy testing. although blood plasma treatment for critical covid- 19 patients was recommended by the national and health commission of the people's republic of china, plasma from recovered patients is a rare resource. compared to these therapies, hivc has great advantages in terms of stability, availability, safety, and cost. therefore, this trial is highly meaningful for potentially saving lives at a lower price. it is expected to improve pulmonary function and reduce mortality for patients with covid-19. furthermore, it can also provide a basis and evidence for applying hivc to treat other diseases with similar mechanisms.however, there are also limitations to our study design and uncertainties during implementation. firstly, as sars-cov-2 is a novel coronavirus, the duration and distribution of infected cases are unpredictable geographically and temporally, so the number of recruitments in some clinical centers may be low. thus, competitive enrollment and multiple clinical trial centers are needed to ensure adequate number of subjects. secondly, complete blindness is not feasible for lack of available resources such as placebos in the same package with vc. it is unblinding for dosing nurse and attending physician, but blinding will be maintained to patients and all other members of the clinical and research team such as statistical staff to minimize the bias. thirdly, some patients may have received non-specific, tentative, and explorative symptomatic treatment such as interferon and traditional chinese medicine, as there is no effective and standardized guideline for treating covid-19 at the early stage, despite the national and health commission recommendation for the diagnosis and management of covid-19 49 which continues to be updated. these therapies are expected to be effective, but they may act as confounding factors for the trial. it must be taken into account when conducting data analysis.this is a revised version of the protocol which was reviewed and approved on 19 february 2020. the first version was approved on 31 january 2020. patient recruitment has started on february 14, 2020 and will be completed on 30 september 2020. written informed consent will be obtained from all participants who will be informed about the purpose, intervention and possible risks/benefits of the study.patients or the public were not involved in the design, conduct, reporting, or dissemination plans of our researchfindings of the trial will be disseminated through peer-reviewed journals and scientific conferences. the consent for publication will be obtained from the patients or patients' family members.the crfs and final dataset will only be accessible with the contact of the study investigators.none declared.this work was supported by the science and technology department of hubei province grant number: 2020fca024. the foundation has reviewed and approved this project. the primary investigator is supposed to report the progress of this trial to the department regularly.author contributions fl, yz, jz, yl, zp designed this study; fl, yz, jz designed the statistical analysis plan; jz and yl wrote the bid for the research project and obtained permission from every ethics committee; fl, yz, jz, yl carried out this trial; fl and yz drafted this manuscript; zp, yl, jz carefully reviewed the manuscript; all authors read and approved the final manuscript.this trial is conducted in 2 hospitals: zhongnan hospital of wuhan university and leishenshan hospital of wuhan city. the authors thank the patients and their family members, nurses, pharmacy staff fellows and clinicians of the icus at the above complete this checklist by entering the page numbers from your manuscript where readers will find each of the items listed below.your article may not currently address all the items on the checklist. please modify your text to include the missing information. if you are certain that an item does not apply, please write "n/a" and provide a short explanation.upload your completed checklist as an extra file when you submit to a journal.in your methods section, say that you used the spiritreporting guidelines, and cite them as: implementation #16c who will generate the allocation sequence, who will enrol participants, and who will assign participants to interventions 8 1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9  10  11  12  13  14  15  16  17  18  19  20  21  22  23  24  25  26  27  28  29  30  31  32  33  34  35  36  37  38  39  40  41  42  43  44  45  46  47  48  49  50  51  52  53  54  55  56  57  58  59 confidentiality #27 how personal information about potential and enrolled participants will be collected, shared, and maintained in order to protect confidentiality before, during, and after the trial 8-9declaration of #28 financial and other competing interests for principal 13 1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9  10  11  12  13  14  15  16  17  18  19  20  21  22  23  24  25  26  27  28  29  30  31  32  33  34  35  36  37  38  39  40  41  42  43  44  45  46  47  48  49  50  51  52  53  54  55  56  57  58  59 1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9  10  11  12  13  14  15  16  17  18  19  20  21  22  23  24  25  26  27  28  29  30  31  32  33  34  35  36  37  38  39  40  41  42  43  44  45  46  47  48  49  50  51  52  53  54  55  56  57  58  59 1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9  10  11  12  13  14  15  16  17  18  19  20  21  22  23  24  25  26  27  28  29  30  31  32  33  34  35  36  37  38  39  40  41  42  43  44  45  46  47  48  49  50  51  52  53  54  55  56  57  58  59 1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9  10  11  12  13  14  15  16  17  18  19  20  21  22  23  24  25  26  27  28  29  30  31  32  33  34  35  36  37  38  39  40  41  42  43  44  45  46  47  48  49  50  51  52  53  54  55  56  57  58  59 this is one of the first prospective randomized controlled trials applying hivc to treat covid-19."high-dose" vitamin c therapy lacks a universal definition. a previous meta-analysis considered high doses as equal to or greater than 10 g/d. in this trial, we will administer 24 g vitamin c per day for 7 days intravenously.hivc has advantages in terms of stability, availability, safety and cost compared to other treatments.the sample size was calculated in two stages to ensure the calculation is reasonable, maximizes the possibility of obtaining significant results, and provides credible outcome data.as the duration and distribution of infected cases are unpredictable geographically and temporally, the number of recruited patients at each centre is also unpredictable, in spite of competitive enrolment. 1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9  10  11  12  13  14  15  16  17  18  19  20  21  22  23  24  25  26  27  28  29  30  31  32  33  34  35  36  37  38  39  40  41  42  43  44  45  46  47  48  49  50  51  52  53  54  55  56  57  58  59  60   f  o  r  p  e  e  r  r  e  v  i  e  w  o  n  l  y  introduction   background and rationale the covid-19 pandemic is a threat that has caused panic at the global level. as of 21 june 2020, 8,708,008 cases were confirmed worldwide, resulting in 461,715 deaths 1 . infected patients presented predominantly with fever and cough as well as dyspnea and myalgia [2] [3] [4] . a meta-analysis 4 concluded that, among the patients, 32.8% presented with acute respiratory distress syndrome (ards), 20.3% were transferred to the intensive care unit (icu), and 13.9% died. according to our previous research 3 , patients with ards accounted for 66.1% of covid-19 patients in the icu, and the rates of noninvasive and invasive mechanical ventilation were 41.7% and 47.22%, respectively. however, no specific treatment is currently available because traditional antiviral drugs do not work well against covid-19. recent clinical trials exploring new therapies, including remdesivir 5 , hydroxychloroquine 6 , and lopinavir-ritonavir 7 , for covid-19 had negative results. therefore, it is urgent to explore effective therapies considering the grim situation.the mechanism of covid-19 involves a cytokine storm, which is a potentially fatal immune reaction triggered by a variety of factors, including infections. cytokine storms are associated with the clinical manifestation of severe inflammation and highly elevated levels of proinflammatory cytokines 8 . previous research 9 suggested that cytokine storms may be the main mechanism of highly pathogenic human coronavirus (hcov)-infected pneumonia, such as severe acute respiratory syndrome (sars) and middle east respiratory syndrome (mers). as a member of the coronavirus family 10 , severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2) exhibits similar clinical features. the clinical characteristics of covid-19 indicate that cytokine storms may be positively correlated with the severity of the disease 2 11 12 . moreover, cytokines and t cell subsets may be indicators for predicting prognosis 12 . an immunopathology report 12 speculated that il-6 and granulocytemacrophage colony-stimulating factor (gm-csf) were the main cytokines in the hyperinflammatory response caused by covid-19, while th1 cells were the key cells involved, especially for patients transferred into icus. the findings and speculations were verified by an autopsy study that confirmed that patients with critically ill covid-19 13 had developed ards. in addition, they also found that the overactivation of t cells, and the decrease in the cell counts may explain the occurrence of cytokine storms and, to some degree, the severe immune-medicated injury. all these results indicated that decreasing cytokine storms and immunogenetic damage may be the main treatment option for critically ill patients with covid-19.vitamin c (vc), a common and necessary nutrient, is also an antioxidant. in addition to its role in the metabolism of the human body, including energy transformation, collagen biosynthesis and repair, adrenal steroid and catecholamine production, iron absorption, etc. [14] [15] [16] [17] [18] [19] , vc also possesses antimicrobial properties-thus reducing 14 . first, vc plays a crucial role in immunomodulation. it can inhibit the activation of nfκb, which is a primary pro-inflammatory transcription factor, and plays a pivotal role in overall immunity, including the genetic regulation of chemokines, cytokines, adhesion molecules, inflammatory mediators, and apoptosis inhibitors 20 . vc can inhibit the production of il-6 and tnf-α 21 22 , and this effect appears to be a dose dependent 21 . vc can reduce gm-csf signaling responses 23 , functioning as a regulator of cytokine redox-signal transduction in host defense cells and having a possible role in controlling inflammatory responses. in addition, highdose vc can regulate the proliferation and function of t cells, b cells, and nk cells 24-27 . this may help inhibit the progression of cytokine storms and improve the host's immunity. second, previous studies 22 demonstrated that vc can inhibit oxidative stress, an important part of the innate immune response to viral respiratory infection 28 29 and contributes to lung injury and barrier dysfunction 28 . vc may also play a role in the mechanism of covid-19 29 . it has been reported that vc can repair oxidative damage in human bronchial epithelium by modulating reactive oxygen species (ros) generation and inflammatory expression 30 and can prevent ros-induced lung damage 31 . third, vc can regulate alveolar fluid clearance by enhancing lung epithelial barrier function through epigenetic and transcriptional enhancement of protein channels that regulate alveolar fluid clearance 32 33 . vc may help decrease the symptoms of ards and improve respiratory function. fourth, vc may have antiviral effects. vc has been reported to inhibit the replication of herpes simplex virus 1, poliovirus type 1 and influenza a virus in vitro 34 .previous research 35 demonstrated that intravenous vc (ivc) can achieve a higher plasma concentration than oral vc due to losses during intestinal absorption, tissue transport, and renal reabsorption. the efficacy and safety of intravenous high-dose vc (hivc) in critically ill patients have been investigated via several clinical trials. a recent meta-analysis 15 , of mostly cardiac surgery trials, revealed that vc shortened icu length of stay and duration of mechanical ventilation in icu patients. in addition, the effect of vc was significantly greater for patients with more severe illness 15 36 . regarding patients with sepsis or ards, a phase i trial of ivc in patients with severe sepsis 37 reported that vc significantly reduced multiorgan failure scores and circulating injury biomarker levels. notably, the effect appeared greater in the highdose group (200mg/kg) than in the low-dose group (50 mg/kg). however, another study conducted on patients with sepsis and ards 38 reported no difference in the primary outcome of organ failure scores and inflammation biomarkers, but found a significant reduction in 28-day mortality and long-term prognosis. this study applied 50 mg/kg vc intravenously at a late stage when patients were undergoing mechanical ventilation. in addition, there was also a case report 39 that administered hivc (200mg/kg) to successfully treat virus-induced ards, with patients making a rapid recovery after receiving extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ecmo) and without any long-term sequelae. a major concern regarding the use of high-dose vitamin c is its potential side effects. many reported side effects of high-dose vc are insignificant and rare and of little consequence 40 . it was reported that high-dose vc was related to hemolysis in glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase (g-6-pd) deficiency, acute kidney injury (aki), and acute oxalate nephropathy [41] [42] [43] [44] . however, adverse effects were mostly reported in a few cases and were related to too large of doses [41] [42] [43] [44] , nonstandard administration 43 , or highrisk underlying diseases 44 . clinical trials with large sample sizes conducted on icu patients 15 36-38 reported few adverse events. in addition, a survey 45 also indicated that other than the known complications of kidney damage and g-6-pd deficiency, hivc appeared to be remarkably safe. for patients with hemochromatosis, g-6-pd deficiency, renal dysfunction, renal stones, or oxaluria, vc should be carefully administered; adequate hydration, appropriate dilution, and slow infusion rates are recommended for hivc 46 .thus, we hypothesize that administering hivc at an early stage of ards in covid-19 would result in better outcomes. in this trial, we will tentatively explore the safety and efficacy of hivc used in covid-19.the main goal is to investigate a new potential therapy for covid-19 by clarifying the effect of hivc on the prognosis of patients with covid-19, especially on respiratory function assessed by ventilation-free days.this protocol was written in accordance with the standard protocol items: recommendations for interventional trials (spirit) guidelines 47 (see attached research checklist); the protocol is summarized in fig.1 and fig.2 .the study is a multi-center, prospective randomized, placebo-controlled trial. it is an interventional study with two arms (vc group and placebo group). the study is welldesigned according to the concept of a pragmatic trial 48 with broad inclusion criteria, a reasonable sample size, and study procedures embedded into clinical routine care and executed by clinical personnel.the table has equal numbers of 1 and 2 , which represent the placebo group (sterile water for injection) and treatment group (vc), respectively. once generated, the list will remain unchanged and be kept by the primary investigator who does not participate in the treatment of patients. when a patient is transferred to the icu and meets the enrollment criteria, the clinician on duty will inform the other investigators and obtain a number from the list according to the chronological order of icu recruitment. then, participants are enrolled in the corresponding group. this trial is not completely blinded. the covid-19 pandemic is a public health emergency, that overwhelms the medical system. thus, there is not enough manpower and material resources to implement the double-blind method, which requires modifying the medical orders system, connecting the ward and the pharmacy, and assigning a special nurse to configure and label infusions. therefore, the grouping and intervention are unknown to the participants and investigators responsible for data collection and statistical analysis but are known to the clinical staff and investigators responsible for recruiting participants. vc injection and sterile water for injection are both colorless and transparent liquids and will be contained in the same brown syringes with different marks and without explanations on the syringe to make sure that patients cannot distinguish the treatment they receive. investigators, clinicians, and dsmb will monitor the whole process of treatment and determine whether or not to continue the trial if potential aes occur or if it is in the participants' best interests to stop treatment, so there is no need for unblinding of the study grouping.this trial is an interventional study with 2 arms. the intervention lasted for 7 days. for the treatment group, 12 g vc will be diluted in sterile water to a total volume of 50 ml and will be infused within 4 hours by an infusion pump. this treatment will be repeated every 12 hours. thus, the total dosage of vitamin c for the treatment group is 24 g per day. the control group is assigned a placebo (50 ml sterile water); the method and speed of administration are identical to those of the treatment group. sterile water is used for dilution fluid as well as placebo fluid, as the combination of vc and saline has been reported to irritate the vein 52 . no other medications or therapeutic schedules other than standard critical supportive care will be applied in this study. the intervention should be commenced within 12 hours after enrollment. delivery of the assigned vc injection or placebo injection is achieved through the medical orders system, pharmacy supply, and clinical routine in hospitals. vc injection is a common and basic drug and has been widely used in the hospital, so there will not be problems of inventory and logistics.baseline data including demographic characteristics, main diagnosis, assigned group, changes in acute physiology and chronic health evaluation (apache) ii scores, sequential organs failure assessment (sofa) scores, and multiorgan function, especially respiratory function indices, will be collected on the first day. general vital signs, chest radiography and computed tomography (ct) scans, respiratory and cardiac ultrasounds, respiratory indices (rif, parameters of ventilation, etc.), infection indices (white blood cell count, neutrophil count, lymphocyte count, procalcitonin, creactive protein), cytokine tests (il-6, il-10, etc.), immunologic indices (lymphocyte subpopulation), organ function indices (cardiac function, hepatic function, renal function and coagulation function), and blood gas analyses will be collected on the first, third and seventh days. participants are scheduled for a follow-up visit on the 28th day to track their long-term prognosis and sequelae.all the data will be collected from the clinical information system of the hospital and recorded in the case report format (crf). every participant will be distinguished with a study identifier and initial without full name. an electronic password-protected document containing all the information from the crfs will be set up for statistical analysis. the analysis process will be performed by the primary investigator and designated teammates who are experienced with trial crfs. relevant documents will be stored at the department of critical care medicine of zhongnan hospital of wuhan university after the study. the confidentiality and safety of participants' data are guaranteed. all the data will be reserved for 10 years for the purpose of further analysis and investigation.the primary outcome of this study is ventilator-free days in the 28 days (vfd28) since admission to the icu.secondary outcomes include the following: 1. icu mortality, 28-day mortality; 2. changes in sofa scores; 3. changes in plasma biomarkers of inflammation: including white blood cell counts, neutrophil counts/percentage, lymphocyte counts/percentage, procalcitonin (pct), c-reactive protein (crp) and cytokines (il-6, il-10, etc.); 4. changes in pulmonary infection estimated by chest radiography/ct imaging and lung ultrasound and changes in pulmonary function measured by murray lung injury scores; 5. rate of organ failure including ards diagnosed by the berlin definition 53 , acute kidney injury (aki) diagnosed by the kidney disease improving global outcomes (kdigo) criteria 54 , coagulation disorders, immune dysfunction characterized by changes in lymphocytes, etc.; and 6. other clinical outcomes including ventilation days, vasopressor days, icu length of stay and hospital length of stay to day 28.since the covid-19 pandemic is uncertain and unpredictable, the sample size is calculated in two stages, which is set to adjust statistical power and determine whether there is a promising trend. at the first stage, as no data from covid-19 regarding our 55 ) was chosen instead for the calculation of sample size through a noninferiority test to maximize the possibility of significant results. with an allowable error of 10%, a total of 308 study participants (154 in each group) would result in a power of 80% with a one-sided type-1 error rate (α) of 2.5%, allowing a 10% withdrawal rate in each group. of course, this calculated sample size is not accurate and needs revision based on the real situation. thus, we arranged a second-stage calculation. after 50 patients are enrolled and have completed follow-up, interim analysis will be conducted at the second stage, and the required sample size will be recalculated. during interim analysis, the data of these 50 patients will be used and processed according to the following methods. the results of the analysis will be reported to the dsmb.measurement data will be described as the mean with standard deviation (sd) or median with interquartile range (iqr) according to its distribution. count data will be represented as frequencies and proportions. for univariate analysis, the difference in measurement data will be compared between the vitamin c and placebo groups using t-test/mann-whitney u test. chi-square test and fisher's exact test will be used for rate comparisons. a mixed linear model will be used to assess the effect of treatment on outcomes and to fit a repeated-measures analysis of variance. kaplan-meier analysis with the wilcoxon test will be used to show the effect of vc on patient survival probability. the testing will be two sided, and a p value <0.05 will be considered statistically significant. spss 22.0 and graphpad prism 6.00 will be used to complete data processing and statistical analysis.to describe the patients' baseline characteristics, ensure no differences in distribution, and eliminate the confounding factors, the primary analysis will be an intention-to-treat comparison of the general characteristics(sex, age, race, group assignment, principle diagnosis, etc. ) and other random effects. the secondary analysis will be a comparison of the primary outcome and secondary outcomes between the treatment group and the control group. the statistical methods mentioned above will be applied according to the characteristics and distribution of the data.if the number of enrolled patients permits (no fewer than 5 patients in each subgroup of interest), stratified analyses will be carried out in the following subgroups to further clarify the suitable population for administering hivc: 1. patients without ventilation and patients with mechanical ventilation or with a ventilation requirement within 24 hours after admission to the icu. 2. patients with high (above median) or low (below median) murray lung injury scores for every patient, the days of mechanical ventilation and ventilator parameters will be recorded in the medical record system. thus, data on the primary outcome is very unlikely to be missing. secondary outcome data might be missing due to recordkeeping errors. multiple imputation methods, including mean completer, hot-deck imputation, and regression will be used to minimize the effect of missing data as much as possible. the data of patients with complete outcomes after conservative imputation will be included in the comparison between the treatment and control groups.this study follows the principles of the helsinki declaration 2013. the entire protocol was reviewed and approved by the ethics committee of zhongnan hospital of wuhan university (identifier: clinical ethical approval no. 2020001). zhongnan hospital of wuhan university also took charge of the management of leishenshan hospital of wuhan city, including affairs of clinical trials, so the above ethical approval document is also applicable to leishenshan hospital.an independent data and safety monitoring board (dsmb) comprised of two academic intensivists outside the study who are experienced in conducting clinical trials in critical illness is monitoring the progress and safety of the trial. the dsmb is able to pause the trial to investigate or give suggestions on potential safety issues to improve the study design and implementation.previous reports revealed that cytokine storms, which can be suppressed by vc, are believed to be the main mechanism in the deterioration of patients with covid-19 9 11-13 . vc, traditionally considered a dietary supplement, has antimicrobial and immunomodulatory properties. hivc has been proven to be safe and therapeutic in critical care medicine, primarily as an adjunct to the treatment of septic shock and multiple organ failure, where it has been shown to improve outcomes and reduce mortality 15 36-39 . "high-dose" vc therapy lacks a universal definition. a previous metaanalysis 56 considered high doses as equal to or greater than 10 g/d. 24 g of vc in this trial is higher than the dosage of vc in previous clinical trials conducted on critically ill patients with severe infection 37 38 .to our knowledge, this is one of the first prospective randomized controlled studies of 1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9  10  11  12  13  14  15  16  17  18  19  20  21  22  23  24  25  26  27  28  29  30  31  32  33  34  35  36  37  38  39  40  41  42  43  44  45  46  47  48  49  50  51  52  53  54  55  56  57  58  59  60   f  o  r  p  e  e  r  r  e  v  i  e  w  o  n  l  y  high-dose intravenous vc treatment for covid-19. specific treatments for covid-19 are not available at present. there are several clinical trials exploring immunotherapy 10 . documenting efficacy for any of these approaches requires time, adequate patient numbers, and careful analysis. vaccine development will require even more time for both safety and efficacy testing. although blood plasma treatment for critical covid-19 patients was recommended by the national and health commission of the people's republic of china, plasma from recovered patients is a rare resource. compared to these therapies, hivc has great advantages in terms of stability, availability, safety, and cost. therefore, this trial is highly meaningful as it could potentially save lives at a low price. hivc is expected to improve pulmonary function and reduce mortality for patients with covid-19. furthermore, it may also provide a basis and reference for hivc treatment of other diseases with similar mechanisms.however, there are also limitations to our study design and uncertainties during implementation. first, as sars-cov-2 is a novel coronavirus, the duration and distribution of infected cases are unpredictable geographically and temporally, so the number of recruited patients at some clinical centers may be low. thus, competitive enrollment and multiple clinical trial centers are needed to ensure an adequate number of subjects. second, complete blinding is not feasible due to the lack of available resources, such as placebos in the same package as vc. the study is unblinded for dosing nurses, attending physicians, and investigators in charge of enrolling participants, but blinding will be maintained for patients and all other members of the clinical and research team, such as statistical staff, to minimize bias. third, some patients may have received nonspecific, tentative, and explorative symptomatic treatment, such as interferon and traditional chinese medicine, as there is no effective and standardized guideline for treating covid-19 at the early stage, despite the national and health commission recommendations for the diagnosis and management of covid-19 49 , which continues to be updated. these therapies are expected to be effective, but they may act as confounding factors for the trial and it must be taken into account for data analysis.patient recruitment started on 14 february 2020 and will be completed on 30 september 2020. 1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9  10  11  12  13  14  15  16  17  18  19  20  21  22  23  24  25  26  27  28  29  30  31  32  33  34  35  36  37  38  39  40  41  42  43  44  45  46  47  48  49  50  51  52  53  54  55  56  57  58  59 the trial was registered on clinicaltrials.gov (identifier: nct04264533) on 4 february 2020. of note, this manuscript is a revised version of the protocol that was reviewed and approved on 19 february 2020. the first version was approved on 31 january 2020. compared to the first version, which was registered on clinicaltrials.gov, the sample size and secondary outcomes of this version have been revised, as there was insufficient information about covid-19 at the early stage, and we have learned more about covid-19 over time.this protocol has been reviewed and approved by the ethics committee of zhongnan hospital of wuhan university (identifiers: clinical ethical approval no. 2020001). written informed consent will be obtained from all participants who will be informed about the purpose, intervention and possible risks/benefits of the study.patients or the public were not involved in the design, conduct, reporting, or dissemination plans of our research.findings of the trial will be disseminated through peer-reviewed journals and scientific conferences. the consent for publication will be obtained from the patients or patients' family members.the crfs and final dataset will only be accessible with the contact of the study investigators.none declared.this work was supported by the science and technology department of hubei province grant number: 2020fca024. the foundation has reviewed and approved this project. the primary investigator is supposed to report the progress of this trial to the department regularly.author contributions fl, yz, jz, yl, and zp designed this study; fl, yz, and jz designed the statistical 1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9  10  11  12  13  14  15  16  17  18  19  20  21  22  23  24  25  26  27  28  29  30  31  32  33  34  35  36  37  38  39  40  41  42  43  44  45  46  47  48  49  50  51  52  53  54  55  56  57  58  59  60   f  o  r  p  e  e  r  r  e  v  i  e  w  o  n  l  y   14   analysis plan; jz and yl wrote the bid for the research project and obtained permission  from the ethics committees; fl, yz, jz, and yl carried out this trial; fl and yz drafted  this manuscript; zp, yl, and jz carefully reviewed the manuscript; and all authors read  and approved the final manuscript.  1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9  10  11  12  13  14  15  16  17  18  19  20  21  22  23  24  25  26  27  28  29  30  31  32  33  34  35  36  37  38  39  40  41  42  43  44  45  46  47  48  49  50  51  52  53  54  55  56  57  58  59 1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9  10  11  12  13  14  15  16  17  18  19  20  21  22  23  24  25  26  27  28  29  30  31  32  33  34  35  36  37  38  39  40  41  42  43  44  45  46  47  48  49  50  51  52  53  54  55  56  57  58  59 1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9  10  11  12  13  14  15  16  17  18  19  20  21  22  23  24  25  26  27  28  29  30  31  32  33  34  35  36  37  38  39  40  41  42  43  44  45  46  47  48  49  50  51  52  53  54  55  56  57  58  59 1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9  10  11  12  13  14  15  16  17  18  19  20  21  22  23  24  25  26  27  28  29  30  31  32  33  34  35  36  37  38  39  40  41  42  43  44  45  46  47  48  49  50  51  52  53  54  55  56  57  58  59 1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9  10  11  12  13  14  15  16  17  18  19  20  21  22  23  24  25  26  27  28  29  30  31  32  33  34  35  36  37  38  39  40  41  42  43  44  45  46  47  48  49  50  51  52  53  54  55  56  57  58  59 1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9  10  11  12  13  14  15  16  17  18  19  20  21  22  23  24  25  26  27  28  29  30  31  32  33  34  35  36  37  38  39  40  41  42  43  44  45  46  47  48  49  50  51  52  53  54  55  56  57  58  59 1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9  10  11  12  13  14  15  16  17  18  19  20  21  22  23  24  25  26  27  28  29  30  31  32  33  34  35  36  37  38  39  40  41  42  43  44  45  46  47  48  49  50  51  52  53  54  55  56  57  58  59 1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9  10  11  12  13  14  15  16  17  18  19  20  21  22  23  24  25  26  27  28  29  30  31  32  33  34  35  36  37  38  39  40  41  42  43  44  45  46  47  48  49  50  51  52  53  54  55  56  57  58  59 1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9  10  11  12  13  14  15  16  17  18  19  20  21  22  23  24  25  26  27  28  29  30  31  32  33  34  35  36  37  38  39  40  41  42  43  44  45  46  47  48  49  50  51  52  53  54  55  56  57  58  59 1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9  10  11  12  13  14  15  16  17  18  19  20  21  22  23  24  25  26  27  28  29  30  31  32  33  34  35  36  37  38  39  40  41  42  43  44  45  46  47  48  49  50  51  52  53  54  55  56  57  58  59 1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9  10  11  12  13  14  15  16  17  18  19  20  21  22  23  24  25  26  27  28  29  30  31  32  33  34  35  36  37  38  39  40  41  42  43  44  45  46  47  48  49  50  51  52  53  54  55  56  57  58  59 complete this checklist by entering the page numbers from your manuscript where readers will find each of the items listed below.your article may not currently address all the items on the checklist. please modify your text to include the missing information. if you are certain that an item does not apply, please write "n/a" and provide a short explanation.upload your completed checklist as an extra file when you submit to a journal.in your methods section, say that you used the spiritreporting guidelines, and cite them as: 1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9  10  11  12  13  14  15  16  17  18  19  20  21  22  23  24  25  26  27  28  29  30  31  32  33  34  35  36  37  38  39  40  41  42  43  44  45  46  47  48  49  50  51  52  53  54  55  56  57  58  59 implementation #16c who will generate the allocation sequence, who will enrol participants, and who will assign participants to interventions 8 1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9  10  11  12  13  14  15  16  17  18  19  20  21  22  23  24  25  26  27  28  29  30  31  32  33  34  35  36  37  38  39  40  41  42  43  44  45  46  47  48  49  50  51  52  53  54  55  56  57  58  59  60 the covid-19 pandemic is a threat that has caused panic at the global level. as of 21 june 2020, 8 708 008 cases were confirmed worldwide, resulting in 461 715 deaths. 1 infected patients presented predominantly with fever and cough as well as dyspnoea and myalgia. [2] [3] [4] a meta-analysis 4 concluded that, among the patients, 32.8% presented with acute respiratory distress syndrome (ards), 20.3% were transferred to the intensive care unit (icu) and 13.9% died. according to our previous research, 3 patients with ards accounted for 66.1% of patients with covid-19 in the icu, and the rates of non-invasive and invasive mechanical ventilation were 41.7% and 47.22%, respectively. however, no specific treatment is currently available because traditional antiviral drugs do not work well against covid-19. recent clinical trials exploring new therapies, including remdesivir, 5 hydroxychloroquine 6 and lopinavirritonavir, 7 for covid-19 had negative results. therefore, it is urgent to explore effective therapies considering the grim situation.the mechanism of covid-19 involves a cytokine storm, which is a potentially fatal immune reaction triggered by a variety of factors, including infections. cytokine storms strengths and limitations of this study ► this is one of the first prospective randomised controlled trials applying high dose of intravenous vitamin c (hivc) to treat covid-19. ► 'high-dose' vitamin c therapy lacks a universal definition. a previous meta-analysis considered high doses as equal to or greater than 10 g/day. in this trial, we will administer 24 g vitamin c per day for 7 days intravenously. ► hivc has advantages in terms of stability, availability, safety and cost compared with other treatments. ► the sample size was calculated in two stages to ensure the calculation is reasonable, maximises the possibility of obtaining significant results and provides credible outcome data. ► as the duration and distribution of infected cases are unpredictable geographically and temporally, the number of recruited patients at each centre is also unpredictable, in spite of competitive enrolment.open access are associated with the clinical manifestation of severe inflammation and highly elevated levels of proinflammatory cytokines. 8 previous research 9 suggested that cytokine storms may be the main mechanism of highly pathogenic human coronavirus infected pneumonia, such as severe acute respiratory syndrome and middle east respiratory syndrome. as a member of the coronavirus family, 10 severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2) exhibits similar clinical features.the clinical characteristics of covid-19 indicate that cytokine storms may be positively correlated with the severity of the disease. 2 11 12 moreover, cytokines and t cell subsets may be indicators for predicting prognosis. 12 an immunopathology report 12 speculated that interleukin (il)-6 and granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor (gm-csf) were the main cytokines in the hyperinflammatory response caused by covid-19, while th1 cells were the key cells involved, especially for patients transferred into icus. the findings and speculations were verified by an autopsy study that confirmed that patients with critically ill covid-19 13 had developed ards. in addition, they also found that the overactivation of t cells and the decrease in the cell counts may explain the occurrence of cytokine storms and, to some degree, the severe immune-medicated injury. all these results indicated that decreasing cytokine storms and immunogenetic damage may be the main treatment option for critically ill patients with covid-19. vitamin c (vc), a common and necessary nutrient, is also an antioxidant. in addition to its role in the metabolism of the human body, including energy transformation, collagen biosynthesis and repair, adrenal steroid and catecholamine production, iron absorption and so on, [14] [15] [16] [17] [18] [19] vc also possesses antimicrobial properties-thus reducing the risk of infections-and immunomodulatory functions, particularly in high concentrations. 14 first, vc plays a crucial role in immunomodulation. it can inhibit the activation of nuclear factor kappa-b (nfκb), which is a primary proinflammatory transcription factor, and plays a pivotal role in overall immunity, including the genetic regulation of chemokines, cytokines, adhesion molecules, inflammatory mediators and apoptosis inhibitors. 20 vc can inhibit the production of il-6 and tumor necrosis factor alpha (tnf-α), 21 22 and this effect appears to be a dose dependent. 21 vc can reduce gm-csf signalling responses, 23 functioning as a regulator of cytokine redox-signal transduction in host defence cells and having a possible role in controlling inflammatory responses. in addition, high-dose vc can regulate the proliferation and function of t cells, b cells and natural killer (nk) cells. [24] [25] [26] [27] this may help inhibit the progression of cytokine storms and improve the host's immunity. second, previous studies 22 demonstrated that vc can inhibit oxidative stress, an important part of the innate immune response to viral respiratory infection 28 29 and contributes to lung injury and barrier dysfunction. 28 oxidative stress may also play a role in the mechanism of covid-19. 29 it has been reported that vc can repair oxidative damage in human bronchial epithelium by modulating reactive oxygen species (ros) generation and inflammatory expression 30 and can prevent ros-induced lung damage. 31 third, vc can regulate alveolar fluid clearance by enhancing lung epithelial barrier function through epigenetic and transcriptional enhancement of protein channels that regulate alveolar fluid clearance. 32 33 vc may help decrease the symptoms of ards and improve respiratory function. fourth, vc may have antiviral effects. vc has been reported to inhibit the replication of herpes simplex virus 1, poliovirus type 1 and influenza a virus in vitro. 34 previous research 35 demonstrated that intravenous vc (ivc) can achieve a higher plasma concentration than oral vc due to losses during intestinal absorption, tissue transport and renal reabsorption. the efficacy and safety of intravenous high-dose vc (hivc) in critically ill patients have been investigated via several clinical trials. a recent meta-analysis, 15 of mostly cardiac surgery trials, revealed that vc shortened icu length of stay and duration of mechanical ventilation in icu patients. in addition, the effect of vc was significantly greater for patients with more severe illness. 15 36 regarding patients with sepsis or ards, a phase i trial of ivc in patients with severe sepsis 37 reported that vc significantly reduced multiorgan failure scores and circulating injury biomarker levels. notably, the effect appeared greater in the high-dose group (200 mg/kg) than in the low-dose group (50 mg/kg). however, another study conducted on patients with sepsis and ards 38 reported no difference in the primary outcome of organ failure scores and inflammation biomarkers but found a significant reduction in 28-day mortality and long-term prognosis. this study applied 50 mg/kg vc intravenously at a late stage when patients were undergoing mechanical ventilation. in addition, there was also a case report 39 that administered hivc (200 mg/kg) to successfully treat virusinduced ards, with patients making a rapid recovery after receiving extracorporeal membrane oxygenation and without any long-term sequelae.a major concern regarding the use of high-dose vc is its potential side effects. many reported side effects of high-dose vc are insignificant and rare and of little consequence. 40 it was reported that high-dose vc was related to haemolysis in glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase (g-6-pd) deficiency, acute kidney injury (aki) and acute oxalate nephropathy. [41] [42] [43] [44] however, adverse effects were mostly reported in a few cases and were related to too large of doses, 41-44 non-standard administration 43 or high-risk underlying diseases. 44 clinical trials with large sample sizes conducted on icu patients 15 36-38 reported few adverse events (aes). in addition, a survey 45 also indicated that other than the known complications of kidney damage and g-6-pd deficiency, hivc appeared to be remarkably safe. for patients with haemochromatosis, g-6-pd deficiency, renal dysfunction, renal stones or oxaluria, vc should be carefully administered; adequate hydration, appropriate dilution and slow infusion rates are recommended for hivc. 46 open access thus, we hypothesise that administering hivc at an early stage of ards in covid-19 would result in better outcomes. in this trial, we will tentatively explore the safety and efficacy of hivc used in covid-19.the main goal is to investigate a new potential therapy for covid-19 by clarifying the effect of hivc on the prognosis of patients with covid-19, especially on respiratory function assessed by ventilation-free days.this protocol was written in accordance with the standard protocol items: recommendations for interventional trials guidelines 47 (see attached research checklist); the protocol is summarised in figures 1 and 2.the study is a multicentre, prospective randomised, placebo-controlled trial. it is an interventional study with two arms (vc group and placebo group). the study is well designed according to the concept of a pragmatic trial 48 with broad inclusion criteria, a reasonable sample size and study procedures embedded into clinical routine care and executed by clinical personnel.the trial is being conducted in the icu of zhongnan hospital of wuhan university and the icu of leishenshan hospital of wuhan city from 14 february 2020 to 30 september 2020. zhongnan hospital of wuhan university, with a comprehensive 66-bed icu, is a tertiary hospital integrating clinical care, scientific research and teaching. during the covid-19 pandemic, it took charge of leishenshan hospital of wuhan city (the second specialised hospital that was built by wuhan government within half a month to only accommodate and treat patients with covid-19). each icu will enrol patients competitively for 8 months.patients admitted into the above 2 icus, consistent with the following inclusion criteria and no exclusion criteria at the time of randomisation, will be considered for enrolment. enrolment must be completed within 12 hours after patients are admitted to the icu.participants' inclusion criteria are as follows: open access 4. patients with an expected survival duration of less than 24 hours. 5. patients with a previous history of end-stage pulmonary disease, end-stage malignant tumour, g-6-pd deficiency, diabetic ketoacidosis, active kidney stone disease and severe kidney diseases. 6. patients who are already enrolled in another clinical trial.as mentioned above, this trial is considered to be safe. first, vc is an essential nutrient for the human body, and ivc has been widely used in clinical practice for over five decades. 50 second, patients with greater potential risks of side effects were excluded based on the exclusion criteria. third, the rate of infusion is as slow as 12 ml/hour. however, aes and serious adverse events (saes) must be observed and followed in accordance with the good clinical practice guidelines issued by the national medical products administration of the people's republic of china. 51 an ae refers to any untoward medical event that occurs after a human subject receives a drug. saes include prolonged hospital length of stay, disability, death and so on. aes and saes will be recorded during the 28 days of observation from enrolment. either may occur during a subject's participation in the research and do not need to have a causal relationship with the treatment. investigators will evaluate the relationship between the events and the intervention and report it to the ethical committee and data and safety monitoring board (dsmb). benefits and potential risks are written in the informed consent document. patients will be informed of the purpose, intervention, benefits and possible risks of the study.each icu is assigned an independent, random numeric table that is generated by the primary investigator alone through microsoft excel 2019 and carried out by other investigators. each table has equal numbers of 1 and 2, which represent the placebo group (sterile water for injection) and treatment group (vc), respectively. once generated, the list will remain unchanged and be kept by the primary investigator who does not participate in the treatment of patients. when a patient is transferred to the icu and meets the enrolment criteria, the clinician on duty will inform the other investigators and obtain a number from the list according to the chronological order of icu recruitment. then, participants are enrolled in the corresponding group. this trial is not completely blinded. the covid-19 pandemic is a public health emergency that overwhelms the medical system. thus, there is not enough manpower and material resources to implement the double-blind method, which requires modifying the medical orders system, connecting the ward and the pharmacy and assigning a special nurse to configure and label infusions. therefore, the grouping and intervention are unknown to the participants and investigators responsible for data collection and statistical analysis but are known to the clinical staff and investigators responsible for recruiting participants. vc injection and sterile water for injection are both colourless and transparent liquids and will be contained in the same brown syringes with different marks and without explanations on the syringe to make sure that patients cannot distinguish the treatment they receive. investigators, clinicians and dsmb will monitor the whole process of treatment and determine whether to continue the trial if potential aes occur or if it is in the participants' best interests to stop treatment, so there is no need for unblinding of the study grouping.this trial is an interventional study with two arms. the intervention lasted for 7 days. for the treatment group, 12 g vc will be diluted in sterile water to a total volume of 50 ml and will be infused within 4 hours by an infusion pump. this treatment will be repeated every 12 hours. thus, the total dosage of vc for the treatment group is 24 g per day. the control group is assigned a placebo (50 ml sterile water); the method and speed of administration are identical to those of the treatment group. sterile water is used for dilution fluid as well as placebo fluid, as the combination of vc and saline has been reported to irritate the vein. 52 no other medications or therapeutic schedules other than standard critical supportive care will be applied in this study. the intervention should be commenced within 12 hours after enrolment. delivery of the assigned vc injection or placebo injection is achieved through the medical orders system, pharmacy supply, and clinical routine in hospitals. vc injection is a common and basic drug and has been widely used in the hospital, so there will not be problems of inventory and logistics.baseline data including demographic characteristics, main diagnosis, assigned group, changes in acute physiology and chronic health evaluation (apache) ii scores, sequential organs failure assessment (sofa) scores and multiorgan function, especially respiratory function indices, will be collected on the first day. general vital signs, chest radiography and ct scans, respiratory and cardiac ultrasounds, respiratory indices (rif, parameters of ventilation and so on), infection indices (white cell count, neutrophil count, lymphocyte count, procalcitonin (pct) and c reactive protein (crp)), cytokine tests (il-6, il-10 and so on), immunological indices (lymphocyte subpopulation), organ function indices (cardiac function, hepatic function, renal function and coagulation function) and blood gas analyses will be collected on the first, third and seventh days. participants are scheduled for a follow-up visit on the 28th day to track their long-term prognosis and sequelae.all the data will be collected from the clinical information system of the hospital and recorded in the case report format (crf). every participant will be distinguished with a study identifier and initial without full name. an electronic password-protected document containing all the information from the crfs will be set up for statistical analysis. the analysis process will be performed by the primary investigator and designated teammates who are experienced with trial crfs. relevant documents will be stored at the department of critical care medicine of zhongnan hospital of wuhan university after the study. the confidentiality and safety of participants' data are guaranteed. all the data will be reserved for 10 years for the purpose of further analysis and investigation.the primary outcome of this study is ventilator-free days in the 28 days since admission to the icu.secondary outcomes include the following: since the covid-19 pandemic is uncertain and unpredictable, the sample size is calculated in two stages, which is set to adjust statistical power and determine whether there is a promising trend. at the first stage, as no data from covid-19 regarding our primary outcome are available, icu mortality (13.57% reported by the who on 12 february 55 ) was chosen instead for the calculation of sample size through a non-inferiority test to maximise the possibility of significant results. with an allowable error of 10%, a total of 308 study participants (154 in each group) would result in a power of 80% with a one-sided type 1 error rate (α) of 2.5%, allowing a 10% withdrawal rate in each group. of course, this calculated sample size is not accurate and needs revision based on the real situation. thus, we arranged a second-stage calculation. after 50 patients are enrolled and have completed follow-up, interim analysis will be conducted at the second stage, and the required sample size will be recalculated. during interim analysis, the data of these 50 patients will be used and processed according to the following methods. the results of the analysis will be reported to the dsmb.measurement data will be described as the mean with sd or median with iqr according to its distribution. count data will be represented as frequencies and proportions. for univariate analysis, the difference in measurement data will be compared between the vc and placebo groups using t-test/mann-whitney u test. χ 2 test and fisher's exact test will be used for rate comparisons. a mixed linear model will be used to assess the effect of treatment on outcomes and to fit a repeated-measures analysis of variance. kaplan-meier analysis with the wilcoxon test will be used to show the effect of vc on patient survival probability. the testing will be two sided, and a p value <0.05 will be considered statistically significant. spss v.22.0 and graphpad prism v.6.00 will be used to complete data processing and statistical analysis.to describe the patients' baseline characteristics, ensure no differences in distribution and eliminate the confounding factors, the primary analysis will be an intention-to-treat comparison of the general characteristics (sex, age, race, group assignment, principle diagnosis and so on) and other random effects. the secondary analysis will be a comparison of the primary outcome and secondary outcomes between the treatment group and the control group. the statistical methods mentioned above will be applied according to the characteristics and distribution of the data.if the number of enrolled patients permits (no fewer than five patients in each subgroup of interest), stratified analyses will be carried out in the following subgroups to further clarify the suitable population for administering hivc: 1. patients without ventilation and patients with mechanical ventilation or with a ventilation requirement within 24 hours after admission to the icu. 2. patients with high (above median) or low (below median) murray lung injury scores at the time of randomisation. 3. patients with high (above median) or low (below median) apache ii scores at the time of randomisation. 4. patients with different severities of ards, stratified into mild, moderate and severe groups based on rif. 5. patients receiving or not receiving renal replacement therapy.handling of missing data for every patient, the days of mechanical ventilation and ventilator parameters will be recorded in the medical record system. thus, data on the primary outcome is very unlikely to be missing. secondary outcome data might be missing due to record-keeping errors. multiple imputation methods, including mean completer, hot-deck imputation and regression, will be used to minimise the effect of missing data as much as possible. the data of patients with complete outcomes after conservative imputation will be included in the comparison between the treatment and control groups.an independent dsmb comprised of two academic intensivists outside the study who are experienced in conducting clinical trials in critical illness is monitoring the progress and safety of the trial. the dsmb is able to pause the trial to investigate or give suggestions on potential safety issues to improve the study design and implementation.previous reports revealed that cytokine storms, which can be suppressed by vc, are believed to be the main mechanism in the deterioration of patients with covid-19. 9 11-13 vc, traditionally considered a dietary supplement, has antimicrobial and immunomodulatory properties. hivc has been proven to be safe and therapeutic in critical care medicine, primarily as an adjunct to the treatment of septic shock and multiple organ failure, where it has been shown to improve outcomes and reduce mortality. 15 36-39 'high-dose' vc therapy lacks a universal definition. a previous meta-analysis 56 considered high doses as equal to or greater than 10 g/day. twenty-four grams of vc in this trial is higher than the dosage of vc in previous clinical trials conducted on critically ill patients with severe infection. 37 38 to our knowledge, this is one of the first prospective randomised controlled studies of high-dose intravenous vc treatment for covid-19. specific treatments for covid-19 are not available at present. there are several clinical trials exploring immunotherapy. 10 documenting efficacy for any of these approaches requires time, adequate patient numbers and careful analysis. vaccine development will require even more time for both safety and efficacy testing. although blood plasma treatment for critical patients with covid-19 was recommended by the national and health commission of the people's republic of china, plasma from recovered patients is a rare resource. compared with these therapies, hivc has great advantages in terms of stability, availability, safety and cost. therefore, this trial is highly meaningful as it could potentially save lives at a low price. hivc is expected to improve pulmonary function and reduce mortality for patients with covid-19. furthermore, it may also provide a basis and reference for hivc treatment of other diseases with similar mechanisms.however, there are also limitations to our study design and uncertainties during implementation. first, as sars-cov-2 is a novel coronavirus, the duration and distribution of infected cases are unpredictable geographically and temporally, so the number of recruited patients at some clinical centres may be low. thus, competitive enrolment and multiple clinical trial centres are needed to ensure an adequate number of subjects. second, complete blinding is not feasible due to the lack of available resources, such as placebos in the same package as vc. the study is unblinded for dosing nurses, attending physicians and investigators in charge of enrolling participants, but blinding will be maintained for patients and all other members of the clinical and research team, such as statistical staff, to minimise bias. third, some patients may have received non-specific, tentative and explorative symptomatic treatment, such as interferon and traditional chinese medicine, as there is no effective and standardised guideline for treating covid-19 at the early stage, despite the national and health commission recommendations for the diagnosis and management of covid-19, 49 which continues to be updated. these therapies are expected to be effective, but they may act as confounding factors for the trial, and it must be taken into account for data analysis.patient recruitment started on 14 february 2020 and will be completed on 30 september 2020.acknowledgements this trial is conducted in two hospitals: zhongnan hospital of wuhan university and leishenshan hospital of wuhan city. the authors would like to thank the patients and their family members and the nurses, pharmacy staff, fellows and clinicians of the intensive care units at the above hospitals for making this study possible. we would also like to express our gratitude to the medical assistance teams for their help and sacrifice for wuhan.contributors fl, yz, jz, yl, and zp designed this study; fl, yz, and jz designed the statistical analysis plan; jz and yl wrote the bid for the research project and obtained permission from the ethics committees; fl, yz, jz, and yl carried out this trial; fl and yz drafted this manuscript; zp, yl, and jz carefully reviewed the manuscript; and all authors read and approved the final manuscript.funding this work was supported by the science and technology department of hubei province (grant number: 2020fca024) and the special project for significant new drug research and development in the major national science and technology projects of china (grant number: 2020zx09201007). the foundations have reviewed and approved this project. the primary investigator is supposed to report the progress of this trial to the departments regularly.competing interests none declared.patient and public involvement patients and/or the public were not involved in the design, or conduct, or reporting, or dissemination plans of this research.ethics approval this study follows the principles of the helsinki declaration 2013. the entire protocol was reviewed and approved by the ethics committee of zhongnan hospital of wuhan university (identifier: clinical ethical approval no. 2020001). zhongnan hospital of wuhan university also took charge of the management of leishenshan hospital of wuhan city, including affairs of clinical trials, so the above ethical approval document is also applicable to leishenshan hospital. written informed consent will be obtained from all participants who will be informed about the purpose, intervention and possible risks/benefits of the study.• the novel coronavirus-2 (sars-cov-2) was already shown to induce a systemic inflammatory response, which is accompanied by an excessive release of proinflammatory cytokines. • furthermore, covid-19 is commonly accompanied by hemodynamic abnormalities, such as an increased coagu-lation activity, increasing the risk for venous thromboembolic events. • in our short communication we focus on the relation of cytokines' and chemokines' release and the influence of coagulation factors on the inflammatory response of peripheral mononuclear blood cells (pbmcs). • after 24 h of incubation time, 20% serum was the main trigger for the release of several cytokines and chemokines in comparison to heparinized plasma. furthermore, it was shown that the addition of fibrin to the pbmcs resulted in a significant increase of the cytokines and chemokines measured in a dose-dependent manner. • anti-coagulation could constitute a potential tool to handle and treat the circle between inflammation and thrombosis in covid-19, reducing a profound cytokine storm and thrombotic complications.in december 2019, the new coronavirus severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus-2 (sars-cov-2) emerged, causing coronavirus disease 2019 (covid-19). sars-cov-2 was found to infect lung alveolar cells, cardiac myocytes, vascular epithelial and endothelial cells, as well as inflammatory cells including macrophages, monocytes and lymphocytes [1, 2] . this phenomenon is primarily due to the virus' portal of entry, the angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ace2) receptor, which is highly expressed in vascular tissues [3] . consequently, endothelial injury is a crucial indicator of sars-cov-2 infection [2] . clinically, the disease manifests with symptoms, including fever, cough, dyspnea, and myalgia. the infection mortality rate is a subject to debate, but likely higher than for seasonal influenza [4] . the higher risk of mortality is primarily due to the risk for severe illnesses, such as systemic inflammatory response syndrome, septic shock, multi-organ involvement, and most notably acute respiratory distress syndrome (ards) [5] . there is also increasing evidence that covid-19 differs from "classic" ards with regards to respiratory characteristics and optimal ventilatory management [6] .generally, acute inflammation, intravascular coagulation and platelet activation characterize ards. in covid-19 patients, excessive cytokine release and cytokine storm have been reported in response to sars-cov-2 infection. in particular, vast amounts of the pro-inflammatory cytokine interleukin-6 (il-6) are released; although whether il-6 is foremost a marker for the severe illness or the disease's mediator itself is still unknown yet, its levels in circulation seem to correlate with disease severity and the propensity for a pro-coagulant status. in addition to il-6, also higher levels of il-1β, il-2, il-4, il-7, il-10, interferon-gamma (ifn-γ), if-γ-induced protein 10 (ip-10), tumor necrosis factor-alpha (tnf-α), granulocyte-colony stimulating factor, macrophage inflammatory protein 1-alpha, and myocyte chemotactic protein (mcp-1), as well as c-reactive protein (crp), and d-dimer have been found in circulation. this cytokine storm may also seem to correlate with the severity of disease or mortality [7] . due to the lack of not only an appropriate vaccine, but also effective antiviral treatment to sars-cov-2, anti-cytokine therapies targeting il-6 or il-1 have been proposed to serve as a potential therapy against the ongoing cytokine storm [5, 8] . the il-6 inhibitor tocilizumab is currently under investigation to serve as a treatment option for covid-19 [5, 8] .furthermore, recent studies revealed that sars-cov-2 infections are commonly accompanied by hemostatic abnormalities, such as elevated coagulation activity, leading to disseminated intravascular coagulation (dic) [9] . complement activation is one initiating pathway responsible for the innate immune responses, that promotes inflammation and often defends against bacteria and virus infections. furthermore, the complement system and the coagulation cascade are closely linked, which may provoke hypercoagulability and thrombosis. excessive activation of the complement system is therefore associated with several pathologic events, such as thrombotic microangiopathy and organ dysfunction ( fig. 1 ). it has already been described that patients with sars-cov-2 infections exhibit a higher risk for venous thromboembolic events, including pulmonary embolism. the clinical parameters of patients suffering from severe covid-19 correlate with an excessive complement activity: high lactate dehydrogenase, d-dimer, and bilirubin. concerning this, increased levels of d-dimer were shown to serve as a particularly important marker for coagulopathy [10] and pulmonary embolism [11] . additionally, an in vitro study in which vero cells were infected with a sars-associated cov has outlined the potential of heparin to inhibit the infection by 50% [12] ; in vivo, heparin has already proven to significantly lower the rate of mortality due to sars-cov-2 infection [13] . consequently, there is evidence suggesting use of anɵvirals e.g. remdesivir a link between the coagulation pathway and the inflammatory response.to prove this assumption, we performed an in vitro study to investigate the potential of an activated coagulation cascade or clotting factors to trigger the expression and release of pro-inflammatory cytokines. human peripheral mononuclear blood cells (pbmcs) from healthy volunteers (n = 7) were treated with either autologous serum or heparinized plasma, respectively. as in serum the coagulation cascade has already been progressed to a final state, the addition of autologous serum used to clarify the influence of the coagulation factors released into serum on the pbmcs. on the contrary, in heparinized plasma the coagulation cascade is inhibited due to the presence of heparin, presenting a hypocoagulable environment. in addition to that, the different doses of the coagulation factor fibrin (sigma-aldrich, usa) were used to unveil the effect of this specific coagulation factor on cytokine expression and secretion. cells were incubated at 37 °c and 4% co 2 at the different treatment conditions (negative control, autologous serum, autologous heparinized plasma, or fibrin) for 0 h (h), 4 h, or 24 h, respectively. supernatant cytokine and chemokine concentrations were measured using commercially available enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay kits purchased from r&d systems (minneapolis, mn, usa): human il-1 beta/ il-1f2 duoset, human il-6 duoset, human il-8 /cxcl8 duoset, human ccl2/mcp-1 duoset, and human tnfalpha duoset, and human il-1ra. the results were calculated in graphpad prism software (graphpad-software, la jolla, ca, usa). due to non-gaussian approximation, the results are given as median ± interquartile range (iqr).our results revealed that the treatment of pbmcs with 20% autologous serum for 24 h, in comparison to heparinized plasma, led to the greatest inflammatory response, outlined by the significant alteration of inflammatory cytokines and chemokines in the secretome. in particular, the pro-inflammatory cytokines il-1β, and il-6 were significantly elevated in the pbmc's supernatant, rising from 0.0 ± 0.0 pg/ml at baseline to 664.6 ± 1591.7 pg/ml (p = 0.02) after 24 h for il-1β, and an il-6 concentration from 82.4 ± 41.9 pg/ml at baseline to 8331.0 ± 8986.0 pg/ ml (p = 0.03). also, tnf-α, and il-1ra were significantly altered by the treatment of pbmcs with autologous serum. moreover, the chemokine il-8 increased markedly from 66.6 ± 66.1 pg/ml at baseline to 16,776.0 ± 20,665.0 pg/ml at 24 h (p = 0.02), as it is the case for mcp-1 (0.0 ± 11.0 pg/ml at baseline to 1965.0 ± 1,280.0 pg/ml after 24 h, p = 0.016). although the treatment of pbmcs by heparinized plasma resulted in a significant increment of supernatant il-8 and mcp-1 levels, the increase was not as high as it is the case for autologous serum. furthermore, all cytokines and chemokines measured were markedly higher for serum than for heparinized plasma (after 24 h; see fig. 2 ).we analyzed the secretome of pbmcs treated with rising concentrations of fibrin (0.25 µg, 0.5 µg, 10 µg, 50 µg, 250 µg, and 500 µg) for 24 h. our data unveiled a significant rise of il-6, tnf-α, and il-8 in a concentration-dependent manner; the treatment of pbmcs with 500 µg fibrin resulted in the greatest cytokine and chemokine values: for instance, il-6 supernatant levels rose from 10.45 ± 15.3 pg/ml at baseline to 4000.0 ± 3,461.0 pg/ml (p = 0.008) due to the treatment with 500 µg fibrin. in addition to that, the chemokine il-8 was significantly altered by the treatment with fibrin (from 640.4 ± 907.3.9 pg/ml to 17,475.0 ± 3272.0 pg/ml, p = 0.01, see fig. 3 ). these in vitro results confirm the association of coagulation and the inflammatory response of the immune system.our data support the findings of yang et al. [14] where plasma samples of patients infected with sars-cov-2 were examined and outlined an increase of 14 cytokines triggering inflammation in response to covid-19. there are many other evidence that the activation of coagulation has a marked impact on the cytokine-storm associated with the infection. as recently reviewed in bikdeli et al. [9] , among others, there are several hemostatic changes in response to sars-cov-2 infection, including mild thrombocytopenia and increased d-dimer levels. furthermore, some case studies indicate an association between the severity of disease and a potential prolongation of prothrombin time and thrombin time, as well as a shortened activated partial thromboplastin time. concerning this, our study confirms that coagulation may increase the inflammatory response, eventually resulting in a feedback loop, further triggering the hypercoagulable state. although, our data does not outline the reverse progress that inflammation may serve as a trigger for a hypercoagulable state, it is already known that e.g. sepsis may be complicated by dic. supporting our data and speculations, a recent study by patel et al. addressed the expression of inflammatory markers in sepsis an dic and could unveil a positive correlation of il-6, il-8, il-10, and tnf-α with dic score [15] .in addition to that, severe cases of covid-19 exhibit an increased risk of developing venous thromboembolism (vte). a chinese study reported that 40% of covid-19 patients were highly prone to vte [16] . also, danzi et al. [10] reported a case study that a woman infected with sars-cov-2 was hospitalized due to severe bilateral pneumonia. ct scans have unveiled a severe pulmonary embolism, although no predisposing factors for vte were known. in addition, patients with severe pneumonia due to covid-19 had a higher platelet count, contributing to the increased risk of thrombosis [13] . in a small case series a relation between covid-19 and large-vessel stroke was also proposed [17] .based on available in vitro data and first clinical impressions, anti-coagulation could be a cornerstone in successfully managing covid-19 [9, 13, 18] . besides preventing thrombotic complications, anti-coagulation could mitigate the vicious circle between inflammation and thrombosis in covid-19. therapeutic anti-coagulation might be warranted in critically sick covid-19 patients. for non-severely ill covid-19 patients, preventive anti-coagulation could reduce thrombotic complications and have the potential to help minimize the risk for full-blown cytokine storm. although covid-19 patients could benefit from the is not yet proven that their usage would also reduce the inflammatory response due to sars-cov2 infection. as far as the safety of the treatment with oral anticoagulants is concerned, the risk for advanced bleeding of covid-19 patients has to be considered.open access this article is licensed under a creative commons attribution 4.0 international license, which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the creative commons licence, and indicate if changes were made. the images or other third party material in this article are included in the article's creative commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. if material is not included in the article's creative commons licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. to view a copy of this licence, visit http://creat iveco mmons .org/licen ses/by/4.0/. particulate matter (pm) air pollution concentrations frequently encountered in major cities can trigger the release of proinflammatory interleukins (e.g., il-6) from alveolar macrophages, promoting an acceleration of arterial thrombosis [1] . analogously, infection with the novel sars-cov-2 coronavirus can stimulate a too-littletoo-late type-i interferon-mediated innate immune response, which is inherently accompanied by dysregulated secretion of il-6 from alveolar macrophages [2, 3] . the so-called cytokine storminvolving overproduction of proinflammatory cytokines and overactivation of immune cells (hyperinflammation)ultimately drives an acute respiratory distress syndrome (ards), one of the leading causes of mortality in patients with severe covid-19 disease [4, 5] . intriguingly, patients with severe covid-19 admitted to the intensive care unit are at highest thrombotic risk, with acute pulmonary embolism being the most common thrombotic complication [6] . the ability of covid-19 to predispose to thromboembolism, which can fuel futile cycles of hyperinflammatory responses that aggravate sars-cov-2 pathogenesis [7, 8] , is increasingly viewed as a major factor in disease severity and mortality. it is thus not surprising that long-term exposure to pm has been recently proposed as a key contributor to covid-19 mortality in the united states [9] . likewise, the elevated levels of pm air pollution in northern italy and central spain have been postulated as a putative risk factor underlying the extremely high covid-19 fatality rates observed in these european regions [10] [11] [12] .the link between air pollution and covid-19 severity can be viewed merely as the passive result of a carrier action of virus particles by pm; yet, one should acknowledge that pm air pollution is also a principal cause of chronic systemic and airway inflammation, ultimately leading to innate immune system hyperactivation, elevated production of proinflammatory cytokines, and thrombosis [1, 10, [13] [14] [15] [16] . the physiopathological overlap between pm-driven inflammatory cytokine production and the cytokine/thrombotic storm in patients with covid-19 might also suggest a boosting action of the former on the sars-cov-2 mechanism of disease ( figure 1 ). therapeutically, if the chronic pulmonary effects of pm impact the prognosis of covid-19, it then follows that small molecules with acceptable risk profiles that can block the molecular trigger(s) of il-6 release from alveolar macrophages in response to pm might also mitigate the aggressive proinflammatory/prothrombotic nature of covid-19. using sophisticated cell and mouse models, a groundbreaking study by the budinger group established that the anti-diabetic drug metforminthrough its capacity to inhibit mitochondrial complex isuppressed the mitochondrial reactive oxygen species (ros) signaling necessary for the opening of ca 2+ releaseactivated ca 2+ (crac) channels in the generation of il-6 from alveolar macrophages upon exposure to pm ( figure 2 ) [1] . because the use a respiratory filter in people residing in areas with high levels of pm air pollution validated the causal link between pm partially overlaps with that caused by severe sars-cov-2/covid-19, namely the release of proinflammatory interleukins (e.g., il-6) from alveolar macrophages via mitochondrial reactive oxygen species (ros)-driven activation of ca 2+ release-activated ca 2+ (crac) channels, lastly promoting an acceleration of thrombotic events. patients already experiencing a chronic cytokine response might be at higher risk of covid-19 lethal complications after sars-cov-2 infection. bottom. given the linkage between mitochondrial functionality, ion channels, and inflammation in human aging, therapeutic interventions capable of targeting mitochondrial electron transport and prevent mitochondrial ros/crac-mediated il-6 release (e.g., metformin) might illuminate a preventive/prophylactic mechanism of action to quell the raging of the cytokine and thrombotic-like storms that are the leading causes of covid-19 morbidity and mortality in older people. in an acute scenario of sars-cov-2-driven hyperinflammation, small molecule crac channel inhibitors may also be contemplated as a means of treating patients with severe covid-19 at risk for progressing to typical/atypical ards. aging exposure and levels of il-6-related systemic markers [17] , these findings altogether support metformin use as a preventive strategy for the mortality attributable to pm air pollution worldwide [1] . in the same line, it would be relevant to test whether metformin could suppress the cytokine and thrombotic-like storms in covid-19 before they begin, thereby lowering the risk of severe disease in high-risk individuals.ros/crac/il-6-targeted activity of metformin: from preventive therapy of the premature death attributable to pm air pollution to geroprotector against the gerophilic and gerolavic traits of sars-severe covid-19 illness and death is more common in people aged 60 and older with underlying conditions, which can include chronic respiratory system disease not only due to chronic exposure to pm air pollution but also to immuno-senescence and inflamm-aging phenomena [18] [19] [20] [21] [22] . given the linkage between mitochondria functionality, ion channels including crac, and inflamm-aging [23] , the ability of metformin to target mitochondrial electron transport and prevent ros/cracmediated il-6 release might illuminate a preventive (and prophylactic) measure to quell the raging of the cytokine and thrombotic-like storms that are the leading causes of covid-19 morbidity and mortality in older people. such crac-related mechanism of action [24] capable of preventing systemically il-6-driven thrombotic events [1] , together with the multi-faceted capacity of metformin to ameliorate immunometabolism-related inflammation and alleviate ards [25] [26] [27] -which are believed to be the main risk factors for a worse outcome in the elderly with covid-19 [28, 29] -could provide a novel mechanistic basis for the recently proposed geroprotective role of metformin against the gerophilic and gerolavic traits of sars-cov-2 infection [30] .previous randomized clinical trials and numerous retrospective observational studies have consistently associated metformin administration with significant improvement in risk factors of aging-related diseases (cardiovascular, neurodegenerative, and cancer) beyond type 2 diabetes [31] [32] [33] . research is now urgently needed to test whether metformin might additionally aging reduce the comorbidity, infection rate, severity, and lethality of sars-cov-2 infection, with special emphasis on the elderly risk groups accounting for the majority of severe covid-19 disease and fatalities to date. clinical trial strategies such as the tame (targeting aging with metformin) study, which plans to enroll 3,000 older subjects (ages 65-79) without type 2 diabetes who will be randomly assigned to 1,500 mg metformin daily or placebo for 4 years to measure time to a new occurrence of a composite outcome that includes cardiovascular events, cancer, dementia, and mortality [31, 33] , provides an ideal opportunity to explore the recently proposed strategy of metformin as a low-cost geroprotector for prevention of sars-cov-2 [30] . in the meanwhile, observational studies in residential care nursing homes and day-care centers where older adults at significant risk of covid-19 outbreaks are receiving metformin for treatment of type 2 diabetes (along with the assessment of bronchial/serological levels of inflammatory cytokines and markers of pro-thrombotic/hypercoagulable states such as d-dimers) might provide a deeper comprehension of how metformin can protect and potentiate common preventive strategies such as distancing measures, maskwearing, and hand-washing.targeting hyperinflammation in severe covid-19 patients may be critical for reducing mortality. one might therefore wonder whether treatment with indirect (e.g., metformin [1] ) or direct (e.g., cm4620 [34] ) small-molecule inhibitors of crac channels could improve clinical outcomes in hospitalized patients with moderate/severe covid-19. cm4620-ie, a potent and selective small molecule crac channel inhibitor that prevents channel overactivation and has demonstrated efficacy in patients with hypoxemia secondary to systemic inflammatory response syndrome in acute pancreatitis [34] , will be trialed in patients with severe covid-19 pneumonia at risk for progressing to ards (clinicaltrials.gov identifier: nct04345614). because a subset of severe covid-19 infections have a delayed onset of respiratory distress despite the severity of hypoxemia that clearly differs from classic ards but principally involves a catastrophic microvascular injury and thrombosis [35] [36] [37] , it might be relevant to carefully evaluate the impact of targeting the mitochondrial ros/crac/il-6 signaling cascade in the respiratory, inflammatory, and survival outcomes during the "typical" and "atypical" presentation of ards in covid-19 patients. nonetheless, the findings from the clinical testing of crac-targeting drugs might link, at a mechanistic level, the metformin lessons on air pollution to ride (out) the cytokine/thrombotic storm in severe sars-cov-2/covid-19.this perspective merely aims to stimulate new ideas as part of the global efforts aimed to develop new preventive/treatment strategies against the sars-cov-2/covid-19 outbreak. accordingly, this perspective does not represent medical advice or therapeutic recommendations to either covid-19 patients or people at risk of sars-cov-2 infection.this manuscript was written over the course of the second month of lockdown in spain due to the sars-cov-2 coronavirus pandemic in march-may 2020. this paper is dedicated to the memory of all those who have succumbed to covid-19 during those hard days. the author would like to thank dr. kenneth mccreath for editorial support.the author declares no conflicts of interest.no funding was received for the writing of this perspective. work in the menendez laboratory is supported by the spanish ministry of science and innovation (grant saf2016-80639-p, plan nacional de i+d+i, founded by the european regional development fund, spain) and by an unrestricted research grant from the fundació oncolliga girona (lliga catalana d'ajuda al malalt de càncer, girona).cardiac damage, and evidence of pulmonary ground-glass opacities. in some patients, ground-glass opacities were detected in subpleural regions in both lungs, which may lead to both systemic and localized immune responses, exacerbating inflammation. in some cases, treatment with inhalers and interferon not only had no positive effects but also worsened the clinical symptoms, with the progression of pulmonary opacities [17, 20] .patients of advanced age and those with underlying conditions (e.g., hypertension, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, diabetes, and/or cardiovascular disease, etc.) are at higher risk of a rapid progression to acute respiratory distress syndrome, septic shock, metabolic acidosis, coagulation dysfunction, arrhythmia, kidney damage, heart failure, liver dysfunction, and/or secondary infection, often resulting in death [17, 19] .treatment options against this new disease are mainly limited to the mitigation of clinical symptoms, especially those affecting the respiratory system, including the application of oxygen therapy, with the provision of extracorporeal membrane oxygenation for patients with refractory hypoxemia. treatments with hyperimmune plasma and immunoglobulin g have also been received by some critically ill patients [21, 22] , while the administration of antivirals and corticosteroids is contraindicated [19, 23] . remdesivir, an adenosine nucleotide analog, has proven effective in in vitro and animal studies and in one patient in the usa [24, 25] . antiretrovirals used against the human immunodeficiency virus (hiv), such as lopinavir/ritonavir, have also been found to reduce the viral load of sars-cov-2 [26] . chloroquine has also been proposed as a candidate drug for the treatment of covid-19 based on its immunomodulatory properties and capacity to suppress tumor necrosis factor  (tnf-) and interleukin-6 (il-6) and to inhibit autophagy [27, 28] . in general, and especially in patients suffering from a cytokine storm, clinicians should focus on the reduction of uncontrolled inflammation by blocking il-6 and tnf- or eliminating cytokines via hemoperfusion [29] (table 1) . cytokine hyperproduction is often followed by edema, gas exchange dysfunction, acute respiratory syndrome, acute cardiac damage, and secondary infection [17] .with regard to the pathophysiological mechanism of the virus, it enters the cell via angiotensin-converting enzyme-2 (ace-2), mainly through the toll-like receptor-7the majority of patients infected with covid-19 have normal or reduced white cell counts and lymphocytopenia, and those with severe disease have shown significantly elevated levels of neutrophils, dimer-d, and urea in blood, with a continuing decrease in lymphocytes. increases in certain cytokines and chemokines (e.g., il-6, il-10, and tnf-) have also been observed in these patients. thus, patients admitted to intensive care units (icus) have been found to have elevated serum levels of il-2, il-7, il-10, macrophage colony-stimulating factor (m-csf), granulocyte colony-stimulating factor (g-csf), granulocyte-macrophage colony stimulating factor (gm-csf), 10 kd interferon-gamma-induced protein (ip-10), monocyte chemoattractant protein-1 (mcp-1), macrophage inflammatory protein 1- (mip 1-), and tnf- [17, 30, 31] (fig. 1) .it is essential to analyze the factors underlying the physiopathology of this pandemic disease, and certain cytokines appear to play a key role. the objective of this study was to review data on the cytokines that influence the progression of covid-19 in order to support efforts to manage this highly virulent disease.the immediate immune response to infection by viruses, bacteria, or other microorganisms involves the mobilization of cells and molecules and draws on energetic, enzymatic, and biosynthetic resources; i.e., metabolic resources [32] [33] [34] . metabolic dysfunctions caused by viral infection requires a reprograming of the host metabolism to generate effective antiviral defense responses. data published on interferences between the actions of viruses and cytokines reveal the molecular mechanisms underlying the innate immune response against viral infection [35] [36] [37] .cytokines are a group of polypeptide signaling molecules responsible for regulating a large number of biological processes via cell surface receptors [38] . key cytokines include those involved in adaptive immunity (e.g., il-2 and il-4), proinflammatory cytokines and interleukins (ils) (e.g., interferon (ifn)-i, -ii, and -iii; il-1, il-6, and il-17; and tnf-); and anti-inflammatory cytokines (e.g., il-10). in response to stress-generating internal processes (e.g., cancer or microbial infection), host cells secrete cytokines with a highly important role in cell metabolism reprogramming as a defensive response [32, 39, 40] .concerning covid-19 disease, blanco-mello et al. described a distinctive and unsuitable inflammatory response related to sars-cov-2 infection. these authors revealed that an "inappropriate and weak immune response" appears more frequently in patients with comorbidities. thus, this could favor virus replication and enhance complications related to severe cases of the disease [41] .in the short time since the emergence of covid-19, numerous studies have described abnormal levels of the following cytokines and chemokines in the patients: il-1, il-2, il-4, il-6, il-7, il-10, il-12, il-13, il-17, m-csf, g-csf, gm-csf, ip-10, ifn-, mcp-1, mip 1-, hepatocyte growth factor (hgf), tnf-, and vascular endothelial growth factor (vegf) [17, 30, 31, 42, 43] (table 2 ). the key point in sars-cov-2 infection could be the depletion of antiviral defenses related to innate immune response as well as an elevated production of inflammatory cytokines [41] .il-1 actively participates in the inflammatory response to infection [39] , and its main sources are activated monocytes and macrophages [44] . sars-cov-2 appears to act on the activation and maturation of il-1, which in turn activates other proinflammatory cytokines, such as il-6 and tnf- [45] [46] [47] . hence, il-1 forms part of the cytokine storm produced by coronavirus infections [48] [49] [50] [51] [52] [53] [54] . yang et al. detected elevated levels of the antagonistic receptor of il-1 (il-1ra) in 14 severe cases of covid-19, and this marker has been associated with increased viral load, loss of pulmonary function, lung damage, and mortality risk [55] . liu et al. also found elevated il-1 levels in patients with severe covid-19, and these were strongly associated with lung injury [56] . il-1 levels are related to the virulence of the process, and significantly higher serum levels have been observed in sars-cov-2 cases with severe symptoms than in mild cases or in those infected with the 2003 sars-cov or 2012 mers coronavirus [57] .most covid-19 patients with severe symptoms have elevated levels of il-1, which has been associated with sars, hypercoagulation, and disseminated intravascular coagulation [58] . for this reason, some therapeutic strategies have used the inhibition of il-1 in an attempt to avoid the cytokine storm [59, 60] . in this way, mesenchymal stem cells (mscs) have been used to inhibit proinflammatory cytokines such as il-1 and tnf- [43] . il-2 plays a key role in the proliferation of t cells and in the generation of effector and memory t cells [61] . it is involved in adaptive immunity and increases glucose metabolism to promote the proliferation and activation of t, b, and nk cells [39] . hence, il-2 participates in the prevention of autoimmune diseases and is essential to control immune responses and maintain self-tolerance [62] . the absence of this interleukin has been associated with a poor control of effector cells and the consequent development of autoimmunity [63] .huang et al. detected elevated levels of il-2 or its receptor il-2r in patients with covid-19, and it has been reported that these increases are directly proportional to the severity of the disease [17, 30, 43, [52] [53] [54] 56, 57, 64, 65] . elevation of this interleukin and its association with disease severity have also been reported in patients with other types of coronavirus [66] [67] [68] .il-4 is also involved in adaptive immunity, playing a crucial role in the immune regulation governed by activated t helper (th) cells. it preferentially acts through activation, proliferation, and differentiation of b lymphocytes and promotion of the immunoglobulin e isotype. it therefore decisively intervenes in the induction of humoral immunity-regulating th2 cells [39, 69] .it has been proposed that il-4 has an anti-inflammatory function that is specific to the tissue in which it is present, reflecting the metabolic plasticity of different tissues [70] . with respect to viral infections that target the respiratory system, bot et al. observed that its expression during infection with an influenza virus had negative effects on cd8 + memory t cells [71] .various studies of covid-19 patients have detected elevated il-4 levels as part of the cytokine storm associated with severe respiratory symptoms [16, 17, 43, 72] .j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f il-6 is involved in inflammation, the immune response, and hematopoiesis [73] .this pleiotropic biomolecule is secreted by multiple cell types and regulates a wide variety of physiological processes [74] . during initial stages of inflammation, secreted il-6 travels to the liver and induces a large number of acute-phase proteins, including creactive protein (crp), serum amyloid a (saa), fibrinogen, haptoglobin, and 1antitrypsin. in addition, il-6 has been found to diminish the production of fibronectin, albumin, and transferrin [75] . it has been reported that it has regenerative and antiinflammatory effects mediated by the conventional signaling process, although it also exerts proinflammatory effects mediated by trans-signaling, as in the case of viral infections [76] .in relation to the different types of coronavirus, elevated il-6 levels have been observed in sars cases and related to the severity of symptoms [48, 77, 78] and in sars-cov, being implicated in possible t-cell dysfunctionality. it has been observed that sars-cov-induced cytokines may damage the capacity of t cells in relation to dendritic cells, compromising the viability of these cells and macrophages to eliminate the pathogen [49, 79] . similar observations have been made in relation to mers [50, 80] . proportional association between elevated il-6 levels and t cell counts [82] , and another study of patients with severe symptoms described elevated serum levels of il-6 and crp [91] . a study of 452 patients infected with sars-cov-2 also reported that the elevation of il-6 levels was more marked with more severe symptoms [57] . these levels have been higher than those observed in patients with sars-cov or mers [77, 80] . il-6 levels were also found to be markedly higher in patients who died from covid-19 than in those who recovered [92] . as noted above, activation of il-1 by sars-cov-2 in turn activates il-6 and tnf- [45] [46] [47] . it has also been demonstrated that a high expression of il-6 in patients with covid-19 can accelerate the inflammatory process, contributing to the cytokine storm and worsening the prognosis [93] . the cytokine storm, including elevated levels of il-6, has also been associated with cardiac damage in these patients [94] .with regard to the important role of il-6 in the sars-cov-2-induced cytokine storm and its evasion, it has been reported that the monoclonal antibody tocilizumab acts by blocking the receptor of il-6 and has been reported to reverse cytokine hyperproduction [84, [95] [96] [97] , inflammation, and pulmonary fibrosis [98, 99] . in fact, a multicenter clinical trial is under way in china on the usefulness of tocilizumab to treat patients with covid-19 (nct04252664 & nct04257656), and it has already been included in clinical practice guidelines in china and italy [100, 101] . the polyol myoinositol was also described by bizzarri et al. as a potential candidate drug to reduce il-6 levels and the risk of cytokine storm [102] . in addition, the capacity of the macrolide azithromycin in combination with hydroxychloroquine, to reduce nasopharyngeal levels of sars-cov-2 has been attributed to its capacity to block il-6 and tnf- [103, 104] .chloroquine also has the capacity to inhibit il-6 and tnf-, and is being tested against covid-19 [104, 105] . finally, blood purification therapy has been proposed to eliminate pathological antibodies and il-6, among other cytokines, given its successful application against other diseases [85] .il-7 plays an important role in lymphocyte differentiation, participating in the development of t cells and peripheral homeostasis [106] . all of the main cd4 t cell subgroups (cd4+ immature, memory, and th17 cells) depend on this cytokine for peripheral homeostasis [107] [108] [109] [110] . il-7 activates t cells, increases the production of proinflammatory cytokines, and negatively regulates transforming growth factor beta (tgf-). the role of this biomolecule depends on il-6 [111] , and it has been suggested that il-7 secretion can be induced by viral infections [112] .as in the case of other cytokines, it has been reported that il-7 levels are elevated in patients with covid-19 and directly related to disease severity [17, 53, 54] .il-10 is a type 2 cytokine that inhibits the production of proinflammatory cytokines (e.g., ifn, tnf, il-1, and il-6) in various cell types and prevents dendritic cell maturation by blocking il-12. it hampers expression of the major histocompatibility j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f complex and costimulatory molecules, which have an important role in cell immunity.however, il-10 can have immunostimulatory effects, including the stimulation of ifn production by cd8 + t cells. it is also a powerful factor for the growth and differentiation of b cells, mast cells, and thymocytes [113] [114] [115] [116] [117] [118] [119] . numerous authors have described viruses (epstein barr virus, cytomegalovirus and herpesvirus) that contain il-10 homologs, which may contribute to the presentation of different binding profiles to receptors and biological activities that can increase viral resistance [72, 114, [120] [121] [122] [123] [124] [125] .however, il-10 regulation is decreased in infection with some viruses, such as hiv, contributing to t-cell depletion [126] [127] [128] . animal studies have shown that the antibody-mediated inhibition of il-10 signaling improves the t-cell response and contributes to eliminating viral resistance. hence, the effective blocking of il-10 signaling may be useful against resistant viral infections [129, 130] .various authors have detected this interleukin in patients with covid-19 and related its levels to disease severity and progression, as in the case of other cytokines [17, 43, 57, 64, 82, 83, 86, 88, 89] and it has been reported to have possible prognostic value [54] . in fact, some authors indicate that il-10 may be hyper-expressed in anti-sars-cov-2 immunity, being higher in patients of advanced age with respect to a "hyperinflammatory response", possibly related to the reduction of t-cell receptors in the elderly [131] . as with other cytokines, il-10 levels were found to be higher in patients with covid-19 than in those with sars-cov or mers [17] .il-12 is one of a group of heterodimeric biomolecules with distinctive characteristics, including pairing versality (also observed for il-23, il-27, and il-35), which are involved in molecular processes and functions with a crucial role in positive and negative feedback [132, 133] . il is a proinflammatory/prostimulatory cytokine produced in response to microbial agents by dendritic cells, b cells, monocytes, and macrophages, among others. it has key functions in the development of th1 and th17 cells [134] [135] [136] [137] . il-12 also induces the production of ifn- by t and nk cells in a positive feedback mechanism [138] .the action of this cytokine in viral infections is based on its direct chemotactic effects on the infiltration of nk cells, increasing their binding to vascular endothelial j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f cells. nk cells secrete ifn-, which participates in positive feedback by increasing the production of il-12 [139, 140] . viral infections rapidly induce the gene expression of il-12, which also acts after viral replication [141] [142] [143] . for instance, il-12 is endogenously induced during the pneumonia produced by influenza and activates nk cells, which secrete ifn- and thereby inhibit viral replication. il-12 has been found to produce some improvement in the response of cd8+ t cells [140] .elevated serum il-12 levels have been observed in patients infected with sars-cov-2, [16, 17, 43] and in those infected with other coronaviruses such as sars-cov [77] .mscs inhibit the secretion of il-12, as well as ifn- and tnf-, and have been proposed as an effective therapy against covid- 19 [144,145] .il-13 is secreted by activated th2 cells, constituting a counter-regulatory system for the th1-type immune response. it is considered an important regulator of immune responses mediated by th2-type cytokines [146] . il-13 has varied functions and has been implicated in the development of bronchial asthma by inducing the production of tgf-, eotaxin-3, and mucin [147] [148] [149] [150] . it also participates in the activation of mast cells (de vries je, 1996). both il-13 and il-4 are involved in allergic processes, asthma, and the regulation of th2 lymphocytes [151] . il-13 mediates tissue responses to infections, including the mobilization of eosinophils and the expulsion of parasites [152] .few data are available on the presence of il-13 in patients with covid-19.huang et al. found no difference in serum il-13 levels between those requiring icu admission and those who did not [17] . however, liu et al. observed a directly proportional association between il-13 levels and the viral load of sars-cov-2 [56] .il-17 is synthetized by th17 lymphocytes and is elevated in inflammatory processes and autoimmune diseases [153] [154] [155] [156] . it is also produced by cd8 + cells and by various sets of immature lymphocytes, including gamma-delta t cells, nk cells, and group 3 innate lymphoid cells [157] . il-17, alongside il-22 and tnf-, also induces the j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f production of antimicrobial peptides [158] . hence, il-17 is a proinflammatory cytokine that plays a role in tissue damage, physiological stress, and infection. these functions vary according to the tissue in which il-17 is expressed, being particularly important in the gastrointestinal tract and skin [159, 160] .elevated il-17 levels have been reported in patients with sars-cov-2 as part of the cytokine storm [17] , and they have been associated with the viral load and disease severity [56] . in contrast, wan et al. found that il-17 levels were normal in patients with covid-19, with no significant differences between patients with severe versus mild symptoms [54] . elevated il-17 levels were previously described in patients with sars-cov or mers [161, 162] . the fact that th17 cells can produce il-17, among others, has led to proposals for a therapeutic approach to covid-19 focused on janus kinase 2 (jak2) inhibitor named fedratinib. this jak2 inhibitor decreases il-17 expression by th17 cells in murine models [163] .m-csf, also known as colony-stimulating factor-1, is a primary growth factor that belongs to the family of colony-stimulating factors [164] . it regulates the growth, and even higher in those requiring icu admission [17] . this could lead the multiorgan failure related to severe cases [90, 169] . wu d and yang xo (2020) associated g-csf levels with the response of th17 lymphocytes in patients with sars-cov-2, finding that the il-17 produced by these cells can induce the production of g-csf, among others.they also reported that th17 contributes to the cytokine storm triggered by sars-cov-2 [163] . liu et al. directly related g-csf levels to the viral load of sars-cov-2 and the associated lung damage [56] .gm-csf is a heterodimeric complex that consists of a specific alpha chain of gm-csf and a signal transduction subunit shared with il-3 and il-5 receptors. it is a single-membrane protein that homodimerizes after binding to g-csf [170] [171] [172] . the main sources of this biomolecule are fibroblasts and endothelial, epithelial, stromal, and hematopoietic cells [164] , and it is secreted by epithelial cells in the lung [173, 174] .unlike m-csf and g-csf, gm-csf is virtually undetectable in the blood, although it has been found to be locally produced and activated in tissues affected by inflammatory processes. serum gm-csf levels can also be elevated in response to endotoxins. hence, gm-csf plays an important role in the inflammatory process [175] [176] [177] , stimulating the proliferation and activation of macrophages, eosinophils, neutrophils, monocytes, dendritic cells, and microglial cells. besides its role as a hematopoietic growth factor, this cytokine increases the production of proinflammatory cytokines, favors antigenic presentation and phagocytosis, and promotes chemotaxis and leukocyte adhesion. it is of major importance in maintaining immune homeostasis in lung and gut [178] .elevated serum gm-csf levels have been detected during the acute phase of infection by sars-cov-2 in comparison to healthy individuals, both in those who required icu admission and those who did not [17] . th17 cells produce gm-csf, and high th17 counts have been associated with elevated gm-csf levels [163] . it has also been observed that the activation of th1 cells by pathogens generate gm-csf, among other cytokines [93] .ip-10 was initially identified as a chemokine whose secretion is induced by ifn-. ip-10 is secreted by neutrophils, endothelial cells, keratinocytes, fibroblasts, dendritic cells, astrocytes, and hepatocytes. through its binding to chemokine receptor 3 (cxcr3), it regulates immune system responses by activating and recruiting leukocytes, including t cells, monocytes, and nk cells. therefore, ip-10 and cxcr3 play a key role in recruiting leukocytes to inflamed tissues and in perpetuating inflammation, thereby making a major contribution to tissue damage [179] . elevated ip-10 concentrations have been found in numerous infections, mainly viral infections [180] .serum ip-10 levels were found to be elevated in patients with covid-19 and even higher in those who required icu admission, suggesting their relationship with lung damage and disease severity [17] . high levels of this biomolecule were previously found in patients with sars-cov [77] , and the levels are even higher in those with sars-cov-2 [81] . thus, the hyperproduction of ip-10, among others, is considered to contribute to disease progression [17] . liu monocytes, macrophages, dendritic cells, and neutrophil granulocytes can also produce this cytokine. although numerous cells can be the source of ifn-, it is mainly produced by t and nk cells. mscs can also secrete low ifn- levels to regulate hematopoiesis [181] . ifn- participates in numerous immune and adaptive immunological functions and in inflammatory processes. it promotes macrophage activation and antigen presentation and is highly involved in anti-bacteria and anti-virus immunity and in signal transduction.it is difficult to classify ifn- as a pro-or anti-inflammatory cytokine, given its complex and varied roles [182] . (2020) observed that elevated ifn- levels were associated with greater viral load and lung damage [56] . sun et al. found that ifn-, il-6, and il-10 levels were higher in patients with infection by sars-cov-2 but did not differ between patients who required icu admission and those who did not [88] . in fact, these authors found that levels of this cytokine were lower in cd4 + t-cells from patients with severe versus mild symptoms and suggested that the infection may initially affect cd4 + and cd8 + t-cells, reducing the production of ifn- [64] .this protein belongs the c-c chemokine family and is a powerful monocyte chemotactic factor that is constitutively produced or induced by oxidative stress, cytokines, or growth factors. it can be expressed by endothelial cells, fibroblasts, epithelial cells, smooth muscle cells, mesangial cells, astrocytes, monocytes, and microglial cells, which play an important role in the antiviral response in the peripheral circulation and tissues. monocytes and macrophages are the main source of mcp-1, which regulates the migration and infiltration of monocytes, memory t cells, and nk cells [184] .huang et al. found that mcp-1 levels were higher in patients with covid-19 and even higher among those admitted to icu [17] . it has been reported that mcp-1 increases rapidly in the early acute phase of infection and then progressively decreases with the advance of the disease [185] . xiong et al. detected elevated levels of mcp-1 and other cytokines in the bronchoalveolar lavage fluid of patients with covid-19 and associated the pathogeny of the virus with these cytokines [186] . elevated levels of this protein have also been detected in the lung tissue of patients infected with sars-cov-2 [81] .tnf- is produced by various cell types, such as monocytes, macrophages, and t cells, among others. this cytokine has been related to proinflammatory responses mediated by il-1 and il-6. alongside other cytokines, tnf- is involved in the regulation of inflammatory processes, infectious diseases, and malignant tumors [187] .it has been observed that serum tnf- levels are elevated in patients with covid-19 and are higher with more severe disease [17, 57, 64] . diao et al. reported similar results in a sample of 522 patients with covid-19 and found an inverse relationship between tnf- levels and t-cell counts [82] . in contrast, wan et al.described normal tnf- levels in patients with covid-19 [54] . tnf- was one of the cytokines whose overproduction was related to a poor prognosis in patients with sars-cov and mers [48] [49] [50] 183] . zhang et al. proposed that the administration of certolizumab, an anti-tnf- antibody, might have beneficial effects on patients with covid-19 [188] . another possible therapeutic approach is to use mscs to inhibit tnf- and il-1, among other cytokines [145] .other biomolecules besides cytokines have shown increased expression in patients with covid-19, including growth factors.j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f vegf vegf is essential for vascular endothelial homeostasis and is present in numerous cells and tissues. it has also been found to participate in the pathogenesis of tumor growth and metastasis. vegf plays an essential role in endothelial cell activation by binding to cell surface receptors (vegfr). the integrity of the endothelial barrier in lung tissue is crucial for alveolar immune regulation. severe inflammation and the associated immune responses induce the apoptosis of epithelial and endothelial cells, increasing the production of vegf and exacerbating edema and the extravasation of immune cells [188] . the pathogenic effects of this factor are related to its action on vascular permeability and neoangiogenesis [189, 190] . vegf hyper-regulation is observed in various viral infections, and attempts have been made to stimulate this factor by using vegf homologs present in some viruses or by activating inflammatory mediators that trigger the overexpression of vegf [189] .serum vegf levels were found to be higher in patients with sars-cov-2, although they did not differ between those who were admitted to icu and those who were not [17] . as noted above, the therapeutic application of mscs is under consideration due to their regenerative and immunomodulatory potential. besides vegf, mscs can also secrete vegf, among others, which would be useful in the approach to respiratory distress syndrome and in the regeneration of lung tissue and treatment of lung fibrosis induced by infections [145] .hepatocyte growth factor (hgf) is synthesized by fibroblasts and by endothelial and hepatic cells, among other cell populations. the active form is produced by the action of a serine protease enzyme released by damaged tissues. in the lungs, hgf is sequested by pulmonary fibroblasts, and its secretion is increased when the tissue is damaged [191] .serum hgf and mip 1- levels were found to be elevated in patients with covid-19, and even higher mip 1- levels were found in those requiring icu admission [17] .the immunological reaction triggered by infection with sars-cov-2 mobilizes numerous cytokines, mainly of proinflammatory character. changes in their levels are associated with the presence of the disease and a more severe prognosis. this study summarizes findings on the role of these cytokines in the onset and outcomes of sars-cov-2 infection and on possible therapeutic approaches involving the inhibition of their activity.the authors declare no competing or financial interests. chen et al. [16] retrospective study to describe the epidemiological and clinical features of sars-cov-2 pneumonia in patients from wuhan jinyintan hospital approximately 50% of the subjects who developed the disease had been exposed to the huanan seafood market. it affects men more often, with an average age of 55.approximately half of the subjects had other comorbidities. the main symptomatology is characterized by fever, cough, shortness of breath, muscle pain among others. ct scan revealed that 75% of patients developed bilateral pneumonia and some cases evolved into acute respiratory distress syndrome (ards) or died from multiple organ failure.huang et al. [17] descriptive study to describe the epidemiological, clinical, laboratory and radiological characteristics, treatment and outcomes of patients infected with covid-19 in wuhan and make a comparison between patients in the intensive care unit (icu) and those who are not infection by sars-cov-2 caused clusters of severe respiratory disease and was associated with icu admission and high mortality. most of the infected patients were male, with different comorbidities and an average age of 49 years. the disease is mainly manifested by fever, cough, and myalgia or fatigue. dyspnea occurred in more than 50% of the patients. lymphopenia was present in 63% of the cases. patients admitted to the icu were found to have higher plasma levels of il2, il7, il10, gscf, ip10, mcp1, mip1a, and tnfα.liu et al. [30] descriptive study to describe the epidemiology, clinical features, possible treatments and prognosis of patients infected with sars-cov-2 in hubeithe initial manifestations of sars-cov-2 were fever, cough and muscle pain or fatigue. most patients had a normal or decreased white blood cell count, and 72.3% had lymphocytopenia. lung involvement was observed in all cases. treatment was based on symptom control and respiratory support. immunoglobulin g was administered to some critically ill patients while systemic corticosteroids showed no significant benefit. the risk of death was related to age, comorbidities and the period between initial symptoms and dyspnea.wang et al. [31] retrospective study to describe the cytokine release syndrome-like (crsl) that occurs in patients affected by covid-19 pneumonia and to identify risk factors and possible treatments.average age: 58 years old. gender: men mostly. extensive pulmonary inflammation and ards: 83,3%. symptoms: fever, hypoxia and shock (28,6%). laboratory findings: decrease of cd3, cd4, cd8, nk cells. increase of il-6, cd4/cd8 ratio. crsl: 72, 7%, manifested by: pulmonary inflammation, decrease of cd4, cd8 and nk, increase of il-6 and dysfunction of non-pulmonary organs. management: ventilation, anti-inflammatory therapy, mechanical-ventilation chen et al. [43] literature review to review the literature on the relationship between covid-19 and the cytokine storm as well as the possible immutherapic treatments availablethe effectiveness of some therapies was demonstrated such as the use of stem cells that inhibit the activation of t-lymphocytes, macrophages and induce their differentiation into regulatory subpopulations of t-cells and anti-inflammatory macrophages, but also inhibit the secretion of il-1α, tnf-α, il-6, il-12, and γinterferon, controlling the cytokine storm.conti et al. [52] literature review to clarify the relationship between il-1 and il-6 pro-inflammatory cytokines and lung inflammation. anti-inflammatory strategies infection with covid-19 causes a release of il-1β and il-6 which will lead to lung inflammation, fever and fibrosis. the therapeutic potential of severalsevere acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2) is a member of the coronaviridae that causes respiratory disorders. after infection, large amounts of inflammatory cytokines are secreted, known as the cytokine storm. these cytokines can cause pulmonary damage induced by inflammation resulting in acute respiratory distress syndrome (ards), and even death.one of the therapeutic approaches for treatment of ards is a mesenchymal stem cell (msc). mscs suppress inflammation and reduce lung injury through their immunomodulatory properties. mscs also have the potential to prevent apoptosis of the lung cells and regenerate them. but our suggestion is using mscs-derived exosomes. because these exosomes apply the same immunomodulatory and tissue repair effects of mscs and they don't have problems associated to cell maintenance and injections.for investigation the hypothesis, mscs should be isolated from tissues and characterized.then, the exosomes should be isolated from the supernatants and characterized. these exosomes should be injected into a transgenic animal for covid-19. in the final section, lung function assessment, histological examination, micro-ct, differential leukocyte, viral load analysis, cytokine assay, and crp level analysis can be investigated.covid-19 treatment is currently focused on supportive therapies and no vaccine has not been developed for it, so, numerous research studies are needed to find potential. since the pathogenesis of this disease was identified in previous studies and can cause lung injury with ards, so, investigation of the therapeutic approaches that can suppress inflammation, cytokine storm and ards can be helpful in finding a novel therapeutic approach for this disease.severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2) is a member of the family coronaviridae that, like two other members of the family, coronavirus (sars-cov) and middle east respiratory syndrome coronavirus (mers-cov), causes respiratory disorders [1, 2] . the virus was first detected in wuhan, china, on december 2019, and the disease caused by the virus, coronavirus disease (covid- 19) , was characterized as a pandemic on 11 march 2020 by the world health organization (who) [3, 4] .that can encode a number of structural proteins such as m (matrix), e (envelope), n (nucleocapsid) and s (spike) protein as well as a number of non-structural proteins. among these structural proteins, the s protein binds to the angiotensin-converting enzymes 2 (ace2) present on the surface of human cells, especially the alveolar type ii cells that highly express this receptor, and then the virus enters the host lung cells [5, 6] . effective immune responses against viral infections depend on ifn-i production from innate immune cells and subsequently cell mediated immunity through t helper 1 and cytotoxic t cells [5] . so, as the virus enters the cell, its genome is recognized by various pattern recognition receptors (prrs) such as toll-like receptor-3 (tlr-3), tlr7-9, retinoic acid-inducible gene-i (rig-i), melanomadifferentiation-associated gene 5 (mda5), and cyclic gmp-amp synthase (cgas), then signaling pathways are initiated. following these incidences, large amounts of type i interferons and inflammatory cytokines are secreted [7] [8] [9] [10] . following these inflammatory conditions in the lungs, which also increase with the proliferation of the virus, a sharp increase in inflammatory cytokines such as il-2, il-7, il-10, g-csf, ip-10, mcp-1, mip-1a, andtnfα have been reported in patients with covid, known as the cytokine storm [11] . this cytokine storm is similar to that seen in sars and mers and is caused by the lack of proper regulation of inflammatory immune responses [12, 13] .clinical evidences demonstrated that this cytokine storm is the main cause of acute respiratory distress syndrome (ards) in covid-19 [5, [12] [13] [14] . pathogenic t cells produce inflammatory cytokines after activation and subsequently inflammatory monocytes and other leukocytes migrate to the lung [15] . increased neutrophil counts have been reported as a symptom in a number of patients [2] . these activated immune cells may cause pulmonary damage induced by inflammation resulting in complications such as pneumonia, loss of lung function, ards, and even death (fig. 1a ) [5, [12] [13] [14] . since ards is recognized as one of the leading causes of mortality in patients and appears to be caused by cytokine storm, so, suppression of this inflammation may cause decrease inflammatory cytokine production and consequently reduce inflammation and lung injury. as has been shown, the use of anti-il6 in patients with covid-19-induced pneumonia can be useful and has been approved in china [16] . currently, there is no approved treatment for sars-cov-2, and usually supportive treatments such as the use of ventilators and muscle relaxants were used for these patients [6, 16, 17] . numerous therapeutic interventions have been performed to treat ards, but since the mechanisms of damage in ards are complex and diverse, it seems that therapeutic strategies that target a single pathway or mediator cannot be useful in achieving therapeutic outcome [17] . therefore, interventions that target several aspects of immunopathogenesis and associated injuries, can be helpful to find the appropriate treatment strategy. [19] [20] [21] [22] [23] [24] . mscs are the multipotent cells that can be obtained from different tissues such as, adipose tissue and bone marrow. these cells have the self-renewing capacity and can be differentiated into chondrogenic, osteogenic and adipogenic lineages [25] . several features of these cells have made them an appealing candidate for the treatment of many diseases, including ards.  immunomodulatory properties: mscs able to alter the function of the immune cells and modulate the immune response [17] . for example, in lps-induced ards animal models, it has been shown that, mscs suppress inflammation and reduce inflammationinduced lung injury through their immunomodulatory properties. these cells affect the macrophages by releasing prostaglandin e2 (pg-e2), and reduce the production of inflammatory cytokines and increase il-10 production. il-10 reduced neutrophils recruitment to the lungs and attenuated inflammatory cytokine production [20, 22, 24] .mscs can also increase regulatory t cells and alter the phenotype of macrophages to m2 macrophages [17] . tissue repair characteristic: mscs also have the potential to repair tissue and can prevent apoptosis of the lung cells and regenerate them, especially type ii alveolar cells by producing growth factors such as keratinocyte growth factor (kgf), vascular endothelial growth factor (vegf), and hepatocyte growth factor (hgf). this characteristic is important because people with ards develop pulmonary fibrosis even after surviving the acute phase of the disease [19, 21, 26] . mscs can restore epithelial protein permeability by secretion of angiopoietin-1. these cells can increase phagocytosis capacity of the macrophages by transferring the microvesicles [17] . some studies shown that mscs could imply antiviral activity. it was shown that gammaherpesvirus infected mscs could limit the replication of the virus after sensing its dna by cgas and initiation of the sting-tbk1 signaling pathway. this pathway that is resulted in ifn-γ production along with ifn-γ independent manner could be responsible for the anti-viral response of the mscs [27] . in addition, some studies shown that ido, which expressed by mscs, could responsible for anti-viral activity of the mscs [28] [29] [30] . ido-positive mscs triggered by inflammatory cytokines demonstrated antimicrobial effector function against pathogens such as viruses [28] . in a study performed in 2011, it was shown that ifn-γ stimulated the expression of the ido in mscs and the replication of the cmv and hsv-1 were decreased [29] .in summary, it can be suggested that mscs can be attractive candidates for improving covid-19-induced ards and lung injury, due to their immunomodulatory, tissue repair and anti-viral characteristics (fig 1b) .but our suggestion is using mscs-derived exosomes. because it has been shown that msc- were significantly decreased [32] . in a study performed in 2018, intravenous injection of mscexosomes reduced the tnf-α, il-1β, nf-κb, and matrix metallopeptidase 9 in the lung.another study mentioned that these exosomes could decrease endothelial cell apoptosis and il-6 production. an increase in il-10 production was also observed [33] . in addition to this, due to the specific structure of the exosomes, mirnas as well as various drugs can be inserted into them. then, after administration of these exosomes, they can be trapped in the lung tissue and reached to the target cells. these mirnas or drugs can target the specific molecules inside the infected cells and diminish local inflammation or prevent apoptosis of the lung cells [34] .in a song et al. study, it was showed that pretreatment of the mscs with il-1β augmented their immunomodulatory effects. because their exosomes transfer of mir-146a to the target cells [35] . other advantages of the exosomes include ease of access, lack of problems associated to cell maintenance and injections, proper size, and finally the nature of their phospholipid membranes, which enable them to fuse with the target cell membrane and transfer the cargo into the cytoplasm. additionally, this special structure protects the contents of the exosomes from degradation [36] .to investigate the effects of exosomes derived from mscs, a study can be performed according to the following steps and characteristics:at the first section of the study, mscs should be isolated from tissues, different sources can be chosen such as adipose tissue, bone marrow, wharton jelly, and, etc. second, these cells will be cultured. then, the differentiation potential of homogenous population of spindleshaped mscs will be determined using in vitro adipogenic and osteogenic induction. in addition, the immunophenotype of mscs will be confirmed by measurement of cd73, cd90, cd105, cd14, cd45, cd34, and hla-dr cell surface marker using flowcytometry. after the adaptation of the cells with serum-free medium the supernatants of them can be collected. then, a good manufacturing practice (gmp)-grade method should be used for the isolation of the exosomes from the supernatants, as a medicinal product [37] . the next step is to characterize the exosomes. for this purpose, the size distribution of isolated exosomes will be evaluated using dynamic light scattering (dls) and nanosight, nanoparticle tracking analysis (nta).the morphology of these vesicles will be determined using scanning electron microscopy (sem) and transmission electron microscopy (tem) analysis. in addition, the expression of exosome membrane specific markers including cd9, cd63 and cd81 will be assessed using western blot or flowcytometry.the second section of the study is related to animal model preparation and exosome injection to them. it is better to choose two ards models that induced by different condition and compare them with each other. for example, a hace2 transgenic animal infected with sars-cov-2 [38] and an lps-induced ards animal [24] . next, the isolated exosomes should be injected into these animals. intravenous or intratracheal injection can be performed. it is suggested to use both of these routes and compare them with each other. injection program can be designed like this: pbs, exosomes derived from other sources such as fibroblasts, mscexosomes (dose 1), msc-exosomes (dose 2), and other doses.in the final section of the study, the effects of exosome injection on different groups should be measured. lung function assessment can be investigated through arterial oxygenation and static lung compliance evaluation [22] . in addition to these, histological examination or micro-ct can be done for assessment of the lung injury. ball is an important sample for evaluating the effects of msc-exorcisms' on lung inflammation. after collection of the ball sample, differential leukocyte count can be done. for the monitoring of the viral load, real time pcr is a beneficial technique. evaluating the cytokine profile using elisa can be useful. another sample is blood, that differential leukocyte count, inflammatory cytokines and crp level are the important data for evaluating msc-exosomes effects on ards and cytokine storm. all of these procedure can be performed in clinical trials studies after confirmation in animal models ( fig. 2 ).since covid-19 treatment is currently focused on supportive therapies and no vaccine has not been developed for it [6] , so, numerous research studies are needed to find potential therapies to control the virus as soon as possible. because sars-cov-2 has high transmission potential and spreads rapidly throughout the world and causes many deaths. since the pathogenesis of this disease was identified partially in previous studies and there are similarities between its pathogenesis with that of other viruses in this family and some bacterial infections and can cause lung injury with ards [1, 5, 14] , so, investigation of the therapeutic approaches that can suppress inflammation, cytokine storm and ards can be helpful in finding a novel therapeutic approach for this disease. therefore, the use of mscs as one of the immunomodulating and tissue regenerating cells that have previously shown satisfactory effects on ards and cytokine storms [19, [21] [22] [23] [24] 39] could be considered. since these cells exert their effects in a variety of ways, such as exosomes secretion, the use of their exosomes can be considered as a cell-free therapy [31] . because these exosomes can have antiinflammatory effects on lung tissue by transferring mrnas, mirnas, and various proteins from its secretory cell to the target cell [40] . as previously shown, these exosomes can reduce inflammatory cytokines, increase regulatory cytokines and suppress inflammation [34] .monsel et al. also showed that msc-exosomes could increase survival of alveolar type ii cells by increasing intracellular atp levels [41] . so we introduced this hypothesis in order to further study in the future and hope to see satisfactory results.the authors have no conflict of interest.no financial support was used for the development or writing of this manuscript. ■the authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.☐the authors declare the following financial interests/personal relationships which may be considered as potential competing interests:the family of coronaviruses (cov) are enveloped rna viruses which can be highly pathogenic to human beings [1] . before long, the epidemics of the two highly infectious coronaviruses, severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus (sars-cov) [2] and middle east respiratory syndrome coronavirus (mers-cov) [3] had resulted disastrous effects to human beings globally. the outbreak of severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2) and coronavirus disease-2019 (covid-19) originated from wuhan, china in the end of 2019 has caused thousands of deaths [4] . phylogenetic analysis of sars-cov-2 indicated that it is closely related to sars-cov (~79%) and a little more distant to mers-cov(~50%) [5] . the pathological changes of covid-19 dead puncture suggest that its pathological characteristics are very similar to sars-cov and mers-cov-induced viral pneumonia [6] . thus, it is critical to identify common patterns between these lethal pathogens and immune response.coronavirus has specific immune response and immune escape characteristics, and then causes severe pathogenic mechanisms through inflammation, which leaded to severe pneumonia, pulmonary oedema, ards, or multiple organ failure and even death [7] . cytokine storm, also known as cytokine cascade, or hypercytokinemia, is caused by infection, drugs or autoimmune diseases of the body's excessive immunity response [8] . pioneering investigations have confirmed that increased volumes of pro-inflammatory cytokines in serum (e.g., il-1b, il-6, il-12, ifn-γ) correlated with pulmonary inflammation and severe lung impairment in sars patients [9] . mers-cov infection was also described to provoke increased concentrations of cytokines (il-15,il-17, aging tnf-α, and ifn-γ) [10] . it is reported that victims infected with sars-cov-2 also demonstrate high amounts of il-1b, ifn-γ, ip10, and mcp1, which may attribute to activated th1 (t helper) cell responses [11] . although these virus invaded human bodies through various proteins(sars-cov: angiotensin-converting enzyme 2, angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ace-2), mers-cov: dipeptidyl peptidase-4 (ddp-4), sars-cov-2: ace-2 possibly ), the similar cytokine cascade from immune response which caused severe damage has been widely covered [12] .hence, identifying the key cytokines induced by coronavirus infection and the cells involved in the regulation of cytokine storms, blocking their signal transduction, will greatly reduce the inflammatory response and damage to the lung tissue and multiple organs of patients.sars-cov-2 shows 88% identity to the sequence of sars-like coronaviruses and about 50% to the sequence of mers-cov. due to the similar structure, their pathogenesis is similar. sars-cov-2, just like sars-cov, requires the ace-2. mers-cov enters target cells not via ace-2, but via binding to dpp-4. both ace-2 and dpp-4 are expressed in several human tissues. while the virus enters the cells, antigen presentation subsequently stimulates the body's humoral and cellular immunity, which are mediated by virusspecific immune cells. immune response causes a lot of symptoms and the main death cause of coronavirus is cytokine storm, which is the deadly uncontrolled systemic inflammatory response. covid-19 induced strong immune response is resulting from the release of large amounts of pro-inflammatory cytokines and chemokines, which are similar to the symptoms of sars-cov and mers-cov infections. hence, although the pathogenesis of covid-19 is poorly understood, the similar mechanisms of sars-cov and mers-cov still can give us a lot of information on the pathogenesis of sars-cov-2 infection to facilitate our recognition of covid-19 ( figure 1 ).to explore sars-cov induced immune responses, infected mice group was analyzed. lungs from mice were harvested at 12, 24, and 48 hours post-infection and at least 3 biological replicates were collected. as pneumonia in the elderly is more susceptible to infection and the symptoms are heavier, the changes in inflammatory factors at 12, 24, and 48 hours after the infection of the sars virus in elderly rats were analyzed, and multiple factors were found to occur. il-1α, il-1 β, il-6 and il-10 presented a significant higher level and was more obvious at 24 hours while the level of il-7 showed moderate fluctuation and il-23α a decreased trend ( figure 2 ). the results showed that sars-cov infection induced a cytokine storm. as for interferon system which protects mammals against virus infections, we analyzed the changes of interferon at 12h, 24h and 48h after infection with sars virus in elderly rats. we found ifn-α2, ifn-β1 and ifn2 all demonstrated higher expression volumes especially in 24h ( figure 3 ) which suggest the onset such as plasmacytoid dendritic cells (pdcs) and proinflammatory monocytes. in terms of changes in chemokines which synergistically induce a proinflammatory recruitment, the level of ccl2, ccl3, ccl5 and ccl10 are all drastically elevated in 24h and remained high level in 48h. in the meantime, cxcl3 expression increased in 24h but decreased in 48h. and cxcl5 expression showed a decreased trend in 24h and 48h compared to 12h ( figure 4 ). taken together, these rising molecules reflected anti-viral response from the host in the early phase.in order to explore the common pattern of immune response after coronavirus contagion, we analyzed the situation in mers-cov infected human microvascular endothelial cells. so we analyzed the expression genes of interleukins and interferons after 24h. and we found interleukins (il-6, il-23α, il-10, il-7, il-1α, il-1β) and interferons (ifn-α2, ifn2, ifn-γ) have increased dramatically ( figure 5 ) which indicated an elevated anti-virus immune response.to explore the immune differences between young and aged mice, we analyzed the cytokine variation after sars-cov infected for 12 and 24 hours. the results showed that several cytokines increase more significantly in aged mice than young mice ( figure 6 ). it indicated that coronavirus may cause more severe cytokine storms in elderly patients. to quantify the immune response on cell level, we applied ssgsea method to compare the variation of different immune cells of aged and young mice after sars-cov infection. the level of t cells, nk cells and monocytes increased significantly both in aged and young mice. lymphoid cells show an elevated level in young mice but remained stable comparatively in aged mice. and aging granulocytes tend to decrease both in aged and young mice after the infection. interestingly, monocytes aged mice increased more quickly (24h) than in the young mice (48h) (figure 7) . the results showed that coronavirus infection can cause strong immune response in both young and old mice. lymphocyte-mediated immune responses are more severe in young mice, but monocyte-mediated immune responses are more rapid in older mice.for further study, we analyzed immune cells in peripheral blood of 463 patients with covid-19 disease (table 1) . we found that total lymphocytes, cd3+, cd4+ and cd8+ t lymphocytes significantly went down in the severe type patients compared to the common type ( figure 8 ) which indicated sars-cov-2 can impose hard blows on human lymphocyte resulting in lethal pneumonia. moreover, total lymphocytes, and cd8+ t lymphocyte counts decreased more severely in patients >= 50 years old than those below 50 which suggest that young patients are more likely to bounce back. and cd3+ or cd4+ lymphocyte counts showed no significant difference between different age groups.pathological manifestations of covid-19 greatly resemble what has been seen in sars and mers infection which massive interstitial inflammatory infiltrates diffused in the lung [6] . the cellular fibromyxoid exudate which caused severe alveolar impairment from postmortem autopsy indicates the cytokine storm may play a critical role in patient rapid death. in this study, we found that genes coding interleukins(il-1α, il-1β, il-6, il-10), chemokines (ccl2, ccl3, ccl5, ccl10), and interferons (ifn-α2, ifn-β1 and ifn2) raised significantly in sars-cov treated mice within 24h which in line with the elevated infiltration of t cells, nk cells and monocytes. and similar pattern of cytokine projection were found in the mers-cov infected group.investigating the inflammatory profile in sars and mers may advance our knowledge of the immunepathological process in covid-19 treatment. in this study, we reviewed sars-infected mice and merstreated human micro vascular endothelial cells to clarify the association between temporal changes in cytokine/ chemokine profiles and the six immune cell infiltration patterns. we retrospectively reviewed the clinical data of 463 cases with common and severe type covid-19, who discharged before february 6, 2020. we found that severe type of patients suffered more serious symptoms like higher fever and took more time to recover which may suggest the fluctuation of immune indices is of predictive value.to explore the specific mechanism of immune environment changes, we analyzed potential influencing factors. cytokines, not merely aid in the process of antimicrobial immunity but are liable for immunepathological damage to owner cells, causing significant morbidity or even fatality in multiple respiratory disorders as well [17, 18] . chemokines like cxcl10 (ip10) and ccl2 (mcp-1) proved to be up-regulated in monocytes/macrophages by sars-cov which is consistent with our results [19] . the clinical progression of mers cases proves that secretion of monocyte chemo-attractant protein-1 (mcp-1), cxcl10 is out of control [20] . pro-inflammatory cytokines (il-6, ccl5), and interferon-stimulated genes (cxcl10) are involved in toll-like receptors (tlr) signaling [21] . these molecules are effectors on the process of respiratory virus infections towards the context of acute respiratory distress syndrome (ards) which is lethal to the covid-19 patients [22] . il-12 is the main cytokine secreted by dcs that manages the differentiation of cd4+ t cells into th1 cells and serves essential duty in cell-mediated immunity. and il-23 which includes in the il-12 family are aging predominantly pro-inflammatory cytokines which contribute critical roles in the growth of th17 cells [23, 24] . increased expression of il-12 and il-23 after sars-infected lung tissue in mice may indicate the activated response of th1 and th17 cells which is observed in mers victims as well [10] . interesting, in the sars-cov infected cells, the ace-2 was significantly correlated with neutrophils, nk cells, th17 cells, th2 cells, th1 cells, dc which may call for further investigations [25] .ifn-α/β is regarded as one of the body's primary antiviral defenses. ifn-β exerts its effects through intercellular communication resulting the induction of ifn-α/β and interferon-stimulated genes (isgs), which make up an important aspect of host antiviral defense [26] . notwithstanding, particular cell types, such as pdcs and monocytes, have been confirmed to produce more ifn than other cell types when viral infection committed [27] . and elevated level of ifn and monocyte infiltration in our analysis validates this. the aging innate immune response on the basis of pdcs and monocytes may play substantial role in the formation of the cytokine storm which damages the lung severely.lymphopenia is common in covid-19 patients. severe lymphocyte reduction occurred in about 10% of patients, especially in the heavy group, which is consistent with the latest reported results [28] . flow cytometry showed that cd3+, cd4+ and cd8+ t lymphocytes had decreased to varying degrees. and aged patients suffered a more severe decrease in total lymphocytes and cd8+ t lymphocytes. about 40% of patients had a decrease in cd4 + t lymphocytes, and the incidence was higher in the heavy group than in the common group. this shows that sars-cov-2 may mainly attack lymphocytes in the body, which can cause the reduction of cd4 + t lymphocytes, resulting in decreased immune function and infection, and severe cases of severe pneumonia.in a word, we analyze the cytokine profiles in sars-cov infected mice and mers-cov infected human micro vascular cells. interleukin (il-1α, il-1 β, il-6, il-10), chemokine (ccl2, ccl3, ccl5, ccl10), and interferon (ifn-α2, ifn-β1 and ifn2) increased dramatically in sars-cov treated mice within 24h. as for mers-cov treated cells, interleukins (il-6, il-23α, il-10, il-7, il-1α, il-1β) and interferon (ifn-α2, ifn2, ifn-γ) showed a significant ascending trend in 24h. subsequent analysis revealed elevated abundance of t cells, nk cells and monocytes in both young and aged mice group treated by sars-cov. and impaired lymphocyte system in severe and aged covid-19 patients indicates the disease is more likely to progress when cytokines exhausted and functional lymphocytes suppressed. thus, catching the window of treatment for covid-19 according to these immune molecules may be critical.microarray datasets related to gene expression were obtained from the geo database for sars-cov dataset (gse36969), young (8 weeks old) and aged (1 year old) female balb/c mice were intranasally infected with 10^5 pfu of ma15 epsilon (sars-cov pathogenic virus). for mers-cov dataset (gse79218), human microvascular endothelial cells were infected with merscov002 (mers-cov pathogenic virus) or mocks and the 24h post-infection time point was picked for analysis. all gene expression datasets above were independently log2 transformed and quantile normalized in the linear models for microarray data (limma) package in the r language environment.patients who were diagnosed with covid-19 and collected from wuhan jinyintan hospital from january 1 to february 6, 2020 were collected. this study was approved by the ethics review committee of wuhan jinyintan hospital. diagnostic criteria are according to the "diagnosis and treatment of new coronavirus pneumonia " issued by the general office of the national health and health commission as the diagnostic standard [13] . we classified patients into 2 types: (1) common: fever, respiratory tract and other symptoms, with or without pneumonia manifestations on imaging; (2) severe: meet any of the following: ① respiratory distress, rr ≥ 30 beats / min; ② in resting state, refers to oxygen saturation ≤ 93%; ③ partial pressure of arterial oxygen (pao2) / oxygen concentration (fio2) ≤ 300mmhg.the wilcoxon t-test were used to determine differences between two groups for continuous variables and the kruskal -wallis rank sum test for more than two groups, respectively. and we applied single cell gene set enrichment analysis (ssgsea) to estimate the infiltration of immune cells [14] using the gsva r package [15] . fingerprint genes of granulocytes, monocytes, nk cells, activated and naive t cells, b cells and lymphoid cells are extracted from the previous study [16] . statistical analyses were performed in the r (version 3.6.1) language environment and p-value <0.05 (two-sided) is considered to be significant.jhz conceived the initial concept and designed the study, kw, zz and zxy participated to design the study and in the data extraction. zz and zxy wrote the manuscript. all authors read and approved the final manuscript.viruses, including sars, and influenza, can change quickly, thereby negating the efficacy of developed vaccines and targetted antiviral drugs. 1 consequently, it is important to utilize any substance that can more widely limit viral effects. often, as in the case of covid-19, there is little likelihood of developing a vaccine or antiviral within a year of the emergence of such a devastating infection. utilizing or developing more generic antivirals is a significant challenge, given that viruses can vary considerably as to the their effects, including on the immune system. for example, a general antiviral requirement for influenza and covid-19 would be for a treatment that limits the initial innate immune-associated "cytokine storm" where evident, while also acting to increase the efficacy of the adaptive immune response. 2 however, for the ebola virus, such initial dampening of the innate immune response is not so clinically relevant. allowing for such variability in virus effects, melatonin has emerged as a top candidate for protection against an array of different viruses, including the coronavirus. [3] [4] [5] this would seem to arise from the close evolution of melatonin within the emerging mitochondria in the first single-cellular organsims, allowing melatonin to be intimately associated with mitochondrial function, and thereby with immune system regulation. 6 the interactions of our "bacterial-driven" coexistence with viruses have provided a "war of the worlds" from which plant and animal evolution have emerged, and in which evolution has acted to tolerate and limit rather than annihilate. melatonin is an important aspect of our interactions with viruses.as data pertaining to the pathophysiology of covid-19 have still to emerge, the current article focusses primarily on the role of melatonergic pathway in the management of influenza viruses, as well as highlighting its potential utility in supporting people at high risk of fatality from influenza viruses and covid-19. at the time of writing, data from china and italy indicate that the elderly are at far higher risk of covid-19 linked mortality, primarily as a consequence of ageingassociated conditions, such as cardiovascular, pulmonary, and diabetic disorders as well as in immune-compromised conditions. melatonin has clinical utility in all of these health conditions, suggesting its utility in buffering against covid-19 interactions with these medical conditions. however, the interactions of the melatonergic pathway with viruses may be more complex than ameliorative effects on ageingassociated preexisting medical conditions. first, the melatonergic pathway is reviewed and how this pathway may interact with the effects of the influenza, covid-19, and other viruses. this has treatment implications as well as providing indications as to important future research on how an understanding of human physiological systems can provide treatment targets that regulate the impact of viral infections, including influenza, and covid-19 driven pathophysiology.melatonin is classically associated with its night-time release from the pineal gland, where its effects on circadian entrainment have long been recognized. melatonin modulates cellular function via a number of processes, including the activation of an intracellular signalling pathways and transcription factors, which act to dampen inflammatory activity. melatonin is also a powerful antioxidant and antiinflammatory that mediates many of its effects via the optimization of mitochondrial function. emerging data indicate that the melatonergic pathway is evident in all cells, not only those of the pineal gland, and that it may be predominantly present within mitochondria. figure 1 shows the enzymes and factors forming the melatonergic pathway, and how different processes can modulate this pathway.melatonin is derived from tryptophan, via its conversion to serotonin. arylalkylamine n-acetyltransferase (aanat) converts serotonin to n-acetylserotonin (nas), which is then converted to melatonin by acetylserotonin methyltransferase (asmt). however, variations in the nas/melatonin ratio occur and have been largely ignored in previous research, with melatonin synthesis having been seen as the ultimate aim of the melatonergic pathway. a number of factors may act to regulate the nas/melatonin ratio by a variety of mechanisms in different cell types, including o-demethylation/ cytochrome p450 (cyp)2c19, cyp1b1, atp, and the purinergic receptor (p2y1), as well as intercellular glutamate and metabotropic glutamate receptor (mglur5) activation. [7] [8] [9] [10] [11] [12] [13] variations in the nas/melatonin ratio exist may be of significant clinical importance in a range of medical conditions, including glioblastoma 14 and multiple sclerosis. 15 although nas and melatonin can have similar antioxidant and antiinflammatory effects, the nas/melatonin ratio may be of importance given that nas activates the brain derived neurotrophic factor (bdnf) receptor, trkb, as well as inducing bdnf.two products of the kynurenine pathway, kynurenic acid, and kynurenine, can activate the aryl hydrocarbon receptor (ahr), which then induces cyp1b1. this allows proinflammatory cytokines, cortisol and oxidative stress, which increase indoleamine 2,3-dioxygenase (ido) and tryptophan 2,3-dioxygenase (tdo), to increase ahr ligands, as well as other kynurenine pathway products. consequently, proinflammatory conditions as well as heightened levels of psychological stress and oxidative stress not only decrease tryptophan availability for the serotonergic and melatonergic pathways, but may also modulate the nas/melatonin ratio, including via ahr activation ( figure 1 ). such data would indicate that the nas/melatonin ratio may be an important sensor of wider body systems, with consequences for intracellular and extracellular function.the circadian entrainment induced by pineal melatonin is strongly driven by melatonin's upregulation of the circadian gene, bmal1, which seems to mediate many of melatonin's effects in mitochondria. bmal1 inhibits pyruvate dehydrogenase kinase (pdk), leading to the disinhibition of the pyruvate dehydrogenase complex (pdc).pdc drives the conversion of pyruvate to acetyl-coenzyme a (acetyl-coa) in mitochondria, thereby increasing the tricarboxylic acid (tca) cycle, oxidative phosphorylation (oxphos) and atp production. acetyl-coa is also a necessary co-substrate for aanat, and therefore allows pineal melatonin via the bmal1-pdk-pdc path to increase the activation of the mitochondrial melatonergic pathway. for this to happen, aanat needs to be stabilized by 14-3-3 protein, which is present within the mitochondrial matrix. 16, 17 it has been proposed that aanat may also be stabi- acetyl-coasymptom severitythe cytokine storm and stress can increase gut dysbiosis/permeability, further contributing to cytokine induced ido and tdo, leading to kynurenine and kynurenic acid, which activate the ahr to increase cyp1b1 and regulate the nas/melatonin ratio. other factors, including cyp2c19, mglur5, p2y1, and o-demethylation can also regulate the nas/melatonin ratio. the mirnas, mir-7, mir-375, and mir-451 are increased following many viral infections, thereby suppressing 14-3-3 and the stabilization of aanat, leading to melatonergic pathway inhibition. the suppression of melatonin, including from an increase in the nas/melatonin ratio, attenuates melatonin's induction of bmal1 and therefore the circadian regulation of mitochondria. bmal1 induces pdc, leading to an increase in oxphos, the tca cycle and the acetyl-coa that is a necessary co-substrate for aanat and melatonergic pathway activation. the decrease in pineal and mitochondrial melatonin contributes to an increase in the replication and severity of many viral infections. the arrows indicate "stimulation", with a crossed-line indicating "inhibitory"14-3-3-like motif in its c-terminal within the mitochondrial matrix. 18 the pineal melatonin/mitochondrial melatonin path may be most important in immune cells, although relevant in all cells subject to circadian regulation by pineal melatonin. the daytime activation of immune cells is associated with glycolytic metabolism, which pineal melatonin resets to oxphos, thereby inducing more quiescent immune cell phenotyes. it is by such processes that immune cells are "dampened" at night. however, in the presence of indicants of required immuneinflammatory activity at night, proinflammatory cytokines can "switch off" pineal melatonin production, thereby forming another branch of the immune-pineal axis. 19 as such, the circadian rhythm, as driven by pineal melatonin, is a powerful immune regulator, with effects that can include viruses can have quite distinct interactions with the host over the course of an infection, making generalizations across different viruses impossible. however, some factors have been found to regulate the effects of many different viruses. one such factor is the ahr.the ahr has a number of endogenous and exogenous ligands, includ- overall, the ahr may be an important link between the initial "cytokine storm" and alterations in mitochondrial and immune cell function, including via alterations in the melatonergic pathway.the influence of the circadian rhythm is also seen following influenza vaccination where the timing of vaccination and of sample collection modulates the b-cell response measures, especially in the elderly. 24 the host circadian rhythm is a significant regulator of the response to viral infection. preclinical data show that irrespective of the viral burden, survival following influenza viral infection is determined by the circadian influence on the patterning of the immune response. 25 the circadian gene, bmal1, is a significant inhibitor of herpes simplex virus (hsv)-1 and influenza viruses, highlighting the role of circadian factors in the regulation of viral infections. 26 as the loss of the circadian rhythm can increase viral replication, viruses can act to sabotage circadian regulation, exemplified by hsv-1 suppression of bmal1. 26 this overlaps to data in the lung,where pulmonary airway epithelial cell bmal1 regulates the response to the influenza virus, 27 with the influenza virus also decreasing bmal1, thereby contributing to the circadian disruption induced by this virus. 28 such data highlight the circadian nature of host physiology, including in many virus-relevant pathways, upon which viruses act to promote their survival and proliferation.as noted, the effects of pineal melatonin include bmal1 induction, which is a major driver of pineal melatonin's influence on circadian rhythms, with bmal1 acting to regulate mitochondrial metabolism. the importance of such processes is given some support by data in humans with a severe influenza infection and associated poor survival rates. severe influenza and covid-19 infections seem driven by an initial "cytokine storm", with the increase in proinflammatory cytokines acting to suppress pineal melatonin production. 29 this is the essence of the immune-pineal axis, 19 whereby proinflammatory cytokines act to signal the need for an ongoing immune response and thereby prevent its suppression by pineal melatonin. the major driver of the multiorgan failure that is evident in severe influenza infection is the dysregulation of mitochondrial metabolism, 30 and the lost influence of decreased pineal melatonin on such metabolic dysregulation.an elevation in cellular trypsin, as a hemagglutinin processing protease for viral multiplication, is often an aspect of this, leading to the "influenza virus-cytokine-trypsin" cycle, which is coupled to a decrease in mitochondrial atp. 30 work on the "influenza virus-cytokine-trypsin" cycle has led to new proposed treatments, which target the atp crisis and multi- inflammasome, 32 with the regulation of the nlrp3 inflammasome being taken over by viruses. 33 as melatonin is a significant inhibitor of the nlrp3 inflammasome, 34 the suppression of melatonin production, both pineal and mitochondrial, by viruses is likely to be an important aspect of how viruses disengage the nlrp3 inflammasome from physiological processes. it should also be noted that il-18 is induced along with il-1β from nlrp3 inflammasome activation, with il-18being relatively under-investigated in viral research, as in many other medical conditions. 35 there is a growing interest in the role of the gut microbiome across a host of diverse medical conditions, including neurodegenerative and psychiatric conditions, 44 but also immune-mediated conditions such as multiple sclerosis and arthritis. 15, 45 in line with this, recent data show that many viral infections, including influenza, drive changes in the gut and lung microbiomes, 46 with viral-mediated changes in the gut including gut dysbiosis and increased gut permeability. these authors also show how such changes in the gut microbiome/permeability can contribute to secondary bacterial pneumonia. 46 butyrate is also an immune-suppressant via its capacity to disinhibit pdc and thereby increase mitochondrial oxphos, tca cycle, and acetyl-coa for the melatonergic pathway. 17 it seems not unlikey that butyrate therefore acts on the mitochondrial melatonergic pathway to increase melatonin production, as suggested by its induction of the melatonergic pathway in intestinal epithelial cells. 49 the increase in proinflammatory cytokines and the "cytokine storm" that can contribute to viral infection severity and fatality are positively regulated by the activation of the sympathetic nervous system, as shown with influenza virus infection. 57 these authors also showed sympathetic nervous system activation to increase pulmonary pneumonia in a preclinical model, with the inhibition of the sympathetic nervous system increasing survival. 57 some of the effects of the sympathetic nervous system may be mediated by an increase release of not only catecholamines, but also neuropeptide y (npy), the release of which from monocytes also contributes to influenza-associated fatality. 58 in contrast, the activation of the parasympathetic nervous system following the vagal nerve release of acetylcholine, affords protection against some viral infections via the activation of the alpha 7 acetylcholine nicotinic receptor (α7nachr), 59 including decreasing macrophage inflammatory responses. 60 it should be noted that the α7nachr is intimately associated with melatonin, being positively regulated by pineal melatonin over the circadian rhythm, 61 whilst the impact of melatonin in preventing gut permeability under challenge is mediated by its induction of vagal nerve ach release and subsequent α7nachr activation. 62 as such, the viral suppression of melatonin will be associated with a decrease in its induction of the α7nachr and vagal ach, thereby decreasing the viral-and immune-suppressive activity of vagal activated α7nachrs. it should also be noted that the α7nachr is expressed on the mitochondria outer membrane, suggesting more direct impacts on mitochondrial function, including in immune cells and in the regulation of mitochondria ca2+ influx. 63, 64 overall, shifts in the balance of the sympathetic/parasympathetic nervous systems may be another aspect of viral infections. this is another route whereby the viral regulation of the melatonergic pathway can act on wider systemic regulatory processes in a manner to increase viral severity and decrease host survival.it is also noteworthy that increased gut dysbiosis/permeability is fre- drial optimization effects as well as its induction of the melatonergic pathway and ability to decrease the gut permeability that is associated with high risk preexisting medical conditions. overall, there are biomedical, financial, and moral reasons for developing and testing interventions that may immediately limit the impact of viral infections.not applicable.1 introduction:influenza viruses, corona viruses and related pneumotropic viruses cause sickness and death partly by inducing a hyper-proinflammatory immune response in the host airway. this immune overreaction, called a cytokine storm, can lead to multiorgan failure and death (tisoncik et al., 2012) . for example, influenza a (h5n1) has been shown to activate the tnfa-driven nfkb signaling pathway in a mouse host during viral infection generating a cytokine storm (schmolke et al., 2009) . as anticipated, inhibitors of nfkb acutely suppress cytokine storm and increase survival in a mouse model of sars cov infection (dediego et al., 2014) . recent data show that covid-19 also activates nfkb (guo et al., 2020) . cytokine storm marks the airways of sars-cov-2-infected patients that were admitted to the intensive care unit (icu) with more severe disease . since there are multiple strains of influenza as well as coronavirus, there might be an advantage to develop therapies that suppress host-induced cytokine storm, in addition to developing strain-specific vaccines.the clinical problem is that there are limited options for treating respiratory cytokine storm, most of which are predicated on inhibiting nfkb-activated cytokine expression (yang et al., 2013a; teijaro et al., 2014; yang et al., 2017) . the absence of nfkb inhibitory drugs from the human formulary is due to most candidate drugs being either neurotoxic or nephrotoxic when administered chronically (zhang et al., 2017) . one drug that lacks these toxicities is the cardiac glycoside digitoxin. we have previously shown digitoxin to be among the most potent inhibitors of the proinflammatory tnfa/nfkb pathway in the human airway and in other epithelial cells, both in vitro (srivastava et al., 2004), and in vivo (zeitlin et al., 2017; pollard et al., 2019; yang et al., 2019) . corroborating this is a screen of 2800 drugs and bioactive compounds which found digitoxin to be the 2nd most potent inhibitor of tnfa/nfkb activity (miller et al., 2011) . digitoxin has been a drug to treat heart failure for decades, and is safe for children and adults with normal hearts (hoffman and bigger, 1990) . in a clinical trial of digitoxin administered to young adults with the proinflammatory lung disease cystic fibrosis, digitoxin was safe. the study showed "the mrnas encoding chemokine/cytokine or cell surface receptors in immune cells were decreased in nasal epithelial cells...leading to pathway-mediated reductions in il-8, il-6, lung epithelial inflammation, neutrophil recruitment and mucus hypersecretion." (zeitlin et al., 2017) .to further test the ability of digitoxin to inhibit cytokine storm related pneumotropic viruses, we used the cotton rat model of influenza infection to investigate the effects of digitoxin in influenzainduced cytokine storm. the cotton rat model has the important advantage of susceptibility to influenza infection without engineered adaptation. in addition, it has been shown that the response of the cotton rat to this virus strain evokes a pattern of pulmonary cytokine changes that parallel the human response (ottolini et al., 2005) .digitoxin blocks cytokine storm figure 1 shows the changes in cytokine protein in the lung due to digitoxin administration in the cotton rat after intranasally infected with 10 7 tcid50/100 gm of animal of influenza strain a/wuhan/h3n2/359/95 virus. animals were given three different doses of digitoxin, starting one day prior to virus administration and continuing with a daily dose until sacrifice on day 7. the maximum dose of digitoxin, 30 µg/kg, was calculated to be similar to the human dose routinely used to treat heart failure. as shown in figure 1 , protein data were collected for ifng (interferon gamma); gro/kc (rodent equivalent of human il8); mip2(chemokine (c-x-c motif) ligand 2, cxcl2, macrophage inflammatory protein 2-alpha);tnfa (tumor necrosis factor alpha); il-1b (interleukin one beta); mcp1 (monocyte chemoattractant protein 1, ccl2); and tgfb (transforming growth factor beta). as summarized in table 1 , digitoxin-dependent changes in protein were found to be significant for 6 of the 7 cytokines. the digitoxin-dependent reductions are specific and saturating for each cytokine, but do not reduce any of them to zero. table 1 shows that the greatest significant digitoxin-dependent reductions in cytokine proteins were found for ifng (68.9%), gro/kc (46.6%), and mcp1 (54.9%). smaller but still significant reductions in cytokine proteins were found for mip2 (32.2%) and tnfa (38.4%). as also shown in table 1 , a significant reduction of only 15.3% was found for tgfb cytokine protein at a concentration of 3 µg/kg, while only trending significance was noted at higher digitoxin concentrations. in the case of il-1b only the highest digitoxin concentration trended towards significance. thus digitoxin independently, dose-dependently and significantly lowers the individual concentrations in the lung of at least these six cytokines which have been induced by viral exposure.these data show that administration of digitoxin to the cotton rat inhibits expression of many cytokines in the lung that are induced by influenza strain a/wuhan/h3n2/359/95, including tnfa, the key activator of the tnfa/nfkb inflammation pathway. digitoxin inhibits cytokine storm without compromising the entire immune system from physiologically responding to viral infection. the data also indicate that digitoxin acts on multiple cell types. for example, ifng is secreted only from activated t lymphocytes and nk cells of the immune system (mah and cooper, 2016) . the remainder of the cytokines are secreted by epithelial cells in the airway, as well as by endothelial cells, immune cells and others (mills et al., 1999; liu et al., 2017) .gro/kc (cxcl1, the rodent equivalent of human il8), a key target of nfkb signaling, is the most powerful known chemoattractant for drawing neutrophils into the lung. mip2 and mcp1induce entry and accumulation of monocytes and macrophages into the lung, and are targets of nfkb. tgfb drives, and is driven by, nfkb-signaling for inflammation and fibrosis. il-1b also drives nfkb, and is driven by nfkb. it appears that digitoxin-dependent reduction in tnfa/nfkb signaling is sufficient to suppress influenza a-driven cytokine storm.in the cotton rat lung, ifng mrna expression in response to infection is biphasic (ottolini et al., 2005) . there is an early phase, from 6 hours after infection on day 1 to day 6, which may reflect the presence of activated nk cells. the late phase, from day 6 to day 28, may be the product of incoming antigen-specific t cells. importantly, simply neutralizing infg in a mouse model of infection with influenza a virus strain a/california/07/2009 (h1n1v; "swine flu") is sufficient to not only alleviate acute lung injury but also to increase weight and survival rate (liu et al., 2019) . reduced ifng is associated with reduced tnfa and nfkb activation. the data also show that digitoxin treatment causes the most profound reduction in infg expression. it is further known that ifng expression is driven by a combination of both nfkb and nfat (sica et al., 1997) . as summarized in figure 2 , digitoxin not only reduces nfkb expression, but also reduces nfat through digitoxin-dependent activation of caspase 3 (yang et al., 2013b) .finally, since antiviral properties have been reported for digitoxin and other cardiac glycosides, it is a limitation of the study that we cannot exclude other antiviral effects by digitoxin from contributing to the reduction in influenza-dependent cytokine concentrations (burkard et al., 2015; amarelle and lecuona, 2018; wei et al., 2020) .in conclusion, these data show that digitoxin blocks the host cytokine storm induced by influenza strain a/wuhan/h3n2/359/95 in the cotton rat lung. since digitoxin already had been shown to be safe in cf patients with pulmonary disease and a normal heart, and caused a similar reduction in nf-kb driven cytokine expression, this drug may be a good candidate for further investigation as a therapy for influenza and potentially for covid-19.cotton rat experiments were performed as previously described (ottolini et al., 2005) .all experiments were performed using protocols that followed federal guidelines and were approved by the institutional animal care and use committee. animals were sacrificed by carbon dioxide inhalation.drugs and protocol for drug preparation digitoxin (µg/kg) was obtained from sigma-aldrich (> 95% pure). the drug was prepared as a stock solution in 95% ethanol, and further diluted in pbs before administration. digitoxin was administered to cotton rats intraperitoneally one day before intranasal infection with 10 7 tcid50/100 gm cotton rat with influenza strain a/wuhan/h3n2/359/95. daily digitoxin treatment continued until harvest on day 7 of the experiment.on day 7 of the experiment, the animals were sacrificed. the left lung was first tied off and reserved for cytokine analysis. lung samples were then immediately frozen on dry ice, and then kept at -80 o c until further processed. the remaining lung tissue was processed for histological analysis. histology revealed no apparent change due to administration of the drug..the frozen tissues were transferred to silver pharmaceuticals. coronavirus disease of 2019 , caused by infection from severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2), has spread across the world as a serious pandemic [1, 2] . sars-cov-2, an enveloped virus with non-segmented, single-stranded, positive-sense rna genome [3] , is a member of the coronaviridae (cov) family which causes a predominantly respiratory illness with a wide range of clinical severity, ranging from asymptomatic or mildly symptomatic (fever, cough, dyspnea, myalgias, fatigue, and diarrhea) in a large proportion of patients to severe acute respiratory distress syndrome (ards) and fatal multi-organ failure [1, 4-6, 7••] . the disease has a case-fatality rate that ranges from less than 0.5% to more than 7% (average,~3.8%) [8] , with an infectivity greater than that of influenza [9] . its high transmissibility and relatively high rate of causing serious complications has led covid-19 to become a serious public health threat worldwide.among various physiological consequences of severe covid-19, cardiovascular complications have emerged as some of the most significant and life threatening. covid-19 may present with respiratory failure from pneumonia and ards, with or without distributive ± cardiogenic shock [10, 11, 12•] , and severe cardiac injury manifesting as markedly elevated troponin and heart failure [12•, 13-14] . cardiac injury has also been associated with increased mortality [15••] . in a cohort study of 416 patients with confirmed covid-19, elevated troponin was present in 19.7% of patients during hospitalization and was found to be an independent risk factor for in-hospital mortality [15••] . the increased incidence of cardiac injury among those with severe systemic inflammatory response syndromes (sirs) and shock in the setting of covid-19 also highlights an important relationship between the immune response to the virus and the cardiovascular system. in addition, a high prevalence of pre-existing cardio-metabolic disease has been noted among those with severe covid-19 [16, 17] , and those with pre-existing cardiovascular conditions suffer increased mortality during covid-19 infection [18] . in particular, the reported case fatality rates for covid-19 are 10.5% in patients with cardiovascular disease, 7.3% in patients with diabetes, and 6.0% in those with hypertension, higher than the case-fatality rate of 3-4% observed world-wide for patients without these co-morbidities [7••] . last but not least, the increased frequency of adverse cardiovascular events following the resolution of covid-19, similar to other viral infections such as influenza [19] , may also play a role in worsening the mortality of patients with covid-19. thus, understanding the relationship between the viral-host immune response and the cardiovascular system will be critically important in our care and management of patients with covid-19 going forward.in order to better understand the biology of viral immune response and how it impacts the heart, we explore here the basic biological mechanisms underlying viral entry into the host cells and the subsequent immune response. coronaviruses are enveloped viruses with a single-strand, positive-sense rna genome approximately 26-32 kilobases in size, which is the largest known genome for an rna virus. six coronaviruses (covs) are known to infect humans: 229e, oc43, sars-cov, nl63, hku1, and mers-cov [3] . in humans, cov infections primarily involve the upper respiratory tract and gi tract [3] . studies have demonstrated that sars-cov-2, as well as other corona viruses, requires the angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ace2) for cellular entry [20] . ace2 is a type i integral membrane protein that serves an important role in cardiorenal homeostasis. it is also highly expressed in lung alveolar cells, providing the main entry site for virus into human hosts [21] . it is plausible that the high expression of ace2 in the lung, gut, heart, and kidneys may facilitate direct damage by the virus throughout the course of infection. one key protein on the virus-the spike protein (s)-facilitates viral entry into the target cells by the binding of its surface unit, s1, to the ace2 receptor on the host cell [21] [22] [23] , followed by cleavage by hostcell protease tmprss2 [24] . other important sars-cov-2 components include the hemagglutinin-esterase protein, the membrane (m) protein, the nucleocapsid protein, the small envelope protein, the internal protein, and group-specific proteins, which could become targets for vaccines in the future [25] . of note, sars-cov-2 also contains an rna-dependent rna polymerase which is the target of the anti-viral agent remdesivir, currently being studied randomized clinical trials for use against covid-19 disease [26] .the host immune response to viral entry is also important to discuss, as pathogenesis in the later stages of sars-cov and sars-cov-2 infection results not only from direct viral toxicity but also from immune dysregulation and hyperactivity [27, 28] . progress in this field, however, has been hindered by the failure to replicate in mice, ferrats, or non-human primates the lethal human immune response in ards with the original sars-cov strain [29, 30] . this has led to the development of mouse-or rat-adapted strains of sars-cov that have been able to replicate the extensive and often lethal pulmonary disease [31] . the majority of studies addressing the immune response to respiratory viral infections involve mice infected with a variety of natural and mouse-adapted pathogens.the process of respiratory viral invasion into the body begins with infection of the airway epithelial cells and the activation of lung-resident dentritic cells (rdcs) via acquisition of the invading pathogen or antigens from infected epithelial cells. these rdcs then become activated, process antigen and migrate to the draining (mediastinal and cervical) lymph nodes (dln). naïve circulating t cells in the dlns then recognize antigens presented on the dcs in the form of mhc/peptide complexes. in combination with additional costimatory signals, t cells then become activated, proliferate, and migrate to the infected site [32, 33] . upon arrival to the site of infection, t cells produce and release antiviral cytokines including interferon (ifn)-γ, tumor necrosis factor (tnf)-α, and interleukin (il)-2; chemokines including cxc chemokine ligand (cxcl)-9, 10, and, 11, and cytotoxic molecules such as perforin and granzyme b [34] . ifn-γ and other effector cytokines directly inhibit viral replication and enhance antigen presentation, while the chemokines released by activated t cells recruit more innate and adaptive cells to combat the pathogen. granzyme b and other cytotoxic molecules also directly kill infected cells to eliminate the pathogen [35] [36] [37] [38] .recent data from china on sars-cov-2 [28, 39] as well as prior data from sars-cov [40] demonstrate a rapid reduction of t lymphocytes (both cd4+ and cd8+) in the peripheral blood of infected patients [27, 41, 42] . this is in direct contrast to the proliferative lymphocyte responses seen with other viral infections such as epstein-barr virus (ebv), human immunodeficiency virus (hiv)-1, or cytomegalovirus (cmv), but similar to what happens during other acute viral infections, such as influenza. the loss of lymphocytes precedes even the abnormal radiographic changes on chest xray [43•] . despite reduction in t lymphocyte counts, peripheral blood analysis on a patient infected with sars-cov-2 demonstrated increased markers of t lymphocyte activation [44] , as evidenced by high proportions of hla-dr and cd38 double-positive fractions [28] . additionally, there was an increased percentage of highly proinflammatory ccr6+ th17 among cd4+ t cells, and an increased concentration of cytotoxic granules in cd8+ t cells (31.6% perforin positive, 64.2% granulysin positive, and 30.5% granulysin/perforin double-positive) [28] . interestingly, one group found that production of ifn-γ by cd4+, t cells but not cd8+ t cells or nk cells tended to be lower in severe cases compared with moderate cases [41] . cd4+ t cells, in particular, are felt to be especially important in the host-immune defense against sars-cov infections [45] . in addition, disturbances in t regulatory cells (tregs) were noted in severe cases-with a significantly lower proportion of c45ra+ naïve tregs (ntregs) and a slightly higher proportion of their memory counterparts cd45ro+ memory tregs (mtregs) [41] . on recovery, there is a rapid and significant restoration of cd3+, cd4+, and cd8+ t cells along with b cell and nk cell counts 2-3 months after onset of disease [40] . memory cd4+ t cells returned to normal 1 year after onset, whereas other cell counts including total t lymphocytes, cd3+, cd4+ and naïve cd4+ t cells were still lower than healthy controls [43•] . the mechanism of lymphocytopenia in peripheral blood is unclear but thought to be due to sequestration, with release of sequestered cells upon recovery [21] . taken together, these changes in lymphocyte populations suggest dramatic dysregulation, evidence of t cell "exhaustion" and shifts in the adaptive immune response to sars-cov and sars-cov-2 infections [42] .in addition to changes in lymphocyte populations, changes in innate immunity likely also contribute to viral pathogenesis, particularly as seen in severe lung and systemic inflammation secondary to cytokine storm. in ards, increased levels of cytokines such as tnf-α, ifn inducible protein 10 (ip10), il-6, and il-8 are thought to contribute to tissue destruction and poor outcomes [46] , attributed to hyperactivation of macrophage/monocyte lineage cells. sars-cov-2-infected patients have high levels of il-1 beta, ifn-γ, ip-10, and monocyte chemoattractant protein-1 (mcp-1), which probably leads to activated t-helper-1 cell response [1] . compared with patients who did not require icu admission, those requiring icu admission had higher conentrations of granulocyte colony-stimulating factors (gcsf), ip-10, mcp-1, macrophage inflammatory protein-1 α (mip-1-α), and tnf-α, suggesting that cytokine storm might affect disease severity [47] . additionally, increased levels of type i ifn and a dysregulated ifn-stimulated gene (isg) response have been seen in patients with severe sars [48, 49] .last but not least, sars-specific igg antibodies are produced in the late acute stage (about 2 weeks from symptom onset), gradually increase throughout the course of the disease and are felt to be associated with disease outcome [50] . the development of anti-sars-cov-2 antibodies is highly relevant for both protecting against viral replication/expansion in the infected host as well as providing a source of anti-sars-cov-2 convalescent plasma to treat patients with severe disease, although supporting data for efficacy is currently lacking. this is being tested in covid-19 positive patients under an expanded access program by the fda [51] .myocardial injury, manifesting as elevated serum troponin levels, has been described in many patients infected with covid-19, and mortality has been associated with increase in troponin levels > 99th percentile of the upper limit of normal and with electrocardiographic and echocardiographic abnormalities [12•, 18, 52] . in addition, reports of the rarer manifestation of fulminant myocarditis with markedly elevated troponin levels have been reported [12•, 13, 14] .there are several thoughts on the mechanism of injury, including direct myocardial injury by the virus through ace2 entry, hypoxia-induced myocardial injury, microvascular damage and endothelial shedding, and cytokine/ inflammation-mediated damage [15••] . direct viral toxicity on cardiomyocytes has occurred in the setting of other viral infections such as coxsackievirus-induced myocarditis. in this case, the entry of the coxsackievirus is through the coxsackievirus and adenovirus receptor (car) and through release of protease 2a coded by coxsackievirus particles, disrupting the dystrophin cytoskeleton complex [53] [54] [55] . in the case of coronavirus, as mentioned above, the spike (s) protein of coronaviruses facilitates viral entry into target cells. entry depends on binding of the surface unit, s1, of the s protein to ace2, allowing the virus to attach to the surface of the target cell. in addition, entry requires s protein priming by cellular proteases, which entails s protein cleavage at the s1/s2 and s2' site and allows fusion of viral and cellular membranes, a process driven by the s2 subunit [23] . it was found that sars-2-s shares 76% amino acid identity with sars-s, and both engage ace2 and employ the cellular serine protease tmprss2 for s protein priming for host cell entry [22] . interestingly, injection of sars-cov spike protein into mice worsened acute lung failure in vivo, and was attenuated by blockade of the renin-angiotensin pathway [21] . also of note, tmprss2 is highly expressed in the lung and kidneys, but is present in only low to moderate levels in the heart and blood vessels, suggesting other mechanisms of injury for the latter organ systems [56] . lastly, the amount of viral load in sars-cov-2 infection correlates with disease severity, with higher viral loads on presentation correlating with worse disease outcomes [57] . this study highlights the potential importance of direct viral toxicity in the pathogenesis of covid-19 infections.in addition to direct damage caused by the virus, there has also been speculation of an ischemic effect, either in the form of demand ischemia from lung pathology or direct toxicity by the virus on the macro-or microvascular level. it has been suggested that, because ace2 is expressed on the endothelium, it may induce endothelial shedding and dysfunction contributing to vascular damage, local inflammation, and production of procoagulant factors predisposing to thrombosis, similar to the increase in myocardial infarctions observed after influenza infections [19, 58] . in addition to endothelial inflammation and dysfunction, an increased incidence of abnormal coagulation parameters and of disseminated intravascular coagulation (dic) has been noted in patients with sars-cov-2 infection [59, 60] , contributing to risk of thrombosis and ischemic events that could damage the myocardium.early reports of fulminant myocarditis have alerted the medical and scientific communities that myocardial inflammation may play a role in cardiac injury during viral infection [12•, 13, 14] . however, the exact mechanism of this is currently unclear [12•, 13] , as acute lymphocyte infiltrates were not noted in the myocardium of a sars-cov-2-infected ards patient autopsy [39] , where only a few mononuclear inflammatory cells were seen. currently, there is great interest in obtaining the pathological specimens from patients presenting with markedly elevated troponin and fulminant myocarditis in order to evaluate for lymphocyte-induced myocardial injury in sars-cov-2 infection. consistent with this, no myocardialspecific epitopes have thus far been identified in the setting of sars-cov or sars-cov-2 infection. several hla-a*02:01-specific t cells recognizing sars-cov epitopes have been identified in the peripheral blood mononuclear cells (pbmc) of sars-recovered individuals, including immunogenic epitopes localized to spike (s) and nucleocapsid (n) protein of sars-cov [61, 62] . of note, mri-verified acute myocarditis has been reported in association with mers-cov [63] , although the exact mechanism by which it occurs is unknown.although no evidence of direct lymphocytic infiltration of the myocardium exists, the dysregulation of t cells can likely contribute to the cytokine storm and multi-organ damage in the setting of coronavirus infection. a recent retrospective, multi-center study of 150 patients confirmed that inflammatory markers, including elevated ferritin (mean 1297.6 ng/ml in non-survivors vs 614.0 ng/ml in survivors, p < 0.001) and il-6 (p < 0.0001) were associated with more severe covid-19 infection, suggesting that systemic inflammation may be a significant driver of multi-organ damage [18, 64] . a separate group has also reported that the serum cytokines il-2r, il-6, il-10, and tnf-α are increased in patients with severe disease [41] . this systemic release of cytokines, characterized by increased il-2, il-6, il-10, gcsf, ifn-γ, mcp-1, mip-1-α, and tnf-α, likely contributes to cardiac injury in a situation analogous to cardiotoxicity in the setting of chimeric antigen receptor (car)-t cell therapy. a prior study demonstrated that cardiac injury and cardiovascular events in the form of elevated troponin and left ventricular systolic dysfunction are common post-car-t; in a cohort of 137 patients with post-car-t cytokine release syndrome (crs), 21% had elevated troponin and 12% developed cardiovascular events including cardiac arrest, decompensated heart failure, and arrhythmias [65] . notably in this study, a shorter time from crs onset to the administration of the il-6 inhibitor tocilizumab was associated with a lower rate of cardiovascular events [65] . of note, tociluzumab may have some benefit in covid-19 infection, suggesting a common mechanism of injury in the two settings [66] . the exact mechanism by which cytokines/chemokines damage the myocardium is unknown, but cardiomyocyte and endothelial cell death in the presence of inflammatory cytokines such as tnf-α has been well documented in the literature [67, 68] .age and gender differences in covid-19 infection rates have raised interest in possible differences in age-and genderdependent immune responses to viral exposure. children account for the minority of laboratory-confirmed cases of covid-19 in china and appear less susceptible to severe disease [69] . although the functions of both innate and adaptive immune immunity declines with aging, this does not typically start until late adulthood, and thus would not fully explain the decreased severity of disease in children compared with even young adults. [70] [71] [72] . the effect of age on the immune system can be demonstrated by the low protective titers among 50% of adults older than 65 who receive the influenza vaccine [73] . additional information about the differential response of sars-covand sars-cov-2 with aging comes from animal models; in comparison with sars-cov-ma15-infected young c57bl/6 mice, infection of aged mice (12 months) is associated with severe reduction in the number of virus-specific cd8+ t cells in the lungs [66] .in addition to the effect of aging, gender is also thought to play a role in outcomes in sars-cov-2 infection. one study demonstrated a higher incidence of sars-cov-2 infection in older adult males compared with females [74] . sex differences in immune response have been noted in literature, although the reasons are not clear. males experience greater severity and prevalence of bacterial, viral, fungal and parasitic infections than females, who also mount a more robust response to antigenic challenges including infection and vaccination [75] [76] [77] [78] . we (davis et al) have used machine learning approaches to identify a cluster of genes involved in lipid biosynthesis, previously shown to be upregulated by testosterone, which correlates with poor virus-neutralizing activity in men [79] . interestingly, the stronger immune response in females is thought to explain why females are more prone to immunemediated pathologies including autoimmune disease and cytokine storm [78] . however, in the case of covid-19, there is no data to currently support a female-predominance toward cytokine storm; if anything, males are prone to more severe disease and mortality [74] . thus, it would be important to gather more data and larger number cohort studies on the current sars-cov-2 pandemic to study further delineate whether there is a gender-dependent risk for cytokine storm and subsequent cardiac injury in covid-19 infection.various therapies have emerged to treat the various aspects of viral pathogenesis and subsequent immune response, and an understanding of which aspect of disease pathogenesis they target may aide the clinician in knowing when to use them. treatments which target steps early in the infection process ("respiratory phase" in fig. 1 ) are meant to suppress viral replication and aid the host immune response to fight the virus. when the immune response becomes hyperactive ("sepsis/shock" phase in fig. 1 ) with cytokine storm, immunomodulators that target various harmful inflammatory cytokines may help mitigate end-organ toxicity. unfortunately, there are currently no fda-approved therapies for sars-cov-2, and no substantial randomized trial data to support any therapy thus far. however, several promising therapies are actively being test in patients including the recently announced multicenter, randomized solidarity trial (remdesivir, hydroxychloroquine) sponsored by the world health organization [51] .anti-microbial agents which target the early (pre-systemic) phase of infection include remdesivir, hydroxychloroquine, and azithromycin. remdesivir is a drug which targets the rna polymerase, suppresses viral replication, and has strong in vitro evidence of efficacy against sars-cov-2 [26] . although randomized trial data are still pending [51] , there have been anecdotal reports of improvement after compassionate use of remdesivir [80] . lopinavir-ritonavir is another rna polymerase inhibitor which showed initial promise, but a recently published study from beijing showed no significant difference in the treatment versus control group, suggesting that the effect, if present, was insufficient to cause a significant clinical response [81] . chloroquine has traditionally been used as an anti-malaria drug, but has shown reasonable efficacy against sars-cov-2 in vitro [26] . a single arm study of 20 covid-19-positive patients treated in france demonstrated some efficacy for the combination of azithromycin and hydroxychloroquine, a safer variation of chloroquine, in sars-cov-2 [80] . another small non-randomized study showed similar results [82] however, these were small, non-randomized studies in whose definition of efficacy was based on viral clearance rather than mortality benefit. a subsequent pilot randomized trial in shanghai comparing hydroxychloroquine and placebo has shown no difference in virologic clearance [83] . azithromycin is an antimicrobial agent generally used for antibacterial purposes; however, it also has been shown to inhibit zika virus tropism in the human brain and has been suggested as an adjunct for treatment of intracellular microbes in the past [80, 81] . since both chloroquine/ hydroxychloroquine and azithromycin lead to corrected qt (qtc) prolongation, their use either alone or in combination should be monitored for this potential cardiotoxic side effect [84] .the second group of therapies is immunomodulators, used to target immune hyperactivity and the cytokine storm that occurs in the later stages of covid-19 infection [64] . monoclonal antibodies have shown some promise in early studies. the il-6 inhibitors tocilizumab and sarilumab have shown early benefit and are being studied in ongoing randomized trials [51] . other therapies including meplazumab (anti-cd147), eculizumab (targets complement), adalimumab (tnf-α inhibitor), and ivig (saturation of fc receptors on macrophages, suppression of chemokines/cytokines) are also intended toward reduction of deleterious immune effects [51] . interestingly, immune stimulatory agents aimed at enhancing beneficial aspects of the immune response are also being tested-including ifn-β1a, pd-1 inhibitors, and donor convalescent plasma [51] . there are conflicting data to support the use of glucocorticoids in covid-19 related ards [85] , and even potential evidence of harm in the form of decreased viral clearance in sars and mers [86] and increased mortality in sars-cov2 [87] . without evidence of acute lymphocytic myocarditis in cardiovascular injury, we do not currently advocate for the routine administration of glucocorticoids for elevated troponin in covid-19 patients. randomized trials on both glucocorticoids and ivig in severe cases of covid-19 are ongoing [51] .sars-cov-2 has become a worldwide health threat, with the numbers of infected patients growing rapidly. an increased incidence of cardiac injury has been observed among those with severe infection. the mechanism of cardiac injury is unclear but likely involves a combination of direct viral damage and immune-mediated damage by inflammatory cytokines/chemokines and cytotoxic immune cell response in the later stages of infection. the host immune response and contributors to cytokine storm in sars-cov-2 infection are complex. significant depletion and dysregulation of t lymphocytes may contribute to immune dysregulation and hyperactivity. cardiac damage in the setting of cytokine storm may be analogous to that seen in cardiotoxicity from car-t. treatments for covid-19 are bimodal, with one group of treatments targeted toward early infection and viral replication, and another group targeted toward immune modulation in the later, systemic inflammatory phase of infection. with the advent of single cell immune phenotyping technologies, it will be important to perform comprehensive immune surveys of infected patients to better understand systemic perturbations with the infection and downstream cardiovascular effects. more data are needed to help guide us toward definitive treatment and protection of the cardiovascular system in covid-19 infection. 1 hypothesis of sars-cov-2 pathogenesis and immune response in cardiovascular injury. spike protein (sars-2-s) on the virus is activated by cellular serine protease tmprss2 highly expressed in lung, renal, and gastrointestinal cells and engages with angiotensinconverting enzyme 2 (ace2) that is highly expressed on respiratory epithelial cells for entry into the host cell. early infection is characterized by viral replication and direct damage by the virus to host cells, via ace2/tmprss2-mediated cell entry. as infection progresses, pro-inflammatory signals upregulate inflammatory cytokine production by cells in the adaptive and innate immune system, leading to cytokine storm and multi-organ damageletter to the editor.the pathogenesis of coronavirus disease 2019 (covid-19) remains unclear and there is presently no evidence for efficient therapeutics. the pathogenesis of severe acute respiratory syndrome (sars) related to coronavirus involves a cytokine storm with high serum levels of pro-inflammatory cytokines and chemokines interleukin 6 (il-6), tumor necrosis factor (tnf-alpha), interferon-gamma, il-1 and il-12, and il-8 [1] [2] [3] [4] . similarly, in covid-19, higher plasma levels of cytokines il-6, il-2, il-7, il-10, interferon gamma inducible protein (ip10), monocyte chemo attractant protein (mcp1), macrophage inflammatory protein (mip1a) and tnf-alpha have been found in patients admitted to intensive care units, and the cytokine storm syndrome was proportional to the severity of disease [5] . the proinflammatory il-6 appears as one of the key cytokines leading to the inflammatory storm, which may result in increased alveolar-capillary blood-gas exchange dysfunction [4, 6] . the pro-inflammatory cytokine il-6 seems to have a prominent role in this inflammatory cascade [4] .these data suggest that il-6 may be a potential actionable target cytokine to treat covid-19-related acute respiratory distress syndrome (ards). we report here the case of a patient with a respiratory failure linked to covid-19 who had a rapid favorable outcome after two infusions of the anti-interleukin 6 receptor inhibitor tocilizumab. this suggests that anti-il6 receptor inhibitor treatment could decrease the risk of progression toward sars by mitigating the cytokine storm in the lungs with covid-19. (figure 1 ). antiviral therapy lopinavir-ritonavir use (400mg-100mg orally) was begun at d7 and maintained for 5 days, according to local guidelines. on day 8, sudden dyspnea and saturation drop required oxygen supplementation increase to 6 l/min, without the need for artificial ventilation. he received two doses of tocilizumab, at 8 mg/kg intravenously for each dose, 8 hours apart, with a good tolerability. thereafter, he experienced clinical improvement, rapidly afebrile and with gradually decreased oxygen consumption. this was fully discontinued on day 12 (figure 1) . chest ct on day 12 confirmed improvement by showing partial regression of the pulmonary infiltrates and ground glass appearance (figure 1) . creactive protein in blood, a surrogate marker of cytokine storm, decreased from 225 mg/l to 33 mg/l in 4 days (figure 1) . no major change was observed in circulating lymphocytic subpopulations after tocilizumab, and the percentage of cd4 + cd25 + lymphocytes was found high, before and after tocilizumab. (figure 2) . the patient ultimately clinically fully recovered from covid-19 symptoms.as a recombinant humanized anti-human il-6 receptor monoclonal antibody, tocilizumab can specifically bind soluble il-6 receptor and inhibit signal transduction [7] . tocilizumab is currently mainly used to treat patients with rheumatoid arthritis. it is given every 4 weeks, for up to 24 weeks, with a favorable safety profile [8] . other indications for tocilizumab are juvenile arthritis, giant cell arthritis, and --more recently--cytokine release syndromes associated with chimeric antigen receptor t cell therapies [7, 9] . in these mainly rheumatologic indications, the tolerance of tocilizumab is generally good, the main adverse events are a transient decrease in leukocytes and increase in liver enzymes and a slight increase of bacterial infection [7, 8] . in patients with covid-19, the safety profile, and especially the potential drug interactions with antivirals, remain to be investigated in clinical trials. clinical trials are also required to explore whether tocilizumab can be used effectively in patients with respiratory failure due to covid-19 and to investigate at what stage of the disease this treatment could be the most appropriate.here we report the first successful treatment of a patient with respiratory failure related to covid-19 and treated with tocilizumab. the present report has several limitations. first, the patient was immunosuppressed because of his cancer, and this case is therefore not generalizable to the non-cancer population. interestingly, his lymphocytic subpopulation presented high level of senescence, as frequently observed in cancer patients (data not shown). to what extent this could explain sensitivity to tocilizumab should be further explored. second, the patient received concomitant therapies, especially lopinavir-ritonavir, but it seems unlikely this changed the disease trajectory, since lopinavir-ritonavir has recently been shown not to be effective in patients with severe covid-19 in a randomized controlled trial [10] . it thus seems likely that the rapid control of the pulmonary hyperinflammation resulted from tocilizumab treatment.in summary, covid-19 with hyperinflammatory pulmonary symptoms is associated with a cytokine storm involving interleukins and chemokine dysregulation. among these, the actionable proinflammatory interleukin 6 axis seems to play a major role. we report the first observation of a patient with severe covid-19-related lung disease successfully treated with anti-interleukin 6 receptor treatment. blocking the cytokine axis il6 appears to us a promising therapy to be studied urgently in patients developing severe acute respiratory syndrome related to coronavirus.dr jean-marie michot jmm reports sponsored research at gustave roussy cancer center with abbvie, agios, amgen, covid-19, caused by the novel severe acute respiratory coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2), emerged in wuhan, china, in 2019 and has resulted in the current pandemic the disease continues to pose a major therapeutic challenge patient mortality is ultimately caused by acute respiratory distress syndrome (ards) cytokine release syndrome (or "cytokine storm") is likely to be a contributing factor to ards in many patients because interleukin 6 (il-6) is known to play a key role in inflammation, il-6 receptor inhibitors such as tocilizumab may potentially treat covid-19 by attenuating cytokine release we present the case of a 48-year-old male with severe covid-19, on the verge of meeting intubation requirements, who needed progressive oxygen support for respiratory distress the patient was treated with a non-weight-based dosage of tocilizumab to prevent the onset of a cytokine storm we chose to administer an il-6 inhibitor because of the gradually increasing levels of acute phase reactants identified on serial blood draws, as well as his declining respiratory status the treatment was well-tolerated in conjunction with standard drug therapies for covid-19 (hydroxychloroquine, azithromycin, and zinc) the patient subsequently experienced marked improvements in his respiratory symptoms and overall clinical status over the following days we believe that tocilizumab played a substantial role in his ability to avert clinical decline, particularly the need for mechanical ventilation ultimately, the patient was downgraded from the icu and discharged within days we highlight the potential of il-6 inhibitors to prevent the progression of respiratory disease to a point requiring ventilator support this case underscores the potential importance of early serial measurements of il-6 and cytokine storm-associated acute phase reactants, such as ferritin, d-dimer, and c-reactive protein, in guiding clinical decision-making in the management of patients with suspected covid-19 conclusion: the early, proactive identification of serum acute phase reactants should be implemented in the treatment of covid-19 in order to screen for a primary contributor to mortality-the cytokine storm this screening, when followed by aggressive early treatment for cytokine storm, may have optimal therapeutic benefits and obviate the need for mechanical ventilation, thereby decreasing mortality additionally, we review current evidence regarding cytokine release syndrome in covid-19 and the use of il-6 receptor inhibition as a therapeutic strategy, and examine other reported cases in the literature describing il-6 antagonist treatment for patients with covid-19treatment of severe covid-19 with tocilizumab mitigates cytokine storm and averts mechanical ventilation during acute respiratory distress: a case report and literature reviewcovid-19 is caused by coronavirus sars-cov-2. most cases of covid-19 are asymptomatic, but some are severe and lethal. mortality is the simplest marker of covid-19 vulnerability. covid-19 vulnerability can be defined as a chance of death from covid-19, once infected.age:in all studies conducted in all countries, the mortality rate from covid-19 increases exponentially with age [1–11]. exact mortality rates varied in hundreds of studies because they depend on testing and therapeutic interventions. but the rule is clear: the mortality rate is increasing exponentially with age.age-related diseases:mortality is especially high in patients with pre-existing conditions [6, 9, 10, 12–23].in italy, 99% of patients, who died, had at least one illness https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2020-03-18/99-of-those-who-died-from-virus-had-other-illness-italy-says.in other words, infected people without pre-existing diseases do not die. this may seem paradoxical because we just discussed that age is sufficient to increase mortality exponentially. this is because pre-existing conditions are manifestations of biological age, whereas aging and diseases are two sides of the same coin [24–26]. these conditions are typical age-related diseases: hypertension, diabetes, obesity, ischemic heart disease (ihd) and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (copd) and other diseases [9, 12–23].of course, not all (only some) patients with age-related diseases die from covid-19. in other words, age-related diseases are necessary but not sufficient for mortality from covid-19.age and pre-existing (age-related) diseases are interdependent. a number and severity of diseases correlate with age. an average 60 year old person has more age-related diseases than an average 50 your old person. yet, a particular 60 year old person may have no age-related diseases, whereas a particular 50 year old person may have multiple diseases including hypertension, diabetes, obesity and cancer. in this case, it is a chronologically younger person who is biologically older. and it is the biological age that determines the likelihood of death from covid-19.male gender:at the same age, the mortality rate is twice higher in men than in women [9, 27, 28], in part, because men age faster than women and, at any chronological age, men are biologically older than women [29].so, three rules can be combined in one: covid-19 vulnerability is determined by biological age. biological age combines chronological age, age-related diseases and gender. a combination of all age-related diseases (and pre-diseases) is a biomarker of biological age. figuratively, sars-cov-2 can “measure” biological age, which is thus the best predictor of mortality from both covid-19 and other diseases.aging can be measured as an increase in the probability of death with age. mortality increases exponentially, starting from age 8-9. men have a higher “normal” age-related death rate than women because men age faster than women [29].covid-19 mortality rate parallels the “expected” aging-related death rate (supplementary figure 1) and see second graph in: https://medium.com/wintoncentre/how-much-normal-risk-does-covid-represent-4539118e1196.chances to die from covid-19 are proportional to chances to die from aging itself at any age. the only discrepancy between natural and covid-19 mortality is observed below the age of 8 years old. whereas natural death rate is relatively high, covid-19 mortality is low (no mortality [11]). this discrepancy will be discussed later. but first how do animals, including humans, die from aging?humans and other animals (including the worm [30] and the fly [31]) do not die from aging itself but from age-related diseases such as ischemic heart disease (ihd), hypertension, diabetes, cancer, alzheimer’s and parkinson’s diseases, age-related macular degeneration, osteoporosis and sarcopenia (as we will discuss, even seemingly non-deadly diseases such as osteoporosis can lead to deadly complications). the incidence of these diseases increases exponentially with age. some diseases such as obesity, hypertension and diabetes develop earlier in the course of aging. other diseases, such as alzheimer’s disease and macular degeneration, are usually diagnosed later [32, 33]. age-related diseases may also occur in younger people with genetic predisposition and environmental exposure hazards. but even without these factors, diseases develop because they are quasi-programmed (see “quasi-programmed aging section”). these diseases are not diseases of civilization, as it may seem. humans simply now live long enough to develop them. of course, “hazards of civilization” can accelerate them at a younger age.aging and its diseases cannot be separated. healthy aging, or aging without diseases, is merely a slow aging, when biological age is less than chronological age. during a period of seemingly healthy aging, pre-pre-diseases and pre-diseases are progressing until they eventually reach clinical manifestations. thus, healthy aging progress to unhealthy and pre-diseases become diseases [34].age-related diseases and covid-19 vulnerability are highly intertwined. patients, who die from covid-19, otherwise would die from age-related diseases such as heart disease, cancer, diabetes, hypertension, just a year later. covid-19 approximately doubles a patient’s aging-dependent risk of dying during one year. for example, (numbers are very approximate), a sixty year old woman has 1% chance to die from aging before her 61st birthday. at that age, if infected, the death rate from covid-19 is around 1% for females. if infected, a patient has approximately doubled chances to die compared with usual age-related mortality during one year. as david spiegelhalter put it: “getting covid-19 is like packing a year’s worth of risk into a week or two”. https://medium.com/wintoncentre/how-much-normal-risk-does-covid-represent-4539118e1196.children and young adults have a very low risk of death from aging-related diseases, so that risk remains extremely low even when doubled.although natural mortality is relatively high in the youngest age group, especially in infants, they do not die from age-related diseases of course. instead, infants are vulnerable to bacterial infections and candida infections due to underdeveloped immune system [35]. low covid-19 mortality in the pediatric age group [11] is consistent with the notion that covid-19 vulnerability is not due to a “weak” immune system. in contrast, as we will discuss in the next section, it is hyper-functional immune response that leads to death from covid-19 in the elderly by causing cytokine storm.severe covid-19 is characterized by hyper-inflammation, cytokine storm, acute respiratory distress syndrome (ards), damage to the lung, heart and kidneys [36–39].in response to viral replication, hyperfunctional monocytes and macrophages infiltrate the lung, causing hyper-inflammation and hyper-secretion of cytokines such as interleukin (il)-6, il-2, il-7, il-1ra, interferon-γ inducible protein (ip)-10, tumor necrosis factor (tnf)-α, ferritin, monocyte chemoattractant protein (mcp)-1, macrophage inflammatory protein (mip) 1-α, granulocyte-colony stimulating factor (g-csf), c-reactive protein (crp) and procalcitonin. [22, 36–42].this leads to leukocyte recruitment, vascular permeability, edema and further pulmonary damage in vicious cycle [37, 38, 41, 43, 44]. hyper-inflammation becomes systemic, in turn causing hyper-coagulation and thrombosis, disseminated intravascular coagulation [45]. this causes injury of distant organs such as the kidneys. pre-existing organ damage (late stages of age-related diseases) exacerbates organ damage caused by cytokine storm [42, 43, 46]. in addition, cellular hyper-functions and systemic hyper-inflammation may lead to cellular exhaustion, such as exhaustion of lymphocytes (lymphopenia) [47–49]. hypercoagulation is associated with hyperactive fibrinolysis and increased d-dimer blood levels [23]. cytokine storm is a systemic hyperfunctional response (figure 1).of course, age-related hyperfunctional response, such as cytokine storm, is not caused by lifelong accumulation of molecular damage. aging is not caused by molecular damage after all. instead it’s a continuation of developmental/growth programs that lead to hyper-functions and in turn eventually to dysfunctions.“quasi” means “resembling” or “seemingly, but not really.” quasi-program of aging is not a program but a continuation of developmental programs that were not switched off upon their completion [24, 50]. they purposelessly unfold, leading to age-related diseases, secondary organ failure and death. quasi-programmed (program-like) aging is associated with higher than optimal cellular and systemic functions, which eventually, via cellular exhaustion and organ damage, lead to functional decline (figure 2). for example, starting from birth, blood pressure increases and continues to increase after organismal growth is completed. therefore, hypertension is the most prevalent age-related disease. in turn, hypertension can cause organ damage: stroke, infarction and renal failure. similarly, obesity develops in post-development as a continuation of growth (yet, it can be prevented by low caloric diets, illustrating that quasi-program of aging can be decelerated).hyperfunction is an excessive normal cellular function: contraction by smooth muscle cells (smc), adhesion and aggregation by blood platelets, insulin secretion by beta-cells, lipid accumulation by adipocytes, secretion by stromal and immune cells, oxidative burst by leukocytes, just to name a few. when higher than optimal, they cause vasoconstriction and hypertension, thrombosis, hyperinsulinemia, hypertrophy, hyperplasia, obesity, hyper-secretory phenotype or senescence-associated secretory phenotype (sasp), hyper-inflammation and so on.hyper-function is not necessarily an absolutely increased function. it may be also insufficiently decreased function (relative hyperfunction). levels of igf-1 and growth hormone decrease during lifespan. despite this decrease, igf-1 levels are still higher than optimal (relative hyper-function) because further genetic decrease in igf-1 levels (by genetic means) extends health span and lifespan in mammals [51–53].cellular hyperfunctions may eventually switch to cellular exhaustion and loss of functions at late stages. during the course of type ii diabetes, mtor overactivation and hyperinsulinemia eventually lead to beta-cell exhaustion and insulin insufficiency, from pre-diabetes to diabetes [54, 55]. as another example, after puberty, hyperstimulation of the ovary eventually leads to oocyte exhaustion and menopause (see figure 3 in ref. [29]). depletion of naïve lymphocytes is another example, as reviewed here later. age-related alterations are mostly noticed when they switch to functional decline, which is a late event.in some cases, functional decline can be primary and programmed. for example, thymus involution (replacement of t cells by adipocytes) starts early in life, accelerates at puberty and continues later. still loss of thymocytes and their niches may be in part due to adipocyte hyperplasia and hypertrophy [56]. in fact, obesity accelerates involution, whereas calorie restriction decelerates it [57, 58]. furthermore, the oblation of sex hormones decelerates or even reverses thymus involution [59]. thus, involution is triggered by adipocyte hyperplasia and increased production of sex hormones during puberty [56].quasi-programmed aging is not driven by molecular damage. it is driven by nutrient/hormone/cytokine-sensing and growth-promoting signaling pathways such as target of rapamycin (tor; mtor), which are involved in developmental growth and later cause hyperfunctional aging and its diseases [24, 26].what is the cause-effect relationship between age-related diseases and covid-19 lethality? do patients die from age-related diseases, complicated by covid-19? or, in contrast, do these various diseases make covid-19 infection lethal? both scenarios take place to some extent. however, the relationship is mostly indirect. both age-related diseases and covid-vulnerability result from the same underlying cause (figure 3). this is why they are highly correlated. the cause is aging itself. aging is manifested by a sum of deadly - and not so deadly - diseases and conditions ranging from cancer to grey hair. although not all diseases seem to be deadly, they can cause complications such as stroke, ventricular fibrillation, renal failure, lung edema. even sarcopenia and osteoporosis lead to falls and broken bones culminating in a deadly sequence of events. cosmetic manifestations such as aging spots and wrinkles, while not deadly by themselves, can be manifestations of other diseases. for example, baldness correlates with prostate enlargement [60], and the later can lead to urinary obstruction and renal failure.diseases occur together. for example, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (copd) is associated with diabetes, cardiovascular disease and hypertension [61]. if a person has one disease (e.g., diabetes), this patient has higher chances of having other diseases (e.g., hypertension, ihd, cancer) or conditions, including covid-19 vulnerability, which is revealed only during infection but can be predicted by pre-existing diseases.aging is initially driven by an increase in cellular and systemic functions (hyperfunction), leading to age-related conditions. for example, hypertension is a systemic hyperfunction due to hyperfunction of multiple cell types such as arterial smooth muscle cells (asmc). similarly, covid-19-vulnerability is associated with hyperfunction of inflammatory cells that, in response to covid-19 infection, causes cytokine storm, hyper-coagulation and damage of the lung and distant organs.the covid-19 vulnerability syndrome is an aging-related disease, strictly dependent on biological age, associated with other age-related diseases, and exemplified by hyper-functional response to infection.with hundreds of cell types acting in concert, the immune system is so complex that we cannot discuss age-related alterations without oversimplification. the most noticeable alteration is that memory t and b cells replace naive t and b cells [62]. (this seems natural since life-long exposure to pathogens replaces naïve cells by memory cells). replacement of naïve immune cells decreases adaptive responses to novel antigens such as sars-cov-2. in contrast, immune protection by memory t cells from viral re-infection with known pathogens is usually increased with age [62].immune responses are roughly divided into (a) innate responses, carried mostly by neutrophils, macrophages and nk cells, which react to pathogen rapidly and nonspecifically, and (b) adaptive responses, carried by t and b lymphocytes, which are delayed, slower and specific (e.g., antigen-specific clonal expansion of t and b lymphocytes and antibody production by b lymphocytes) [63–65]. in the elderly, immune responses to sars-cov-1/2 are “stuck in innate immunity,” with insufficient progression to adaptive immunity [37]. however, decline in adaptive response, such as antibody production, plays little role in covid-19 mortality. it is hyper-functional innate immunity, hyper-inflammation, cytokine storm and hyper-coagulation that lead to organ failure and death. in agreement, hyper inflammatory response rather than high virus numbers leads to death of sars-cov-infected old nonhuman primates [66].aging is associated with diseases of immune hyper-function such as autoimmune disorders with paradoxical increase in certain signaling pathways and cytokine levels [67–69].in the elderly, innate immune cells are in a state of sustained activation, producing pro-inflammatory cytokines [67, 70–72]. increased pro-inflammatory activity by the innate immune system, especially by monocytes/macrophages, is a state of alertness and hyper-reactivity on the cost of potential age-related inflammatory diseases [67, 70–72]. whereas some functions are decreased, others are increased. according to the inflamm-aging concept, innate immune system overtakes adaptive immune system in aging. cause-effect relationships are bi-directional: immunosenescence (namely, a decrease in adaptive response) is a cause and consequence of inflamm-aging [67, 70–72].we can consider inflamm-aging as an example of hyper-function. while some functions are decreased, others are increased. hyper-function is damaging. (in analogy, increased electric power, without an adaptor, would damage a laptop). damaging hyper-functions can lead to loss of function and cellular exhaustion. and vice versa, loss of function may cause compensatory hyper-functions of another components.cellular senescence is a continuation of cellular growth, when actual growth is completed [73, 74]. in proliferating cells, cellular mass growth is balanced by cell division. cells grow in size and then divide. when the cell cycle is blocked (e.g., p21 and p16), then growth-promoting pathways such as mtor and mapk drive conversion to senescence (geroconversion) [24, 74, 75]. during geroconversion, cells become hypertrophic and “fat”. cellular functions increase: hyper-secretion and lysosomal hyper-function are manifested by sasp and beta-gal staining. hyper-activated growth-promoting pathways cause compensatory resistance to growth factors/insulin, permanent loss of re-proliferative potential [74]. rapamycin, everolimus, pan-mtor and mapk inhibitors slows down geroconversion, maintaining reversible quiescence instead of senescence [73, 76–88].geroconversion is a continuation of cellular growth [73, 74]. similarly, aging is a continuation of developmental growth (see figure 1 in ref. [89]). when the developmental program is completed, it becomes a quasi-program of aging. as discussed in detail, chronically activated nutrient-sensing and growth-promoting pathways drive age-related diseases, culminating in organismal death [24, 26].age-related diseases are quasi-programmed. aging is a common cause of age-related diseases, a sum of all age-related diseases. they are diseases of hyper-function, secondary hypo-function and compensation reactions [25]; they are deadly manifestations of aging.from activation of cellular functions to systemic hyperfunctions, from diseases to organ damage and death, hyperfunction theory of quasi-programmed aging describes the sequence of events [26]. and as discussed in 2006, suppression of aging by gero-suppressants, such as rapamycin, will prevent and treat all age-related diseases [24]. this point of view is becoming widely accepted and, in recent literature, quasi-programmed model of diseases (2006) is called “geroscience hypothesis” [2, 90].if aging were functional decline due to accumulation of molecular damage, then it would be near to impossible to restore functions and rejuvenate the immune system. in contrast, if functional decline is secondary to hyperfunctions (see figure 2 in ref. [89]), these hyperfunctions can be suppressed pharmacologically to restore lost functions. typical drugs are inhibitors of their targets, rather than activators, so they decrease functions of their targets. by decreasing hyper-functions, which otherwise lead to secondary loss of functions, rapamycin may restore “lost” functions (figure 4).rapamycin improves vaccination against viruses such as influenza in old mice, monkeys and humans [92–100]. importantly, rapamycin increases pathogen-specific but not graft-reactive cd8+ t cell responses [95, 101]. therefore, rapamycin and everolimus can both be used to prevent donor organ rejection and improve adaptive immunity against new pathogens [96].differentiation is an increase of tissue-specific cellular functions. terminally differentiated b, t, and nk cells can rapidly react to already known pathogens [102]. decrease in naïve t and b lymphocytes (and thus diminished response to novel antigens) results in part from cellular hyper-differentiation in the immune system [64, 103]. hyper-functional differentiation can be counteracted by rapamycin [98].as another example, age-related exhaustion of stem cells is partially due to loss of quiescence caused by growth over-stimulation [92, 104–106]. in general, senescent cells characterized by hyper-proliferative drive coupled with cell cycle arrest [77]. in young mice, mtor hyper-activation causes senescence of hematopoietic stem cells (hsc) and decreases lymphopoiesis [92]. in old mice, rapamycin rejuvenates hematopoiesis, and improves vaccination against influenza virus [92].third, production of lymphoid cells may be decreased because of disruption of hypoxic niches due to adipocytes hyperplasia [56, 107]. hypoxic niches can preserve hsc [108, 109] probably because hypoxia inhibits mtor and cellular senescence [110]. in agreement, rapamycin preserves hscs [92, 98, 111, 112] reduces the proportion of memory cells and maintains a pool of naïve t cells [92, 98].fourth, growth factor (gf)- and insulin-resistance is loss of function because cells cannot respond to gf/insulin. but it may be caused by over-activated mtor, which via s6k/irs feedback loop blocks insulin and gf signaling. rapamycin abrogates the loop restoring signaling [113–118].a high prevalence of age-related diseases, often called “diseases of civilization,” is a success story of modern medicine. in the past, most people did not live long enough to develop age-related diseases and those who developed them died soon after. due to medical advances, people survive to 85 on average, despite suffering from age-related diseases. standard medicine preferentially extends life span, without necessarily affecting health span (see figure 3 in ref. [119]). for example, defibrillation and coronary stenting can save life but not cure heart disease. it is anti-aging interventions that extend health span, delaying diseases, thus extending lifespan. aging is a common cause of all age-related diseases. by suppressing aging, anti-aging interventions may delay all age-related diseases [119].as a well-known example, low calorie diets such as calorie restriction, intermittent fasting, and low carbohydrate diets extend both health and lifespan. figuratively, low calorie diets prolong life by improving health. nutrients and obesity activate growth-promoting pathways (e.g., mtor), thus accelerating development of quasi-programmed (age-related) diseases. obesity is associated with all age-related diseases from cancer to alzheimer’s and from diabetes to sarcopenia. covid-19 vulnerability is also associated with obesity [9, 19, 20, 22]. according to hyperfunction theory, obesity accelerates aging and all age-related conditions including covid-19 vulnerability.diabetes is one of main risk factors of death in covid-19 [5, 6, 12, 13, 15, 21]. can type 2 diabetes, an age-related disease, be reversed? in remarkable studies, it was shown that a brief course (6-8 weeks) of very low calorie diets (vlcds) can reverse type ii diabetes. in one study, vlcd reversed diabetes in 46% of patients with up to a 6-year history of diabetes [120]. vlcd is most effective for its prevention and at early stages of diabetes [121]. this anti-aging modality is so simple that remission can be achieved at home by health-motivated individuals [122]. simultaneously, it treats other age-related diseases such hypertension [123]. obesity is associated with other diseases of hyperfunction from diabetes and sarcopenia to cancer and alzheimer’s’ disease. since age-related diseases are predictors of covid-19 mortality, vlcd in theory may decrease covid-19 vulnerability.in the soil of easter island, a complex bacteria produces anti-fungal antibiotic rapamycin to suppress yeast growth but, as a by-product, it also suppresses yeast aging (quasi-programed aging is a continuation of growth). approved for human use in 1999, rapamycin (sirolimus) and its close analog everolimus are widely used in several diseases including cancer and organ transplantation. hundreds of clinical trials (and twenty years of clinical practice) have ensured their safety and good tolerability especially in healthy older adults [119].currently, several anti-aging clinics prescribe rapamycin out of label to prevent age-related diseases and slow aging. hundreds of recent reviews discussed rapamycin and everolimus in detail, so i will just emphasize a few points:as soon as covid-19 epidemic started, it become clear that covid-19 vulnerability is an aging-dependent condition and the use of rapamycin (sirolimus) was immediately suggested by independent researchers [1, 3, 133–137]. these proposals were based on a mixture of several rationales, which need to be clearly distinguished. in theory, there are at least three independent applications of rapamycin and everolimus for covid-19. currently, they all are still hypothetical.3. potential suppression of cytokine storm and hyper-inflammation (figure 1). as we discussed in the section “cytokine storm is a hyperfunction”, cytokine storm and hyper-inflammation is a main cause of death in covid-19 pneumonia [36–40, 42, 45, 135, 141–143] rapamycin, an anti-inflammatory agent, inhibits hyper-functions, cellular senescence and decrease secretion of cytokines ([74, 81, 144]. rapamycin inhibits the jak2/stat4 signaling pathway [145] and reduces if-γ and tnf-α levels [112]. rapamycin (sirolimus) treatment improves outcomes in patients with severe h1n1 pneumonia and acute respiratory failure and was associated with improvement in virus clearance, and shortened ventilator days [146]. clinical trial “sirolimus treatment in hospitalized patients with covid-19 pneumonia (scope)” has been started  https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/nct04341675.this review is intended for a professional audience, to stimulate new ideas and to aid the global efforts to develop effective treatments for covid-19 disease. this article does not represent medical advice or recommendations to patients. the media should exercise caution and seek expert medical advice for interpretation, when referring to this article.covid-19 is the term used to describe the disease caused by severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus-2 (sars cov-2). it originated in december 2019 from wuhan, hubei province in china, and owing to its ability to be transmitted between humans via respiratory droplets 1 , has since spread globally. within the united kingdom (uk), there have been mounting concerns regarding multiple reports of an elevated relativerisk of covid-19 mortality amongst the black and minority ethnic (bame) population 2-5 .after adjusting for socio-demographic characteristics and self-reported comorbidity/disability, the office for national statistics (ons) estimates that indian females are 1.43 times, pakistani and bangladeshi males are 1.8 times, and black males and females 1.9 times, more likely to die from covid-19 relative to their white counterparts 2 . this pattern has broadly been reflected in uk critical care admission and outcome data from the intensive care national audit and research centre report 6 , as well as data from the united states of america (usa) 7 . an urgent national enquiry into the possible reasons for this phenomenon has thus been issued.sars cov-2 is a positive-sense, enveloped, single-stranded rna virus which can bind to the angiotensin converting enzyme 2 (ace2) receptor in humans 1, 8 . ace2 receptors are expressed widely throughout the body but it is believed that sars cov-2 uses ace2 receptors expressed on respiratory epithelial cells to gain entry into the host 8 . after entering the respiratory epithelium, it can replicate to cause pyroptosis and thus the release of pathogen associated molecular patterns (pamps) and damage associated molecular patterns (damps) 9 . damps and pamps are recognised by the pattern recognition receptors of surrounding epithelial cells, alveolar macrophages and vascular endothelial cells, which respond by releasing a wide array of pro-inflammatory cytokines such as c-x-c motif chemokine-10 (cxcl-10), interleukin-6 (il-6), macrophage inflammatory protein 1α (mip1α), macrophage inflammatory protein 1α (mip1β) and monocyte chemoattractant protein 1 (mcp1). these inflammatory cytokines and chemokines can then recruit monocytes, macrophages and t-cells to the local tissue which all release further pro-inflammatory cytokines in a positive feedback loop mechanism resulting in a 'cytokine storm' 8 . evidence to support this was confirmed by the levels of various inflammatory cytokines such as il-2, il-7, il-10, granulocyte colony-stimulating factor (g-csf), cxcl-10, mcp1, mip1α and tumour necrosis factor- (tnf-), being elevated in severe covid-19 patients who required critical care admission, usually after the initial phase of viral infection 10 .one of the major complications of covid-19 is acute respiratory distress syndrome (ards), which can lead to death by respiratory failure, and is indeed associated with systemic inflammation 11 . the aforementioned 'cytokine storm' can also lead to sepsis and multi-organ failure 12, 13 . another emerging frequently fatal complication of covid-19 are venous thrombo-embolisms (vte), namely pulmonary embolisms (pe), which are hypothesized to arise due to the pro-inflammatory and hypercoagulable state described extensively in the literature 14 . peak il-6 levels have now been directly associated with covid-19 disease severity 15 and tocilizumab, an il-6 inhibitor, is amongst many other promising anti-inflammatory drugs undergoing clinical trials to treat covid-19 16, 17 . inflammation is thus at the forefront of covid-19 research 18 and it is postulated that disease severity and outcomes correlate with pro-inflammatory cytokine dysregulation 19, 20 . we therefore undertook the synthesis of a narrative review, which aims to shed light on the novel, acute-on-chronic, pathophysiological role of inflammation in contributing towards the increased mortality risk of covid-19 amongst the bame population. we propose that the bame population may be subjected to elevated levels of chronic, systemic inflammation, due to various reasons discussed, which may augment the acute covid-19 'cytokine storm'described, to potentiate multi-organ failure and death. or 'genetic'. the reference list of each study identified in the initial database search, and the library of each co-author, was also reviewed to identify any potentially relevant studies.study selection: titles, abstracts, and key words of the studies identified in the electronic search were screened for eligibility to be included in this narrative review. all studies deemed relevant were retrieved. a standardized checklist was then used to determine the eligibility for inclusion in the review based on information within the full article. original research articles were selected to participate in this study if they were relevant to our study hypothesis and contained the highest quality of evidence pertaining a given subject; systematic reviews were used preferentially where possible. studies confined to local indigenous populations, or published before the year 2000, were excluded. key epidemiological data was also extracted from government reports.synthesis: a narrative review was synthesized using the included articles in order to summarize key information, hypothesize pathophysiological mechanisms, draw inferences and suggest recommendations for public health policy. 29 . this suggests that from childhood itself, metabolic risk in the bame population is higher, and indeed, there is evidence to suggest a genetic predisposition to metabolic syndrome amongst the bame population 30 42 . osa has been associated with an exacerbation of metabolic syndrome [43] [44] [45] , increased intubation risks 46 and respiratory failure 47 . furthermore, obesity can contribute to nonalcoholic fatty liver disease (nafld), which is more commonly found in ethnic minorities 48, 49 . thus, during a covid-19 'cytokine storm', patients with nafld, may be more prone to acute-on-chronic liver failure 50 .obesity, and insulin resistance, can both also contribute to a chronic inflammatory state which may potentiate a 'cytokine storm' within the context of an acute covid-19 infection. excess fat, in particular visceral fat which is broadly measured by waist circumference, has been associated with chronic systemic inflammation 51 and covid-19 severity 36 furthermore, densely populated urban areas such as london suffered the most deaths from covid-19 and, likewise, the population of london also comprises of over 40% bame 100 . not only does overcrowded housing and inner-city living pose a huge impediment for social distancing, but they are also both associated with psychological stress, mental health disorder and inflammation [101] [102] [103] .finally, whilst 63% of covid-19 related deaths amongst nhs frontline staff were bame 104 , only 20.8% of the nhs workforce are bame 105 . this highlights an enormous relative risk which is greater than that of the general bame population, raising questions regarding occupational hazard. this may partially be explained by the fact that frontline nhs workers are more likely to be exposed to higher viral loads of covid-19. however, healthcare workers can often experience psychological stress and burn-out 106 and there is now emerging evidence that bame nhs staff may encounter greater work-related psychological stress 107 .amongst the non-medical nhs workforce, a hierarchal correlation can be observed whereby the prevalence of white staff positively, and bame staff negatively, correlate with seniority 105 . indeed, a 'lack of decision making' has been identified as a potent source of occupation-related psychological stress 108, 109 . similarly, various other occupations such as chefs, taxi drivers and security guards, have all also encountered a disproportionately higher number of covid-19 related deaths 110 . these occupations not only contain higher representations of minority ethnics amongst staff 111 , but may also involve less decision making, as well as more night shifts, sedentary work and viral load exposure.overall, the mechanism as to how psychological stress can contribute to chronic inflammation is yet to be fully elucidated, but there are two mechanisms that have been described in addition to the well evidenced pathophysiological mechanisms discussed above, there may also be a smaller role played by chronic infections such as tuberculosis (tb), chronic hepatitis, and human immunodeficiency virus (hiv), which are more prevalent in migrants from developing countries [124] [125] [126] [127] . tb is known to contribute to various chronic lung changes such as cavitation, fibrosis, bronchiectasis and impairment in lung function, all of which may contribute to impaired pulmonary immunity 128 based on the pathophysiological mechanisms identified in this review, as well as the surrounding literature, suggested multi-disciplinary interventions to reduce the health inequalities highlighted by the covid-19 pandemic have been summarized in table 1 below.income inequalities for younger generations can be targeted by further investing in the education of deprived populations. inner-city schools and universities can be given more subsidies and grants to facilitate this with awareness of these government schemes should also be addressed by diversifying advertising platforms, for example, via social media. housing inequalities can be addressed by allocating housing benefit claimants to council properties throughout the country rather than in specific inner-city areas. the barriers preventing elderly bame individuals from utilizing care homes should be tackled to reduce overcrowded housing. certain populations, containing more bame, may be excluded from receiving high quality healthcare. firstly, in prisons, where blacks are overrepresented, the lammy review identifies that there is scope for improvement in the mental health awareness and health literacy amongst prison staff as they can often be the first point of contact for prisoners seeking medical attention 93 . additionally, improving staffing levels in prisons would help overcome the added barrier of escort requirements when prisoners require secondary care. secondly, undocumented migrants may not be entitled to non-emergency, healthcare which may delay their presentation to healthcare services due to deportation fears. the government should supportively work with these populations to prevent resultant health impairments by introducing crossborder health and social care. the bame population are at increased risks of unhealthy behaviours such as physical inactivity, and high-fat, high-sugar diets [38] [39] [40] . dietary advice should be offered, in multiple languages, focussing on healthy food interventions for all cuisines, rather than just western cuisines. the importance and benefits of healthy eating and exercise should be taught in schools, social media, and certain occupations which suffered disproportionate covid-19 deaths, for example, taxi drivers. councils in areas which suffered higher levels of covid-19 deaths should be given subsidies to focus on health promotion. this could involve supermarket food stamps for healthy food, discounted gym memberships, more cycle lanes and cycle-to-work schemes, subsidies to convert fast-food restaurants into health food restaurants, and the delivery of healthy-lifestyle talks at community gatherings, places of worship and gypsy communities. the bame population are at elevated risks of various diseases which could be contributing to their more severe covid-19 phenotype. guidelines should reflect this by incorporating ethnicity as a relevant risk factor to assist in determining when to initiate treatment. this may involve starting oral hypoglycaemic agents at lower hba1c levels, the nhs provision of bariatric surgery at a lower bmi threshold, or perhaps the use of statins, aspirin and percutaneous coronary intervention at lower cardiovascular risk thresholds for bame individuals. non-english speakers may lack the confidence to use nhs 111 services. it is thus imperative to increase the provision of translators and multi-lingual nhs services. language barriers may also reduce the effectiveness of talking therapies such as cognitive behavioural therapy. for this reason, the nhs provision of evidence-based, non-verbal psychotherapies such as yoga, tai-chi, dance movement psychotherapy, and music therapy may thus be of benefit. cultural barriers can often influence the interaction between bame individuals and healthcare services. for example, the stigma associated with mental health disorder is often higher amongst the bame population.healthcare staff, such as community mental health teams, should be equipped to deal with such stigmas as well as other cultural barriers. furthermore, the use of alternative medicine may be more prevalent amongst the bame population 143 . where possible, evidence based alternative therapies such as acupuncture, mindfulness and fasting should be considered by health professionals. various drugs such as dexamethasone, convalescent plasma, tocilizumab, and remdesivir are undergoing clinical trials to assess their efficacy in treating covid-19 144 . it is important to increase the bame individuals participating in these studies, or even to conduct separate studies focussed on the bame population. the recognition and reporting of ethnicity as a crucial demographic risk factor, like age and gender, should also be encouraged amongst healthcare research.the mechanisms discussed throughout this review have been summarized in figure 1 below. figure 1 : illustrating the complex, acute-on-chronic interplay between social determinants of health, acute covid-19 pathophysiology and the chronic diseases discussed in this review, which are more prevalent in the black and minority ethnic (bame) population. chronic diseases, and disease processes, that could be contributing to the more severe covid-19 phenotype observed in the bame population include metabolic syndrome ( this review aims to shed light on the ongoing, national enquiry investigating the disproportionate effect of covid-19 on the bame population. for the first time, inflammation has been discussed in a common framework with regards to covid-19 and ethnicity. we suggest a novel, pathophysiological mechanism by which acute inflammation, arising from covid-19, may augment existing chronic inflammation secondary to medical co-morbidity, in order to potentiate a 'cytokine storm' and thus the more severe disease phenotype observed in the bame population. obesity, insulin resistance, cardiovascular disease, psychological stress, chronic infections and genetic predispositions are all relevant factors which may be contributing to elevated chronic, systemic inflammation amongst the bame population. we suggest various interventions to reduce the prevalence of the severe covid-19 disease phenotype amongst the bame population. subsequent systemic immune response syndrome (sirs) and multi-organ failure secondary to covid-19 can manifest as acute coronary syndrome (acs), myocarditis, venous thrombo-embolism (vte), acute liver failure, respiratory failure, and acute renal injury, all of which can be directly potentiated by the aforementioned, pre-existing co-morbidities. there are no relevant conflicts of interest to declare.in the past decades, two known pathogenic human coronaviruses, severe acute respiratory syndrome cov (sars-cov) and middle east respiratory syndrome cov (mers-cov), have been reported to damage the respiratory tract and cause high morbidity and mortality [1] . severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2) is a newly discovered coronavirus, was reported at december 2019 (2019-ncov) in the city wuhan, hubei province, china [2] . up to 21th of march 2020, 81,416 cases have been reported with 3261 fatal cases according to the chinese center for disease control and prevention (cdc). meanwhile, 190,000 cases have been reported with 7992 fatal cases in other countries except china. in italy, to date there are about 47.021 infected and 4.032 deaths [3] . a global outbreak of the sars-cov-2 caused corona virus disease (covid-19) seems inevitable. among these covid-19 patients, most of them have the common symptoms including fever, cough, and myalgia or fatigue at onset. the majority of patients can recover, however, about 25% of patients will progress into severe complications including acute respiratory distress syndrome (ards), which may worsen rapidly into respiratory failure, need an intensive care unit (icu) and even cause multiple organ failure [4, 5] . therefore, the exploration for the mortality causes and advancing novel therapeutic development of severe covid-19 is crucially important at the moment.although virus-induced cytopathic effects and viral evasion of host immune responses are believed to be important in disease severity, studies from humans who diedjournal of translational medicine of sars and mers suggested that an aberrant host immune response resulting in an inflammatory cytokine storm and lethal disease [1] . similar to the inflammatory cytokines in sars and mers, patients with covid-19 also have increased plasma concentrations of inflammatory cytokines, such as tumour necrosis factor α (tnfα),interleukins (il) 2, 7, and 10, granulocyte-colony stimulating factor (g-csf), monocyte chemoattractant protein 1, macrophage inflammatory protein 1 alpha, and interferon-γ-inducible protein 10, especially in icu patients, which implied a cytokine storm occurred [4] . moreover, covid-19 patients have decreased lymphocytes in peripheral blood and characteristic pulmonary ground glass changes on imaging [4, 5] . most importantly, in the biopsy samples at autopsy from patients who died from covid-19, histological examination showed bilateral diffuse alveolar damage including edema, proteinaceous exudate, focal reactive hyperplasia of pneumocytes with patchy inflammatory cellular infiltration, and multinucleated giant cells [6, 7] . it also has been recovered from autopsy examination that type ii alveolar epithelial cells proliferate markedly, with some cells exfoliated. the alveolar septum is hyperemic, edematous, with clear intravascular thrombosis. focal monocytes, lymphocytes and plasma cells are infiltrating into pulmonary interstitium. immunohistochemistry results showed positive for immunity cells including cd3, cd4, cd8, cd20, cd79a, cd5, cd38 and cd68 [8] . these phenomena further suggest severe pulmonary inflammatory immune cells exist in sars-cov-2 infection. therefore, increased alveolar exudate caused by aberrant host immune response and inflammatory cytokine storm probably impedes alveolar gas exchange and contributes to the high mortality of severe covid-19 patients.inflammatory storm refers to an excessive inflammatory response flaring out of control and the immune system gone awry. to identify which kind of immune cells are involved in and which inflammatory cytokine is the critical target in these severe covid-19 patients, we analyzed peripheral blood samples from patients with severe or critical covid-19 from the first affiliated hospital of university of science and technology of china and observed monocytes and t cells from severe or critical covid-19 patients decreased significantly compared to normal controls. these aberrant pathogenic t cells from critical icu care covid-19 patients showed activated characteristic accompanied with co-expressing ifn-γ and gm-csf. this phenomenon aroused our alarm, for gm-csf has the capability to control diverse pathogenic capabilities of inflammatory myeloid cells, especially monocytes [9] . as expected, inflammatory monocyte with cd14 + cd16 + phenotype exists in peripheral blood of covid-19 patients and has larger population in critical covid-19 patients from icu. note that without any re-stimulation with pma or incubation with monensin, large amount of il-6 could be tested from these inflammatory monocytes especially in icu patients. therefore, these pathogenic th1 cells (gm-csf + ifn-γ + ) and inflammatory monocytes (cd14 + cd16 + with high expression of il-6) exist especially in critical icu covid-19 patients [10] . given that large amount of mononuclear inflammatory lymphocytes have been observed in the biopsy samples at autopsy from covid-19 patients, we believe that these pathogenic t cells and inflammatory monocytes may enter the pulmonary circulation in large numbers and incite inflammatory storm in severe or critical covid-19 patients (fig. 1 ).tocilizumab is the first marketed il-6 blocking antibody through targeting il-6 receptors and has proved its safety and effectiveness in therapy for rheumatoid arthritis (fig. 2) . in order to verify whether targeted il-6, may potentially be the effective and safe way to reduce mortality of covid-19, 21 patients diagnosed as severe or critical covid-19 from the first affiliated hospital of university of science and technology of china and anhui fuyang second people's hospital were recruited and given tocilizumab therapy (table 1) . patients received standard treatment according to the diagnosis and treatment protocol for covid-19 (7 th edition), including lopinavir, methylprednisolone, other symptom relievers and oxygen therapy. the results of tocilizumab treatment are inspiring. the temperature of all the patients returned to normal very quickly. the respiratory function and all other symptoms improved remarkably. among these 21 patients, 20 patients have been recovered and discharged within 2 weeks after the tocilizumab therapy. one left patient is recovering and out of icu care. no adverse drug reactions were reported during the treatment with tocilizumab [11] . with these promising preliminary clinical results, we further launched the multicenter, large-scale clinical trials (chictr2000029765) and have already about 500 severe or critical patients treated this way.the immunotherapy strategy about tocilizumab treatment has been formally included in the diagnosis and treatment program of covid-19 (7th edition) of the national health commission of china since 3th march 2020 as following: tocilizumab can be used in patients with extensive bilateral lung lesions opacity or in severe or critical patients, who have elevated laboratory detected il-6 levels. the first dose is 4-8 mg/ kg (the recommended dose is 400 mg, diluted to 100 ml with 0.9% normal saline, and the infusion time is more than 1 h). for patients with poor initial efficacy, an additional application can be made after 12 h (the dose is the same as before). the maximum number of times of administration is two, and the maximum dose of a single dose should not exceed 800 mg. note that patients with allergic reactions, such as tuberculosis and other active infection are contraindicated. we suggest that il-6 concentrations can be detected if fever persists for more than 3 days. by chemiluminescence detection, if serum il-6 content is over 20 pg/ml, tocilizumab can be used. the il-6 will be temporarily increased in serum in the next few days, for its receptors have been blocked by tocilizumab. together, tocilizumab treatment is recommended to reduce the mortality of severe covid-19.all three coronaviruses, including sars-cov, mers-cov and sars-cov-2, induce aberrant non-effective host immune responses that are associated with severe lung pathology. the new sars-cov-2 additionally causes serious alveolar mucus infiltration and multiple organ failure. as the sars-cov-2 continues to spread, the numbers of fatal cases rise exponentially in many countries, advancing novel therapeutic development becomes crucial to minimize the number of deaths from covid-19. in the absence of specific antiviral drugs, existing host-directed therapies could potentially be repurposed to treat covid-19. china's plan of tocilizumab treatment has shown its remarkable effectiveness and safety in clinical practice over the past 2 months, hoping it will benefit other countries fighting the pandemic and reduce the mortality of severe covid-19 as well. ready to submit your research ? choose bmc and benefit from:received: 16 march 2020 accepted: 9 april 2020at present, there is no effective therapy for covid-19. therefore, the group of diseases and the assessment of prognosis become more and more important. 3 the severity of diseases was according to the covid-19 diagnosis and treatment scheme issued by the national health committee. patients were divided into four groups, including light groups, medium groups, severe groups, and critically ill groups.however, platelet-to-lymphocyte ratio (plr) of covid-19 between severe and nonsevere cases were not fully reported, which may have prognostic values and be important therapeutic targets. in this study, the number of platelets, their dynamic changes during the treatment, plr of 30 laboratory-confirmed cases admitted to huizhou municipal central hospital was showed, the difference between severe and nonsevere cases was investigated. multivariate analysis of independent risk factors and relationship between plr and prognosis.data are presented as mean and standard deviation unless stated otherwise. the nonparametric two-tailed student t test was used to analyze variables. differences in values between tested groups were regarded as significant at a value of p ≤ .05. correlation analysis used simple linear correlation, multifactor logistic regression analysis.data were analyzed using spss 25. the optimal cut-off value, sensitivity (sensitivity), and specificity (specificity) of plr were determined by analysis of receiver operating characteristic (roc) curve. the statistical graphs were drawn using graphpad prism 6 software.there were a total of 30 patients admitted with a median age of the correlation between two groups in terms of age, length of hospitalization, the absolute value of lymphocytes, platelets, and so on are shown in table 1 and figures 1 and 2. table 1 shows the difference between nonsevere group and severe group in the average age (49.44 vs 60 years) and the average length of hospitalization (15.33 vs 27 days), the statistics of two groups was statistical significance (p < .05). we also analyze some other indicators between the two groups, such as platelet value, absolute lymphocyte values, plr, alt, and ast, ldh at admission. but there are no significance between them. unexpectedly, comparing the peak of platelet, it was found that the average platelet peak during the treatment of severe patients was 392 × 10 9 /l, which was significantly higher than the nonsevere patients at 301 × 10 9 /l. the plr was 626, which was significantly higher than the plr of nonsevere patients, which was 262. the date of the two groups was statistically significant (p < .05). in terms of hormone use, a total of 18 nonsevere patients used hormones during treatment, accounting for 66.7% of nonsevere patients, and 3 of the severe patients had used hormones, accounting for 100%, but these two groups of data have no statistical significance. multivariate logistic regression analysis of age, platelet peak, and plr at platelet peak during treatment showed that plr at platelet peak during treatment was an independent influencing factor for critically ill patients.the results are shown in table 2. 3.3 | correlation between platelet trend and course of disease during treatment figure 3 shows the trend of platelet in three severe patients. we found the same trend in three nonsevere patients. and their platelet value was above 300 × 10 9 /l. the platelet peak of group a was above 300 × 10 9 /l during the treatment. the platelet peak of group b was under 300 × 10 9 /l during the treatment. as shown in table 3 , patients in group a was older than patients in group b. patients in group a had longer average hospitalization day. the difference between the two groups is statistically significant (p < .05).comparing the correlation between the difference (δplr) the plr at the time of admission and the maximum of plr during treatment, and the length of hospitalization day. the data are shown in covid-19. 25, 26 however, there are many factors that affect platelet changes in the clinic. all patients in this study did not use invasive procedures such as tracheal intubation and deep vein catheterization. therefore, the impact of invasive procedures on platelet changes was not considered in this article. 27 it can be seen from the foregoing that the use of hormones during the treatment of patients is not significantly different between severe and nonsevere patients, so their effects on platelets can also be ruled out.as a new type of inflammation index, plr mainly reflects the level of systemic inflammation. previous studies have confirmed that plr is closely related to tumors, diabetes, coronary heart disease, and connective tissue diseases, and the increase of plr is related to tumor size, lymph node infiltration, distant metastasis and prognosis, and can be used as a potential inflammatory indicator for the clinical diagnosis of community-acquired pneumonia. 28 as an indicator of inflammation, platelet-released platelet factor-4 can prevent agglutinin-a from inhibiting lymphocyte generation, and activated platelets enhance lymphocyte adhesion to the endothelium, thereby promoting lymphocyte homing in endothelial veins and migration to inflammatory sites. plr refers to the ratio of the platelet-to-lymphocyte count. the advantage of plr selection is that it reflects both aggregation and inflammatory pathways, and maybe more valuable in predicting various inflammations than platelet or lymphocyte counts alone.the pathogenesis of covid-19 is also related to the virus-induced inflammatory response in vivo. [30] [31] [32] according to the current clinical and relevant data, patients with lower lymphocyte levels at the first diagnosis are more seriously ill, and the progressive decline in lymphocyte proportion indicates a poor prognosis. according to prior analysis, we propose the plr as an indicator which reflects the severity of inflammation in the process of treatment, by comparing the changes of plr during treatment, we found that the higher the δplr, the longer the hospital stay they were, of which showed a linear correlation.therefore, we speculated that the changes in the platelet/lymphocyte ratio in peripheral blood during treatment could reflect the disease progression and prognosis of covid-19 patients. the larger the δplr, the more severe the cytokine storm, and the longer the hospital stay, the worse the prognosis. when δplr increases in severe patients, we increase thymosin to regulate immune to elevate lymphocyte therapy to improve this situation, to prevent the development of severe patients or promote the improvement of symptoms in severe patients. after active symptomatic treatment, all three severe patients were successfully treated and successfully discharged from the hospital! the results of this treatment also seem to confirm our conjecture. we also calculated the cut-off value of δplr. when δplr > 126.7, we must actively intervene to prevent further deterioration of the disease. however, due to the lack of clinical data, this conclusion may be biased, and a larger number of samples are needed for further confirmation. coronavirus disease 2019 , caused by the severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2) virus, may lead to a severe inflammatory response or cytokine storm. 1 immune dysfunction in untreated crohn's disease may augment the risk for a severe inflammatory response with covid-19. 2 we describe a pediatric patient recently diagnosed with crohn's disease who developed severe covid-19 infection successfully treated with infliximab.a 14 year old male with recently diagnosed small bowel, perianal crohn's disease presented with 5 days of fevers and abdominal pain without respiratory symptoms. physical exam was notable for tachycardia, an erythematous maculopapular facial rash, abdominal tenderness and a perianal lesion with purulent drainage. initial laboratory tests revealed a creactive protein (crp) of 79.8 mg/l (normal 0-5 mg/l), an erythrocyte sedimentation rate (esr) of 64 mm/hr (normal 0-15 mm/hr) and hypoalbuminemia of 2.9 g/dl. sars-cov-2 pcr was positive. magnetic resonance (mr) enterography revealed 28 cm of ileitis, a 2.3 cm perianal abscess and fistula. chest x-ray was negative for an acute pulmonary process. blood culture and stool pcr were negative. treatment was initiated with intravenous (iv) piperacillin/tazobactam for his perianal abscess, hydroxychloroquine and azithromycin for sars-cov-2 infection, enoxaparin for prophylaxis of venous thromboembolism, and iv fluids. repeat concentrations of il-6, il-8, and tnf-α were rising (table 1) . multidisciplinary discussion of potential therapeutic options included remdesivir, an antiviral therapy, and tocilizumab, an il-6 inhibitor, for the treatment of covid-19, iv immune globulin for the treatment of an immune-mediated vasculitis, and infliximab, an anti-tnf-α therapy.infliximab would address the management of crohn's disease and potentially, the cytokine storm attributable to mis-c associated with covid-19. given the possible dual role and rapid clinical deterioration, he received 10 milligrams/kilogram (mg/kg) of infliximab on day cytokines improved with normalization of tnf-α, a decrease in il-6, and il-8. the progression of the rash was halted after infliximab treatment on hospitalization day 8 and significantly improved by discharge (figure 1 ). crp normalized. he was given a second infusion of infliximab10 mg/kg prior to discharge, 5 days after the initial dose due to a high inflammatory burden and presence of active perianal disease. prometheus infliximab concentration prior to the second infusion was > 34 ug/ml without antibodies. follow up two weeks after discharge revealed complete resolution of clinical symptoms and normalization of all labs previously elevated.this is the first reported case of a patient with recently diagnosed crohn's disease with suspected mis-c temporally related to covid-19 treated with infliximab to co-manage both entities. despite surgical management of his active perianal disease and antibiotic therapy, the patient continued to worsen clinically. his clinical deterioration was unclear, as both ibd and mis-c temporally related to covid-19 could be implicated, with all other infectious studies negative.pro-inflammatory cytokines, tnf-α, il-1β, and il-6 are overproduced in ibd patients. 3 elevated levels of tnf-α, mean of 62.3 pg/ml, have been described in the intestinal mucosa of ibd patients. 4 serum concentration of tnf-α and il-6 (median 10.5 pg/ml and 41.5 pg/ml respectively) are also associated with severe covid-19 illness. 5 at the peak of our patient's illness, serum concentrations of tnf-α (97.8 pg/ml) and il-6 (73.4 pg/ml) were higher than is reported in either ibd or severe covid-19. inflammatory disease overlap possibly contributed to cytokine storm and mis-c. cytokine storm has been found to be a major cause of morbidity in patients with severe covid-19 infection. 1, 5 treatment targeting these pro-inflammatory cytokines, such as il-6 inhibition with tocilizumab, have shown evidence of clinical benefit in subsets of severe covid-19 patients. 6 tnf-α is also implicated in severe covid-19 cases. blockade of tnf-α is effective in the treatment of auto-inflammatory conditions in which several cytokines are elevated, suggesting anti-tnf-α therapy alone may inhibit a cytokine cascade. 7 currently, therapy targeting tnf-a has not been associated with negative outcomes in ibd patients with covid-19. 8 this case supports a role for blockade of tnf-α in the treatment of covid-19 inflammatory cascade. whether this is specific for immune dysfunction in the setting of ibd or the non-ibd covid-19 patient requires further investigation.overall, increased tnf-α levels are seen in cytokine storm due to covid-19 and in active ibd. treatment with infliximab is known to be effective for the treatment of children with crohn's disease, and as evidenced by this case, was effectual in halting a systemic inflammatory response in our patient with covid-19. the role of anti-tnf agents in patients with mis-c temporally related to covid-19 requires further investigation.purpuric rash on the dorsum of the hand and antecubital-fossa before and after treatment with infliximab on hospitalization day 8. figure 1a and 1b represent the rash on the dorsum of the hand and antecubital fossa prior to infliximab treatment on hospitalization day 8. figure 1c and 1d demonstrate the improvement in his rash on day 13 prior to discharge. 