thei nterruption of infection chains through appropriate hand sanitization was pioneered in 1847 by the hungarian physician semmelweis ignµcf ülçp (ignaz philipp semmelweis) and became what is probably the first example of evidence-based medicine. [4] isolation or quarantine,s ocial distancing and physical barriers like masks,a re additional measures to slow the transmission of respiratory viruses. other measures,l ike prophylactic coating of airways with polymers,a re under development. [5] frequent handwashing proved effective against the spread of the first severe acute respiratory syndrome pandemic in 2002/2003 [6] and of the middle east respiratory syndrome (mers) in 2007. [7] however,t his hygienic measure is not easy to implement for individuals with frequent customer or patient contact or travelers.h and sanitizer solutions or gels are recommended as an alternative in these cases.a mong the most popular sanitizers are alcoholic hand rub solutions.while non-enveloped viruses like norovirus or rhinoviruses have al ow sensitivity towards alcoholic denaturing agents,members of the (enveloped) coronaviridae family are highly sensitive towards ethanol or isopropanol (2-propanol) . chlorhexidine gluconate and sodium hypochlorite were found to be surprisingly inefficient. [8] repeated use of alcohols dries out the skin, and small quantities of the alcohols may be absorbed, but they are effective. [9] the literature on the inactivation of previously known coronaviruses by surface disinfection procedures suggested 62-71 % ethanol to be effective against sars-cov-2 within 1min. [10] experimental work by several laboratories on the virus itself then showed that it is even less stable toward denaturation by alcoholic solutions. [11] exposure to concentrations of just 30 % of either ethanol or isopropanol for 30 seconds fully suppressed viral infectivity.likewise,the virucidal activity of the hand rub solutions known as who formulation 1, with 85 % ethanol, and who formulation 2, with 75 %i sopropanol, against sars-cov-2 was found to be excellent, with full inactivation of the coronavirus at 40 %or30%concentration, respectively.w hile the alcohol component is the main virucide,0 .125 % v/v h 2 o 2 is added to kill bacterial spores that may be present in the raw materials or the container.the addition of 1.45 % v/v glycerol as ah umectant improves the dermatological properties and thus the acceptance of the product. [12] fors urface disinfection, the same formulation may be used, with no additives required, and surgical hand preparation may be achieved by three applications for aduration of 3-5 min.unfortunately,c ommercial sanitizer solutions containing either alcohol can be difficult to obtain in the current health crisis.w ea re unaware of data for other countries,b ut data published by the german federal statistical office (destatis) show the severity of the problem. during the week of march 2-8, 2020, sales of disinfectants were 7.5-fold higher than usual, and in the subsequent weeks,they dropped to half the normal sales,a st he products were largely sold out. [13] by comparison, the increase in sales of soap reached ap eak of 3.4-fold of the average and that of toilet paper just 2.1-fold of the sales averaged over the preceding six months.ethanol is produced on al arge scale on our planet. the u.s. renewable fuels association reported that 85 million metric tons were produced in 2018 worldwide. [14] thee uropean renewable ethanol association (epure)stated that the production of the european union in the same year was 4.6 million metric tons,while an additional 0.5 million tons were imported. [15] besides minor usage by the chemical industry and food and beverages production (9 %e ach), the lions share (82 %) of the production was used as af uel additive. against the backdrop of reduced individual mobility during the crisis in most countries,i ta ppears likely that enough (bio)ethanol should currently be available for the health sector.several factors appeared to contribute to the supply problems.a sm entioned above,o ne factor was hoarding by consumers who bought unreasonable quantities of sanitizers while they were still available,q uickly depleting what pharmacies and drug stores had in stock. furthermore,t he supply chain was partially disrupted. while truckloads of ethanol were available in europe,t he logistics of getting trucks to sites that can fill 200 ld rums became more challenging due to closed or tightly controlled borders. drums of this size then had to be transported to facilities that can either produce sanitizers or fill the smaller containers commonly used by pharmacists.f urthermore,t he containers used in medical practices,a sw ell as the dispensers used by physicians,health care workers,and consumers,became ever more difficult to obtain, prompting unconventional measures, such as refills.on march 4, the bundesanstalt füra rbeitsschutz und arbeitsmedizin (baua), [16] the relevant regulatory body in germany,issued adecree that allowed pharmacies to produce hand sanitizer solutions locally.t he decree and its update of march 6c onfirmed that aqueous solutions of ethanol do not require regulatory approval to be produced for sale as biocidical agents.t he first decree also explicitly mentioned aqueous 2-propanol (70 %) and who formulation 2a s biocidal agents for hand hygiene.unfortunately,medical grade alcohol as astarting material for the local production of disinfectant solutions,including hand rub formulations,was largely sold out in germany in the second week of march. theu sual suppliers of pharmacists typically gave delivery times of several weeks at the peak of the supply crunch. this left technical grade ethanol or isopropanol of unknown purity as the only available starting material for the preparation of hand rub formulations. without analysis,t his source was considered problematic by many.s olving the analytical problem is where organic chemists in academia were able to contribute.theb auad ecree mentions ap urity of 99 %( w/w)o r 99.22 %( v/v)f or isopropanol to be in accordance with eu law.t he who guideline states that analysis should be made when an analysis certificate is not available to verify the alcohol concentration and to adjust the volume used to obtain the final recommended concentration. what local pharmacists use for quality control and what the who guideline mentions is an alcoholmeter that measures the density of the liquid, but does not provide information on its chemical composition. gas chromatography is mentioned in the who guideline for higher level quality control,b ut this option is largely unavailable to pharmacists in the field.we and others then analyzed technical grade isopropanol and ethanol by 1 hn mr spectroscopy.a1% solution of either alcohol in cdcl 3 gave well-resolved spectra with excellent signal-to-noise ratio,s howing minimal levels of impurities.for isopropanol, acetone was detected as the most prominent trace impurity by spiking with authentic material. due to its low toxicity and its traditional use in nail polish remover,t his impurity was considered unproblematic for hand rubs,a nd the purity of our technical grade isopropanol was declared sufficient for producing hand sanitizer locally together with ac ollaborating pharmacist. as ac onsequence, substantial supplies of the alcohol could be freed up for local production quickly.a so fm id april, over 2m etric tons of who formulation 2have been delivered to physicians in the state of baden-württemberg.another area where chemists may contribute is the development of antiviral drugs.s mall molecule drugs have been game changers in the fight against other viruses.among them are azt (zdv, zidovudin, retrovir), [17] an ucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitor and the first compound approved to treat aids.a nother break-through antiviral drug is sofosbuvir (1,trade name sovaldi)shown in figure 1 , [18] an inhibitor of the rna-dependent rnap olymerase of hepatitis cvirus (hcv) that is able to cure patients of the vicious disease caused by this virus.l ike sars-cov-2, hcv is an enveloped, single-stranded, positive-sense rnavirus.while sars-cov-2 is commonly described as a" novel" virus,genetically,itisclosely related to the sars coronavirus (sars-cov or sars-cov-1). [1] ther na-dependent rna polymerase (rdrp) is 96 %h omologous for the two viruses. this polymerase is ap rime target for antiviral therapy,a s human cells do not contain such an enzyme that copies rna sequences into rna. tw oo ther drug targets are the main proteinase (3cl pro )a nd the spike protein of the viral envelope,w ith am uch lower level of sequence identity.a review of this and the avenues it offers for drug intervention can be found in arecent paper by liu and colleagues. [19] in this context, it is worth mentioning that opportunities for therapy were identified for sars-cov-1 more than 15 years ago. [20] [21] [22] another betacoronavirus that is related to sars-cov-2 is the virus causing mers.again, this virus has been studied in detail, and options for therapeutic intervention have been identified. [23, 24] successful rnap olymerase inhibitors,s uch as sofosbuvir, [18] work by incorporating modified nucleosides into the viral genome that halt viral replication. this approach has been very successful in the treatment of hepatitis c, which can be cured within ashort treatment period. thedrug sofosbuvir is ap hosphoramidate prodrug or protide,atype of compound pioneered by chris mcguigan. [25] it is metabolized in the liver in several steps into its active triphosphate form, which is recognized and incorporated as an analog of uridine-5'-triphosphate by the hepatitis-c virus polymerase.o ne of the frontrunner drug candidates for the treatment of covid-19, remdesivir (2), is as imilar prodrug construct. it is a cnucleoside mimic of adenosine monophosphate [26] in protide phenyl phosphoramidate form. remdesivir was developed by gilead sciences to combat ebola and related filoviruses,b ut did not have sufficient activity against these targets.in2017, it was shown in vitro and in animals that it can inhibit mers-cov and sars-cov-1 replication. [27] in the replication processes,remdesivir, in its triphosphate form, competes with its natural counterpart, adenosine-triphosphate (atp), inducing rnac hain termination.based on the high sequence similarity between sars-cov-1 and the causal agent of the covid-19 pandemic, homology modeling was used to predict the 3d structures of the rdrp and other important viral proteins of the latter.out of the more than 20 viral proteins encoded in the sars-cov-2 genome,p roteases 3cl pro ,m entioned above, and pl pro represent potential targets for antiviral drugs.t he 3-chymotrypsin-like protease (3cl pro )ofsars-cov-2 differs in only 12 out its 306 amino acid residues from its ortholog in sars-cov-1. its structure was quickly predicted in silico and this was used for the virtual docking of ac ollection of 7173 commercial drugs in the search for candidates for drug repurposing. [28] among the top-scoring candidates,f or which the highest binding affinities were predicted, were the two antivirals velpatasvir and ledipasvir. both compounds are fda-approved inhibitors of the ns5a protein of the hepatitis cv irus,b ut so far, the predicted action against the sars-cov-2 3cl pro has not been confirmed experimentally.a similar approach on the same enzyme was employed by another team, and led to different candidate structures, [29] while ateam from china and saudi arabia chose to identify phytochemicals as potential inhibitors in similar fashion using in silico methods. [30] while modeling is fast, it does not produce an ew drug, and experimental work is needed to validate those predictions.arecent crystal structure of 3cl pro ,a lso referred to as m pro ,c omplexed with an aketoamide inhibitor shows how quickly encouraging results can be obtained experimentally. [31] ac rystal structure of the rdrp of sars-cov-2 has also been published in the last few days. [32] one of the most detailed theoretical studies thus far used homology modeling on 19 different sars-cov-proteins and on the human ace2 receptor protein, the putative molecular entry vehicle for the virus into human cells,f or virtual drug screening. [33] fore ach viral protein and for the ace2 receptor,s everal drugs or natural products were identified as potential binders.n otably,r emdesivir was also found to bind to the rdrp enzyme of sars-cov-2 in silico.e xperimentally,activity against sars-cov-2 was also demonstrated in vitro. [34] in the same experimental study,a ntiviral activity was found for the antimalarial drug chloroquine, which is unlikely to act on either rdrp or proteases. chloroquine and hydroxychloroquine [35] act on several targets and can have severe side effects.t heir anti-inflammatory effect may reduce the level of pro-inflammatory cytokine il-6, mobilized by the immune system of covid-19 patients in order to kill infected cells before too many copies of the virus are made.s ometimes this defense mechanism overreacts, resulting in al ife-threatening condition. [36] both remdesivir and chloroquine,are currently among the compounds undergoing clinical trials with covid-19 patients.thes ynthesis of compounds like remdesivir is far from trivial, though, not least because the amino acid ester and aryloxy group make the phosphorus of the phosphoramidate astereogenic center.synthesizing chiral phosphoramidates of this level of complexity is as ynthetic challenge, [37] and so is the synthesis of other drug candidates for treating the virus that will be identified by homology modeling and targetbased virtual ligand screening or conventional medicinal chemistry approaches.developing efficient syntheses for such compounds and making them available to laboratories that test them is as econd opportunity for chemists who wish to contribute to fighting sars-cov-2.there is at hird opportunity for chemists in the current crisis:r eaching out to others through our scientific societies. when av irus spreads and employees stay home,r unning an efficient operation becomes difficult. as soon as an employee gets infected and obtains apositive test result, entire divisions may be shut down to prevent the spreading of the virus. colleagues in quarantine must be provided with food and other supplies,a nd homeschooling ties up significant resour- angewandte chemie viewpoint ces.a saconsequence,m any members of our societies are experiencing unprecedented levels of stress or are too overwhelmed by emails and calls to remain fully operational. this problem affects the supply chain from drivers to executives, but it is not limited to logistics and production. it also affects authorities.t he apparent suicide of dr. thomas schäfer,the minister of finance of the german state of hesse,i satragic example of what can happen to those put under ever increasing pressure in the current pandemic.t rying to spread useful information through governmental channels can thus add to the stress level of administrators.we feel that the network our scientific societies,s uch as the german chemical society (gdch), offer can and should be used to reach out to each other.social media can be very useful, but are also the source of unfiltered anger and accusations.emails to aselect group of colleagues,such as the members of the liebig-vereinigung, the organic division of the gdch, well maintained and checked by the officers of the society,can be away to disseminate information that does not suffer from said disadvantages.a nother option is posting useful information on the newly installed corona webpage of the gdch. [38] chemists have contributed very significantly already,n ot least by synthesizing the necessary amounts of primers and dntp'sfor test kits,but there are countless challenges that lie ahead. broader testing for viral infections, [39] as well as serological testing to confirm immunity,atask that proved difficult, even for the relatively confined mers outbreak, [40, 41] is just one of them. improving the social acceptance of face masks in some western countries, [42] and producing such masks in sufficient quantities,i sanother.whether it is instructions for producing buffers required for test kits,o rs imple face masks for protection against infectious droplets,u seful information can be shared. the same is true for funding opportunities or legal issues that affect society members.chemists are resourceful people,and scientific societies are exceptionally experienced in sorting through information submitted to their journals.h ere lies athird opportunity for chemists to contribute.when we almost ran out of isopropanol for our hand sanitizer solutions,anon-public email call led to acompany in the area offering larger quantities of the solvent. the company was willing to offer it well below its current inflated market price,and our university was willing to support us with logistics and the free use of facilities.atthe end of abusy day, one of the clinical pharmacologists who helped with the local production of who formulation 2l ooked at our less than attractive facility and said:"there is still an important role for good old chemistry in our society."severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2) is an enveloped strain of coronavirus that causes coronavirus disease 2019 . 1 it is known to spread through droplets suspended in the air as well as contact with contaminated surfaces. contaminated hands are the leading vehicles of transmission through touch on one's eyes, mouth, and nostrils, thus introducing the virus into the mucosa. 1 viruses, including sars-cov-2, are wrapped in lipid membranes and attach onto the hands facilitated by the presence of body oils with both hydrophilic and hydrophobic ends. 2 desperate measures to contain the covid-19 pandemic have been proposed ranging from hand washing, social distancing, and community containments, among others. 1, 3 other public health and community-based strategies imposed by countries such as china, north america, italy, and south africa include cancellation of public events, restrictions on human contact games, school closures, and screening of incoming passengers at airports. 1, [3] [4] [5] the impact of these measures, which are majorly informed by lessons learnt from similar outbreaks, are yet to be conclusively outlined. 6 kenya has adopted a number of measures in dealing with covid-19, including a recommendation that the government should supply the marginalized communities with water and soap for hand washing 7 though this may not be sustainable due to economic challenges.hand washing with soap and water is now highlighted as a first-line preventive and a hygienic practice in dealing with covid-19. 8 although this simple, yet effective action is advocated as a first-line measure to prevent the spread of coronavirus, several households from resource-limited settings, and with poor access to water and sanitation may struggle to adhere to this criterion. 9 in particular, people living in rural areas and informal urban settlements in developing counties such as kenya are more likely to be affected compared with the rest of the population. 10 in kenya alone, only 59% of the population have access to clean water services. 11 the ministry of health organizes workshops and communication campaigns to raise awareness about the importance of hand washing with soap to prevent the spread of disease, however, only 5% of people wash their hands with soap at critical times. 11 in the current unprecedented situation of covid-19, hand washing together with cleaning of surfaces commonly shared by people is recommended to prevent the spread of virus. 8 the culture of hand sanitization is foreign practice to many in the community.in the informal settlements in kenya, water supply is intermittent, scarce, and unaffordable for most households. 12 in cases when water is available, families living in these areas struggle to strike a balance between using the scarce resource for hand hygiene and other competing basic needs such as cooking, livestock watering, and drinking. 12 although alcohol-based hand sanitizers have been suggested as an alternative to hand washing, they remain costly for many households living in the informal settlements. furthermore, hand sanitizers are not effective in visibly soiled hands. [12] [13] [14] in their study on alternative strategies for hand hygiene in resource-limited settings sandhu and goodnight 15 suggested sustainable incremental improvement in hand washing by using available and alternative resources such as ash and soda. such approaches would translate to the use of what is accessible and possibly effective as the communities work toward the ideal situation of soap and running water for handwashing. it therefore important to explore existing evidence to understand the alternative strategies for hand wash and cleaning of shared surfaces in absence of soap, water, or alcohol-based sanitizers.our aim was to document alternative, indigenous, and workable solutions in the absence of alcohol-based sanitizers, water, and soap. we reviewed studies that reported the use of locally available products that can be used to decrease virus attachment on surfaces and decontaminate exposed hands and clothes. some studies hypothesize that viruses can be dislodged from hands and clothes when the content of dissolved organic or inorganic matter is increased to create competition for binding sites with the virus. 16 traditionally soil, ash, and salt have been used as both mechanical and chemical forms of neutralizing contaminants in soiled hands and surfaces. 16, 17 dry kitchen ash has previously been recommended as an alternative to soap in hand washing in kenya. 18 the premise of the effectiveness of such materials assumes that households will obtain the soil, ash, and salt from uncontaminated sources. contaminated soil, ash, or salt may have detrimental effects such as infections with microbes and parasites, among others. 16 the availability of these alternative methods may be limited to people living in informal urban settlements areas but not in the rural areas.we searched the literature from pubmed to identify eligible articles. studies were then mapped, assessed and synthesized for a narrative presentation. we used a combination of the following search terms to identify articles that we included for further assessment. articles were included if they met the following criteria: (1) article represents a research article (rather than a letter or commentary), (2) the primary focus of the study was to test or evaluate the effectiveness of an alternative strategy for handwashing or cleaning surfaces, (3) the study setting was a community or a resource-limited environment, or (4) studies reported the experiences of communities using the alternative strategy. out of the 15 full-text articles that were screened at the eligibility stage, 8 were excluded for not meeting the inclusion criteria: did not evaluate the effectiveness of alternative strategy (n = 3); study setting was not a community (n = 3), and the article was not a research article (n = 2). please see the prisma (preferred reporting items for systematic reviews and meta-analyses) flow diagram showing the selection of articles ( figure 1 ).two authors (lk and ac) independently reviewed the full-text articles and where discrepancies were noted they were resolved in consultation with the third and fourth reviewer (pw) and (in) until a consensus was built.the search did not yield significant literature that explicitly describes alternative interventions to soap and water and sanitizers for handwashing in low-income settings. this perspective remains silent to most scientists developing strategies for prevention of covid-19 outbreak but is very crucial in targeting effectiveness of prevention in areas without access to water, the supply of soap, or sanitizers.few if any studies have been done specifically on the use of these traditional alternative methods in coronavirus infection. the included studies focused on the cellular level of transmission of coronavirus family, 19-21 which we used for possible inferred benefits as the basis of our discussion.use of sea salt and salt gargles. at the cellular level, hypertonic conditions have been known to inhibit coronavirus. 20 at the same time, the high osmolality of sodium chloride is known to kill microbes through desiccation and dissolution of fats and oils on the surface, therefore, detaching the contaminants from colonized surfaces, including the hands. 22 gargling with naturally occurring sea water or salt solution containing chloride ions (cl − ) inhibit a number of viruses, including the coronavirus from the throat mucosa resulting in a reduction of the viral infection period with an average of 2.5 days and a reduction in viral shedding. 20, 21 use of sand, soil, and ash. sand, soil, and ash have been used as hand washing agents in low resource setting. 23 the act of rubbing of hands with sand generates mechanical force adequate to dislodge any form of matter on the surface of the hands and by default, carry away other types of contaminants, including microbes. 17 although the reviewed studies did not document the mechanism of action against coronavirus specifically, it is implied that these mechanical actions may be of benefit in coronavirus dislodgement. it is noted that the effectiveness of use of these alternative materials is subject to the quality and amount of water concurrently used. 24 studies on use of these materials without water are limited if available. however, an anecdotal note on fresh wood ash highlighted its alkaline nature and its use as a dry agent on surfaces such as floors, handles, and on body wastes such as vomit and blood stains. 25 use of soda ash powder and other alkaline materials. effect of ph on the fusion of coronavirus with the host cell has been documented 26, 27 as well as the loss of its infectivity at ph of 8. 27 the possibility of decreased attachment to inanimate surfaces covered with fluids of over ph of 8 may be inferred from this observation. 28 ash of any kind creates an alkaline environment that does not support the existence of most pathogens, with possibility of destabilizing coronaviruses that thrive in a ph of between 5.5 and 8.0. 29 the effect of highly acidic environment on sars-cov-2 needs further investigation. decreasing the ph of inanimate surfaces by rubbing ph altering acidic fruits such as lemon on hands in the event of unavailability of water need to be explored.heat treatment. temperatures higher than 27°c have been reported to reduce coronavirus infectivity in surrogate cells and inanimate surfaces. 19, 27, 30 high temperatures and low humidity have been reported to reduce the transmission of covid-19 by wang et al. 31 similarly, nursing covid-19 patients in a warm atmospheric temperature has been reported to contribute to improved survival rates. 32 on this basis, it may be necessary to investigate the hypothesis that sun-drying (with temperature of over 27°c) of contaminated items like clothes and other inanimate objects may be desirable to prevent transmission of the coronavirus. this option may apply to households where infected persons have been identified and isolated. airing personal effects in the open sun may work effectively in places with limited access to water. 33 the thermal benefit may be achieved through placing items on dry black soil surfaces that can reach 60°c in tropical sun. 25 sunlight provides natural supplementation of vitamin d, which is known to protect the respiratory system by regulating secretion of pro inflammatory cytokines known to cause lung injury. 34 exposure of family members to sunshine and warmth may be beneficial in the management of covid-19 infection.our literature search did not yield much evidence to prove our hypothesis about alternatives strategies that could replace soap and water as practical community-based approaches to prevent the spread of coronavirus. however, a number of studies highlighted several methods used traditionally by local communities for decontamination purposes such as alkaline products (ash), increased temperature, reduced humidity (drying), salt, and sand. these products worked by either mechanically or chemically damaging the microbes. although this rapid review showed that alkaline environments could potentially reduce the multiplication of the virus, this should not be confused by the myth that alkaline foods could prevent covid-19 infection.application of alkaline products such as seawater, sodium bicarbonate (baking soda), calcium carbonate (limestone), and calcium hydroxide (slaked lime) on inanimate surfaces and to decontaminate hands needs to be explored for use in resource-limited settings. 35 majority of these resources are traditionally known and used by the african communities and some are readily available to rural communities in these regions. 36, 37 moreover, in the food industry, alkaline materials have been explored in developing food sanitizers from naturally occurring alkaline salts 38 as well as creating a favorable environment in aquatic life. 39 virucidal efficacy of sodium bicarbonate has been documented. 40 analysis of various studies by bright et al 40 postulated possible action of the viricidal effect of food substances against enveloped viruses. the proposed mechanism of action included reduction of the ability of the virus to infect host cells, inhibition of virus replication within the first few hours of contact with the host cells, viral uncoating by reducing acidification and inhibiting viral protein synthesis. prior application on hands before exposure through outdoor activities may be more explored further to determine the additional benefit compared with post exposure use.variation of ph on coronavirus family has resulted in varying effect, including destabilization of the virus at low ph 41, 42 with the report that covid-19 is less stable on smooth surfaces. 41 the hypothesis that lemon juice could not only create an acidic environment but also contribute to the building of a rough surface hence leading to inactivation of coronavirus needs be explored. lemon and lime juice has previously been documented to have virucidal effects, leading to the impression that it could contribute to managing covid-19 challenge, especially in low-resource settings. 43 lemon is a readily available fruit that is stable and can be stored under all conditions. 43 the use of soil to neutralize contaminants is a simple and readily available method but was reported in the literature as the least favorable due to potential spread of parasites like hookworms. however, clean sources of soil can be identified by community members and stored in designated locations within the household with ease of access. 44, 45 heat or elevated temperatures have been credited as methods with a potential to inactivate viruses within minutes. this is more so in enveloped virus such as sars-cov-2. 25, 46 marginalized communities may benefit from naturally occurring elevated temperature from the naturally heated soils or the sun. 25 our review has suggested a variety of alternative measures that could be used as stop-gap options in the absence of soap, water, and sanitizers. however, the adverse effects of these materials on humans are barely documented. one report by international rescue council shows that alternative methods such as the use of ash may lead to damage of the skin around the hands. 25 further studies are needed to examine how these alternative strategies are affecting communities that are already using them. due to lack of sufficient evidence to show how the alternative approaches are affecting the communities, we still strongly recommend the use of world health organization guideline for social distancing and handwashing with soap and water or alcohol-based commercial sanitizers where applicable. 8 this article, however, generates a critical hypothesis that should be examined in the face of covid-19 especially in the economically developing communities. additionally, the majority of households in urban settlements in these countries may not observe social distancing due to overcrowding and high poverty levels. [47] [48] [49] also due to poverty, the priorities of these communities are likely to be about meeting basic needs such as food and shelter rather than social distancing.randomized studies should be carried out to evaluate the effectiveness of these alternative hygiene management methods on coronavirus. the findings of such randomized studies may generate protocols for their use. these local products if proven to be effective, may reduce cost and increase access to decontamination products, especially to disadvantaged communities. the results of such studies could lead to development of policy that could be beneficial especially to the marginalized communities. the proposed alternatives to water, soap, and commercial sanitizers for hygiene and decontamination of surfaces in resource-limited settings are timely in the face of covid-19 pandemic. these alternative products need, however, to be evaluated in order to derive evidence-based conclusions about the side effects on the skin, when used as hand sanitizers.few studies have specifically been done to establish the impact of these alternative wash methods on sars-cov-2. the studies done at cellular levels involving sars virus family though with some positive results may not be inferred on external and inanimate surfaces. sars-cov-2 may not report similar behavior to the rest of sars family.the anxiety and trauma associated with the tragic coronavirus disease pandemic coded, covid-19 led many to indulge in various unorthodox preventive measures such as the extensive indiscriminate use of alcohol-based hand sanitizers (abhs), abuse, misuse, overdose of prescription drugs like chloroquine, hydroxychloroquine and chloroquine phosphate globally. while some preventive measures are recommended and adopted, such as national lockdown, self-isolation, quarantine, stay-at-home model, avoidance of large gathering, social distancing, wearing of face-masks and hand gloves, periodic hand washing particularly with liquid soaps/detergents under running tap water, avoidance of touching the face among others, the use of abhs has been more prominent. abhs contains on average 60-70 % by weight of one or more alcohols. during the 2019/2020 covid-19 pandemic, the use of abhs was more renowned to the extent that some individuals recommended the application on the hands every 30 minutes for a period of at least 20 seconds while outside the home. though, the periodic application of the hand sanitizers seems like an effective on-the-go solution to preventing the spread of the virus, many other associated hazards call for caution. besides transdermal absorption leading to mortality and morbidity of varying degree; alcohol-alcohol adulteration, deliberate and unintentional ingestion of abhs may result in respiratory depression, irreversible blindness, intoxication, cirrhosis, acidosis, headache, central nervous system depression, seizure, hypoglycemia, coma, or even death in some cases. the non-abhs are equally not absolutely safe as many of them contain active agents that are allegedly carcinogenic, toxic, inducing microbial resistance and endocrine disruption. considered together, this implies that while some may not die from contracting the disease, the preventive measures taken could lead to death or other forms of morbidity thereby revealing that there is indeed, death in preventive measures when done without cautionary measures. this study seeks to highlight some associated risks in the use of abhs and non-abhs, whilst advocating the use of safer or 'greener' alternative procedure for use as preventive measures particularly during the covid-19 pandemic.the sudden outbreak of the coronavirus disease epidemic preferably referred to as covid-19 was a tragic global pandemic that claimed over 190,000 lives with over two million reported cases spreading across 210 countries within the first five months (december, 2019 -24 th april, 2020) of the outbreak across the globe (worldometers, 2020) . while the highest toll of mortality remained in china, italy, spain and america as at the end of march, 2020, many asian and tropical african countries such as iran, south africa, algeria, egypt, nigeria and cameroon had got their acrid taste of the pandemic. the fear, anxiety and emotional trauma associated with the outbreak of covid-19 which started from the wuhan province in china in december 2019 was quite rattling, monumental and terrific as many erroneously regarded contracting the infection as a death penalty. in fact, infected individuals who recovered from the disease are stigmatized and disenfranchised, segregated and avoided. the long and short term implications of contracting the disease made citizens of most countries to intensify efforts at preventing the covid-19 disease. while global mortality rate rose to 3.4 % in some countries (worldometers, 2020) , the trauma associated with the infection had no limit. the incident obviously led to improvement in hand hygiene (hh) in order to curtail the spread of the virus. this has brought to limelight the prominence of alcohol-based hand sanitizer, abhs and other non-alcohol based hand sanitizers as well as household disinfectants.as at this moment, there is no vaccine for the prevention of covid-19. the best prevention is to avoid being exposed to the virus (adhikari et al., 2020) . as a result of this, government and individuals adopted various measures in preventing the spread of the disease. the government and health sector' advocacy groups contributed tremendously to the spike in the use of various preventive methods such as city/town and national lockdown, self-isolation, quarantine, stay-at-home model, avoidance of crowd, social distancing, wearing of face-mask and hand gloves, periodic hand washing particularly with liquid soaps/detergents, use of abhs, avoidance of touching the face among others. following unsubstantiated claims, some individuals in the developing countries resulted to the overconsumption of acclaimed immune-boosting substances such as ginger, garlic, lemon fruits, and salt solution etc. besides, some in the tropical countries believed that the hot weather could reduce the chances of survival of the virus, hence, they resulted to staying long hours in the bright day sunlight and/or periodic consumption of hot drinks such as water, tea and juice with the intention of providing an unhealthy high temperature environment for the survival of the infectious virus. some other people resulted to the consumption of food or substances that increases the ph of the body to the alkaline region since there were unsubstantiated claims that the virus does not survive at alkalinic ph. although viruses are sensitive to ph and temperature changes and cannot survive beyond a narrow range (sturman et al., 1990; mi et al., 2019) , a crude means of achieving such could be more deadly than envisaged.moreover, the tentative approval by the united states tentative of chloroquine-based therapy as trial for the management of covid-19 patients on compassionate ground (based on who guideline), led some individuals to an unethical practice of the indiscriminate consumption of chloroquine-based drugs as both prophylaxis and curative. although, initial trials indicated some interesting positive results at minute doses (gao et al., 2020; liu et al., 2020; singh et al., 2020) , reports are still premature and yet to be universally accepted. if clinical data confirm the antiviral activity of chloroquine-based drugs, the novel covid-19 could become one of the cheapest and simplest to treat among infectious respiratory diseases. this is because the drugs are quite affordable (raoult et al., 2020) . the affordability and accessibility of the chloroquine-based drugs partly led to the abuse with resultant lethality and health hazards which included abdominal discomfort, coma and even death in some cases (wong et al., 2011) . in fact, the moderate dose of chloroquine can cause effects such as depression, psychosis, delirium, mood swing, personality change among others (good and shader, 1982) . the close derivative, hydroxychloroquine is also known to possess side effects such as retinal toxicity, cardiovascular toxicity, refractory shock and ventricular arrhythmias (fung et al., 2007; rüther et al., 2007; marmor et al., 2016; tsang et al, 2019) . meanwhile, chloroquine phosphate and a few other derivatives have been reported as potential anti-dote to covid-19 infection (gao et al., 2020; sahraei et al., 2020) .although, many of these preventive measures were often adopted, many of them frequently present mild to severe implications with only a few of them proving really potent and safe. in reality, some of the measures were quite detrimental to human health and it could result to death before even contracting the dreaded viral infection, covid-19 (choi et al., 2017; chan and chan, 2018) . while all the measures adopted thus far have both their merits and demerits, this report focuses more on the chemistry of the death and the associated danger, particularly in the use of hand sanitizers and other applied preventive chemicals against the spread of covid-19 as well as other germs.the advent of the covid-19 outbreak marked the commencement of the surge in the series of industrial and domestic-made chemicals like the hand sanitizers, liquid soaps, disinfectants and others. the upsurge in the global consumption of hand sanitizers following the covid-19 pandemic was unprecedentedly geometrical. the use of hand sanitizer became well renowned to the extent that some individuals apply on their hands every 30 minutes especially when outside the home. while the practice seems a plausibly effective on-the-go solution in the prevention of the spread of the viral infection, other serious dangers are quite associated. although, microorganisms pervade almost everywhere human survives (bhoonderowa et al., 2014; kõljalg et al., 2017) and the use of sanitizers can help in minimizing their spread and deleterious effect on human, the frequent use may however pre-dispose users to some degree of fatality (chan et al., 2017; chan and chan, 2018) .various sub-standard brands of hand sanitizers flooded both offline and online markets in the developed and developing countries. besides the hike in the prices of these household products, their acquisition could be tantamount to self-purchase of quicker "death". while the chemical composition of the various household antiviral preventive products used is sometimes regional or country-based, some chemicals are more accessible and universal to all. some of them are thus discussed herein.hand sanitizers are hygienic products that are applied on the hands to prevent the spread of microorganisms like viruses, bacterial and fungi such as coronaviruses, rhinoviruses, influenza viruses, herpes simplex virus, ebola virus, staphylococcus aureus, enterococcus faecalis, escherichia coli, traveller diarrhoea among others, especially where access to water is limited (fendler et al., 2002; conover and gibson, 2016; wolfe et al., 2017; thaddeus et al., 2018; kuenzli et al., 2019) . hand sanitizers, though, originally developed for the healthcare sector (ascenzi, 1995; block, 2001) , it has become a routine for many people to carry hand sanitizer with them at all times, especially during the recent disease outbreak.industrial and home-made hand sanitizers are made of various chemical compositions subject to what is locally available. a brief check of brands on the internet, local markets and the literatures indicated two main categories of sanitizers; alcohol-based and non-alcohol-based hand sanitizers (nabhs). the alcohol-based hand sanitizers (abhs) are primarily composed of alcohols such as either ethanol, isopropyl alcohol, propan-1-ol or propan-2-ol; and additives such as colorants, stabilizers, fragrance and sometimes preservatives which may include formaldehyde, parabens among other chemicals (luby et al., 2004 (luby et al., , 2005 kramer et al., 2007; napolitani et al., 2020) . other chemicals usually added for various purposes include polyacrylic acid, glycerin, carbomer, propylene glycol, triethanolamine (trolamine), tetraethylammonium chloride, dichlorodimethylphenol (figure 1) , chlorine, deionized water, and extract of plants (wolfe et al., 2017; thaddeus et al., 2018; surini et al., 2018) . the world health organization guideline for the preparation of abhs revealed the composition to be 80 % ethanol, 1.45 % glycerol and 0.125 % hydrogen peroxide or 75 % isopropyl alcohol, 1.45 % glycerol and 0.125 % hydrogen peroxide (who, 2010) . on the other hand, the non-alcohol based hand sanitizers (nabhs) are made up of various chemicals similar to the component found in the alcohol-based type with the exclusion of alcohol. however, anti-microbial or disinfecting agents such as triclosan (tcs), triclocarban, sodium hypochlorite, chlorhexidine, benzalkonium chloride and benzithonium chloride are often added (hayat and munnawar, 2016; bondurant et al., 2019a) .some of the chemicals used in various disinfectants include chloroxyphenol b, oleum aromaticum, triclosan, triethanolamine, tetraethylammonium, dichlorodimethylphenol, chlorine, etc. it is quite imperative that antimicrobial agents, disinfectants and antiseptics substances possess strong activities against the pathogens including the biofilm-forming pathogens, else antimicrobial resistance could easily develop (bridier et al., 2011; hauser et al., 2016; ghanem et al., 2018) . the assumption has led to the use of extremely strong and sometimes hazardous chemicals as disinfectants. for effectiveness or improved potency, combinations of two or more active ingredients are often used in some anti-viral disinfectants (ahmed et al., 2020) .a newly developed nabhs which contains only 14 % alcohol by volume and usually applied in small volume was reported to work synergistically with the other active agent in the sanitizer via a system called "quad system technology" to kill the virus and other germs (cavage, 2010) .generally, in abhs, formulations with ethanol between 60 and 95 % are known to be significantly effective in preventing spread of microbial infections (kramer et al., 2002) and are generally regarded safe (fda, 1994) . who recommends washing of hands under running tap water, and when the resources for that is not available, abhs comes handy. however, the abhs are recommended over the use of soap due to its ease of use and capability in stalling microbial spread (who 2009; hayat and munnawar, 2016) . however, some other potential alternatives such as nonorganic antibiotics and organic or natural biocides have been proposed in place of triclosan due to some of the reported side effects (kim et al., 2007) .many abhs carry a lot of risks. first, most abhs contain alcohols in excess of 60 % which made them to be classified as class i flammable liquid substance as a result of their flash point below 100 °c fahrenheit (kramer et al., 2002; fda, 2020) . precisely, ethanol 80 % (v/v) and isopropyl alcohol 75 % (v/v) have flash points of 17.5 °c and 19 °c, respectively (who, 2020) . this quite indicates that the products can ignite at relatively low temperatures. hence, abhs increase the risk of fire accidents. although, abhs are a more accessible and usually a preferred choice for many people during epidemics like the covid-19 compared to choices like the towelettes (rai et al., 2017 ), yet they carry their own significant risks. the risk associated with the use of the abhs includes accidental poisoning via ingestion, fire hazard, organ toxicity via absorption through the skin among others (figure 2 ). children are often attracted to the nature, smell and cool feel of alcohol on the skin and series of accidental poisonings, including fatal ones in child ren have been reported (chan and chan, 2018) . for instance, investigation carried out on young children who swallowed abhs revealed that they were diagnosed of apnea, acidosis and some even went into coma (rayar and ratnapalan, 2013) . it has been established that younger children have decreased liver glycogen stores, which increases their risk of developing hypoglycemia and have various pharmacokinetic factors, which make them more susceptible to developing toxicity from alcohol (tran et al., 2007; marek and kraft, 2014) . in addition, alcohol-alcohol dilution is a major contamination in the industry. a more affordable alcohol with similar physical properties is sometimes used to adulterate another alcohol for pecuniary profit. if the ethanol for instance, is adulterated with other toxic alcohols such as methanol, irreversible blindness, coma or even death could result (gormley et al., 2012; forrester, 2015; moore, 2019) . methanol is known to be more lethal than ethanol as unintentional ingestion by children and deliberate consumption by older subjects often lead to poisoning requiring prompt antidotal therapy, critical care in addition to other supporting therapy (chan and chan, 2018) . methanol is reportedly more toxic when inhaled, or exposed to human orally or through the skin. alcohol concentration in the blood could increase via absorption through the skin when used frequently. due to its toxicity, it is therefore strongly not recommended for use in hand sanitizers. however, some reports indicated that such contaminations have been observed in abhs (mowry et al., 2015; chan and chan, 2018) . transdermal poisoning resulting from skin absorption of methanol is well reported (qiao and guo, 1992; ryu et al., 2016) . in fact, exposure to methanol was reported to cause multiple sclerosis (henzi, 1984) . other types of alcohol-alcohol intoxication and poisoning have been reported (chan et al., 2017; chan and chan, 2018) .the commonly used alcohol in abhs, ethanol, is a known toxicant and central nervous (cns) depressant capable of inducing hypoglycemia (baum 2017; moore, 2019) . the use of isopropanol-based hand sanitizers carries equal or even greater risk than ethanol-based counterparts. isopropanol besides being intoxicating, it is converted in the liver to acetone (propanone) which causes greater cns depression than ethanol (litovitz, 1986) . various deaths and morbidities associated with abhs have been reported (gormley et al., 2012; darracq et al., 2013; jones et al., 2013; forrester, 2015; basyal et al., 2018; moore, 2019) . interestingly,there has been emerging cases of alcohol-tolerant microorganisms which therefore cast aspersion on the future of the use of alcohol in hand sanitizers (pidot et al., 2018; bondurant et al., 2019b) . it is predicted that more organisms would develop resistance to alcohol in the near future if indiscriminate discharge to the environment is not controlled.other adverse health effects that could result from both abhs and nabhs include ocular irritation, vomiting, conjunctivitis, oral irritation, cough, and abdominal pain (qiao and guo, 1992; choi et al., 2017; chan and chan, 2018) . in some rare scenario, adverse effects could include acidosis, respiratory depression, headache, hypoglycemia, irreversible blindness, central nervous system depression, seizure, coma and death (figure 2 ). these effects are noted to be more severe in abhs (bonner, 2017; choi et al., 2017; chan and chan, 2018) . the continuous use or overuse of hand sanitizers can cause chronic irritation and severe skin breakdown among other effects (qiao and guo, 1992) , especially in children. a study that reported the incidences of poisoning associated with abhs between 2011 and 2014 indicated that children below 12 years had incidences of over 70,000 exposures to hand sanitizers, of which 92 % are due to abhs with only 8 % nabhs exposure (bonner, 2017) .furthermore, the continuous topical application of ethanol on the skin was reported to lower skin barrier functions, thereby rending the membrane highly susceptible to harmful chemicals in soaps and cosmetics (lachenmeier, 2008) . moreso, percutaneous toxicity could also occur in children with lacerated skin (lachenmeier, 2008) . in fact, the potential for abuse of abhs has raised more concern now than before. although, abhs seem easier to use and proved higher efficiency than some detergent-based sanitizers, the repeated exposure of users to the abhs calls for caution (perez et al., 2019) .triclosan (tcs: 2, 4, 4'-trichloro-2'-hydroxydiphenyl ether) is a universal antimicrobial agent that has found its way into many pharmaceuticals and personal care products as well as in the promotion of growth in animal including aquatic species (daughton and ternes, 1999) . it is used as antibacterial agent in many consumers' and household products such as medicated soaps, hand sanitizers, deodorants, toothpastes, air fresheners and other cosmetic products (sethuraman et al., 2014) . it is currently being considered as an emerging contaminant (wang et al., 2018) .triclosan with its related compound, triclocarban ( figure 1 ) used in consumer's products such as liquid soaps and hand sanitizers previous mentioned is of paramount concerns to scientists due to its long persistency in the environment (fda, 2016; usgs, 2016) . its ability to cause disruption of the endocrine (hormone) system is still being evaluated and already recommended to be avoided (bonner, 2017; stoker et al., 2010) . it was classed as a pesticide in the national pesticide information retrieval system (npirs [triclosan], 2020) of the united states. previously, hexachlorophene, an organochlorine compound known as nabac (figure 1 ) with structural similarity to triclosan had been banned as disinfectant by the fda following health concerns due to the allegedly associated teratogenicity (iarc, 1998; halden, 2014) . tcs together with bisphenol a were reported to possess potential to weaken the immune system (clayton et al., 2011) . tcs is reported to cause oxidative stress and induce genotoxicity in goldfish, suggesting a potential ecotoxicological risk to aquatic ecosystems (stasinakis et al., 2008; halden, 2014; silva et al., 2015) . tcs has been reported as persistent organic pollutants that are retained for months or years in water bodies (lygina et al., 2013) .antibiotics abuse, overuse and misuse of soaps and hand sanitizers is often responsible for effects such as antibiotics resistance and endocrine disruption (atolani et al. 2016; lu et al., 2018) . tcs, a typical antibiotic is commonly used in many soap preparations and some hand sanitizers are known to produce high anti-microbial efficiency. however, many studies have implicated it as a source of induction of antibiotic resistant microorganisms as the use of only 0.2 mg/l tcs for only 30 days can cause multi-drug resistance to escherichia coli and staphylococcus aureus of which similar effects were not reported for chlorhexidine or hydrogen peroxide-based agents ( westgate et al., 2016) .the use of alcohol in abhs is equally not absolutely safe as it can easily be absorbed through the skin. reports indicated that blood concentration of ethanol could reach 2.3 % within 90 minutes of use of abhs (kramer et al., 2007) . in the study, ethanol and acetaldehyde concentrations were as high as 1.7 and 1.95 mg/l respectively. ethanol is often converted to acetaldehyde which is also absorbed into the blood stream (thompson et al., 2005; npirs [ethanol] 2020). the metabolic products are often more toxic in the human system. high concentration of ethanol in human blood ingested via consumption of alcoholic beverages is known to cause both short-term and long-term toxicity such as inebriation and liver cirrhosis. hence, the use of abhs could invariably lead to increased concentration of alcohol in human blood (kramer et al., 2007) .there are increasing incidences of intentional ingestion of ethanol-containing hand sanitizers especially by alcohol addicts (gormley et al., 2012) . since children are attracted to the scent, bright coloration and the attractive packaging of abhs, they are generally more at risk (rayar and ratnapalan, 2013) . within 2011 -2016, u.s. poison control centers reported over 100,000 calls with regards to children exposure to hand sanitizer (georgia poison center, 2015; cdc, 2020b) .the intoxication by the ingestion of hand sanitizers is a major overlooked risk seeking urgent attention globally (jones et al., 2013; raza et al., 2014; moore, 2019) . high degree of morbidity and mortality are risks associated with the use of abhs (santos et al., 2017) . therefore, following the proliferation in the production of abhs due to the covid-19 pandemic, there is an obvious need for global caution and conscientiousness in the acquisition and utilization of hand sanitizers.it was reported that most germs or microbial pathogens cannot survive adequate washing with liquid soaps. the structure of most pathogenic bacterial and virus is less resistant to the potency of the alkalinity, the corrosive nature and membrane-shattering ability of most liquid soaps. while the proper washing with the liquid soaps kills the pathogens up to 99.9 % the rinsing with clean water helps to eliminate the dead organisms from hands. most liquid soaps are water-based; hence, this naturally reduces the skin penetrating effect of some of the components compared to abhs. most hand-sanitizers usually organic-based are also known to kill pathogen up to 99.9 % when effectively rubbed on the hand, but the absorption potential through human skin to some vital organs such as the kidney and liver could result to toxicities such as nephrotoxicity, cirrhosis among others (kramer et al., 2007; choi et al., 2017; chan and chan, 2018) .since hh is of paramount importance to the prevention of the spread of virus and other germs, the use of safe hand rub, soap, or sanitizers is imperative. due to associated toxicities and side effects, some hand rubs, soaps and sanitizers contain some chemical compounds which may only be most appropriate for use on non-skin surfaces such as the surfaces of furniture, door handles, walls, phones, glass, toilet zincs, metal tools, vehicles exteriors, electronic gadgets, hospital equipment among others and not on human skin.in order to underscore the relevance of alcohol in disinfection of non-skin objects, a study reported that a single cleaning with an alcohol wipe proved higher potency than the alcoholbased hand rub in decontamination of stethoscopes used in hospitals (mehta et al., 2010) . other studies also showed that use of hand sanitizers used outside hospital environment do not show superior benefit to soap (oughton et al., 2009; cdc, 2020a) . hence, washing with soap and warm water with good hh may adequately suffice for homes and as well eliminate exposure to hazardous chemicals and consecutive release to the environment (wolf et al., 2018) . the cdc and some other reports indicated that besides preserving good environmental flora, washing with soap and water produces better or equivalent results compared to abhs sanitizers at removing or killing certain types of virus such as the noroviruses and other germs (grayson et al., 2009; blaney et al., 2011; bondurant et al., 2019a; cdc, 2020b) .hand sanitizers usually end-up being deposited in high concentrations of the constituting chemical residues (contaminants) in the environmental soil and water bodies. high concentration of these chemicals released in the environment could trigger multi-drug resistance (westgate et al., 2016) . antimicrobial resistance is obviously a major public health concern globally. the world health organization (who) reported that about 700,000 people died due to antimicrobial-resistant infections every year (who, 2019). it is further predicted that the death due to antimicrobial-resistant infections could reach 10 million annually by 2050 if no concrete action is taken now (who, 2019).experiment has revealed that washing with ordinary soap solution is effective at killing and eliminating the virus and other germs in the hand. the fatty outer surface of the virus is denatured by the soap molecule and that process leads to the destruction of the virus which is washed away by water. it is worth mentioning that hand washing with soap solution and rinsing with water (preferably warm water) will kill and eliminate the germs from the surface, using of abhs will kill the organism without eliminating them from the surface. the use of soap and water must be a preferred choice when the hand is visibly or grossly contaminated. abhs also do not remove pesticide from the hand (cdc, 2020b). the use of abhs in such instances could make the hand so messy and unpleasant. in fact, the food and drug administration (fda) of the united states already banned the use of triclosan in antibacterial soaps (iarc, 1998; halden, 2014 ).recent advances in the cosmetic industry have led to the production of safe hand sanitizers obtained via green process. this involved the incorporation of safe natural antiseptic agents into soaps, hand rubs or nabhs in place of the synthetic ones that are associated with multiple side effects. natural products such as plant extracts, exudates, purified isolates and essential oils have been proposed as germ-killers in hand sanitizers, soaps and other cosmetics and body care products (ningsih et al., 2017; hartatik, 2014; lateh, 2015; surini et al., 2018; zubair et al., 2018a, b; atolani et al., 2019a, b; 2020) . natural products such as coconut oil have been used to produce hand sanitizers with enhanced cosmetic properties (tran et al., 2019) . such green alternative will preserve the natural environment and the skin of people (atolani et al., 2016) .following the multiple side-effects associated with the use of abhs and some liquid soaps due to the "unsafe" active agents in them, the following recommendations have become inevitable: i)manufacturers and health care providers should advocate the potential dangers associated with abuse, overuse and misuse of abhs and antibacterial active soaps. ii)the habitual use of abhs must be deliberately avoided. as much as it is possible, its use should be occasional when other options such as soap and warm water are not available. this would impact safety of both users and the environment. iii)users should only purchase small amount of abhs at a time to avoid overt addiction and abuse due to the surplus. iv)the use of hand sanitizer should be limited to only the finger and wrist region as absorption via the arm and other body parts could be increased thereby raising blood alcohol concentration within a short time. v)when the use of abhs is unavoidable, users should ensure use of low concentration alcohol at an average of 60-70 % as higher concentrations could be more deleterious. vi)the abhs should be kept far away from heat, flame, spark-source or any oxidizing agents to avoid fire incidence since they are flammable. vii)children should not be allowed direct access to abhs as the fatality of accidental ingestion in children is worse and incidences are on the rise. viii) in case of liquid soaps; soaps with triclosan or triclocarban and other questionable safety profile should be avoided. ix)there should be incorporation of skin protecting emollient in abhs and liquid soap in order to prevent after-use skin dryness, skin breaking/cracking as well as reduce alcohol penetration through the skin. x)general cleanliness and good hygiene is imperative to keep microbial infections at bay. consistent tidiness will minimize the need for repetitive use of liquid soaps and abhs.the enormous release of adulterated and uncontrolled infection-preventing household products such as the antibacterial active liquid soap and abhs in the global markets have several potential adverse health effects on human such as dehydrated skin, irritation, poisoning, and cancer among others. thus, the careful adoption of hand washing with selected safe liquid soap should be encouraged by all. improvement in hand hygiene is akin to the containment of the spread of germs, including the ravaging viral infection, covid-19. however, when the use of hand sanitizer is inevitable, consumers should be cautious of the chemical constituents as well as the concentration of each constituent. these measures are important to the prevention of avoidable implications such as unintentional or deliberate ingestion or chemical absorption through the skin which could lead to incidences such as irreversible blindness, depression, intoxication, liver cirrhosis, acidosis, headache, central nervous system depression, seizure, hypoglycemia, coma and death. while preventing infections such as the covid-19 and other microbial-induced infections, slow and systematic death should be meticulously avoided. otherwise, the prevention mode could lead to higher fatality than the infection being avoided.the emergence of the covid-19 (coronavirus disease-2019) pandemic has risen to be a significant global public health concern and led to extensive use of hand disinfectants given its contagious nature. there was a total of 3.8 million reported cases affecting over 200 countries worldwide as of 7 may 2020 [1, 2] . covid-19 is an infectious disease caused by the severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2), which can persist and remain infectious on surfaces for up to 9 days [3, 4] . the recent study reveals that transmission of sars-cov-2 is possible in the form of aerosol and fomite, and the virus can remain viable and infectious in aerosols for hours and on surfaces up to days, depending on the inoculum shed [5] . hence, it is crucial to interrupt the transmission chain of the virus through contact isolation and strict infection control tools [6] . following face masks, appropriate hand hygiene is of utmost importance as hands may be contaminated from direct contact with patients' contaminated from direct contact with patients' respiratory droplets from coughs and sneezes or indirect contact via surfaces, which may then facilitate the transmission and spreading of the disease [7] [8] [9] . the 2003 severe acute respiratory syndrome (sars) outbreak was caused by a novel human coronavirus (cov) (sars-cov) that could survive on surfaces for 24 to 72 h [10] . the studies on sars-cov outbreak settings showed that providing efficient handwashing facilities reduced transmission [11] .given the dangers imposed by this disease, the centre for disease control and prevention (cdc), the united states has promoted and encouraged hand hygiene through handwashing or use of hand sanitizer [12] . hand disinfectants are commercially available in various types and forms such as anti-microbial soaps, water-based or alcohol-based hand sanitizers, most often used in hospital settings. different types of delivery systems are also formulated-for instance, rubs, foams, or wipes ( figure 1 ). the world health organisation (who) recommends alcohol-based hand sanitizer (abhs) in line with the proven advantages of their rapid action and a broad spectrum of microbicidal activity offering protection against bacteria and viruses. however, the effectiveness against nonenveloped viruses is still debatable and questionable [7, [13] [14] [15] [16] [17] [18] . to date, most effective hand sanitizer products are alcohol-based formulations containing 62%-95% of alcohol as it is capable of denaturing the proteins of microbes and inactivating viruses [19, 20] . there are a few challenges and concerns with regard to this formulation in terms of fire hazards and skin toxicity due to high alcohol content [21] . this systemic review aims to investigate the range of available hand sanitizers and their effectiveness against the human coronavirus as well as the formulation aspects, adverse effects, and recommendations to improve the formulation of current hand sanitizers.this study was conducted according to the prisma recommendations [22] . we systematically reviewed the available literature in pubmed and google scholar, up to 2020. the search terms we used are hand sanitizers and alcohol and treatment and handwashing and virucide and bactericide and (cure or failure or mortality). a manual search was also performed. we set no year limit, and english is the only language we limit. the study selection based on effective treatment resulted in a potential eradication of pathogens. the data extracted from each study comprised the main characteristics of the study, such as the first author's name, year, study design, and country. out of many reports, we selected articles based on the hand disinfectant agents and their potential outcome suitable for the present viral pandemic. data were extracted by two authors based on the to date, most effective hand sanitizer products are alcohol-based formulations containing 62%-95% of alcohol as it is capable of denaturing the proteins of microbes and inactivating viruses [19, 20] . there are a few challenges and concerns with regard to this formulation in terms of fire hazards and skin toxicity due to high alcohol content [21] . this systemic review aims to investigate the range of available hand sanitizers and their effectiveness against the human coronavirus as well as the formulation aspects, adverse effects, and recommendations to improve the formulation of current hand sanitizers.this study was conducted according to the prisma recommendations [22] . we systematically reviewed the available literature in pubmed and google scholar, up to 2020. the search terms we used are hand sanitizers and alcohol and treatment and handwashing and virucide and bactericide and (cure or failure or mortality). a manual search was also performed. we set no year limit, and english is the only language we limit. the study selection based on effective treatment resulted in a potential eradication of pathogens. the data extracted from each study comprised the main characteristics of the study, such as the first author's name, year, study design, and country. out of many reports, we selected articles based on the hand disinfectant agents and their potential outcome suitable for the present viral pandemic. data were extracted by two authors based on the screening of the titles and abstracts obtained from the pubmed and google scholar database. the other authors have checked the materials to fulfil the criteria for the work.hand sanitizer can generally be categorized into two groups: alcohol-based or alcohol-free ( figure 2 ). an abhs may contain one or more types of alcohol, with or without other excipients and humectants, to be applied on the hands to destroy microbes and temporarily suppress their growth [23] . abhs can effectively and quickly reduce microbes covering a broad germicidal spectrum without the need for water or drying with towels. nevertheless, there are a few shortcomings with the effectiveness of abhs, such as its short-lived antimicrobial effect and weak activity against protozoa, some non-enveloped (non-lipophilic) viruses and bacterial spores [23] . screening of the titles and abstracts obtained from the pubmed and google scholar database. the other authors have checked the materials to fulfil the criteria for the work.hand sanitizer can generally be categorized into two groups: alcohol-based or alcohol-free ( figure 2 ). an abhs may contain one or more types of alcohol, with or without other excipients and humectants, to be applied on the hands to destroy microbes and temporarily suppress their growth [23] . abhs can effectively and quickly reduce microbes covering a broad germicidal spectrum without the need for water or drying with towels. nevertheless, there are a few shortcomings with the effectiveness of abhs, such as its short-lived antimicrobial effect and weak activity against protozoa, some non-enveloped (non-lipophilic) viruses and bacterial spores [23] . on the other hand, the alcohol-free sanitizer makes use of chemicals with antiseptic properties to exert the antimicrobial effects. these chemicals have a different mode of action and function according to their chemical functional groups (table 1 ) [24] [25] [26] . as they are non-flammable and often used at low concentrations, they are relatively safer to use among children as compared to abhs.abhs is available in different dosage forms, namely gel, liquid and foam. as each type has its own characteristics, a study was conducted to understand the impact on sensory attributes that may affect user's acceptance of the product and ultimately influence usage leading to hand hygiene compliance [27] [28] [29] . the overall result showed that gels and foams are more widely accepted compared to liquid, especially in terms of handleability, though the latter left a high clean feeling and took a shorter time to dry [30] .united states food and drug administration (usfda) has given the list of eligible antiseptic agents used in the non-prescription (also known as over-the-counter or otc) and listed in table 2 . this list is highly useful in selecting appropriate antiseptic active ingredients intended for use by health care professionals in a hospital setting or other health care situations outside the hospital [31] . recently, the united states pharmacopeia (usp) compounding expert committee (cmp ec) recommends the three formulations for compounding alcohol-based hand sanitizers for use during shortages associated with the covid-19 pandemic and listed in table 3 [32] . on the other hand, the alcohol-free sanitizer makes use of chemicals with antiseptic properties to exert the antimicrobial effects. these chemicals have a different mode of action and function according to their chemical functional groups (table 1 ) [24] [25] [26] . as they are non-flammable and often used at low concentrations, they are relatively safer to use among children as compared to abhs.abhs is available in different dosage forms, namely gel, liquid and foam. as each type has its own characteristics, a study was conducted to understand the impact on sensory attributes that may affect user's acceptance of the product and ultimately influence usage leading to hand hygiene compliance [27] [28] [29] . the overall result showed that gels and foams are more widely accepted compared to liquid, especially in terms of handleability, though the latter left a high clean feeling and took a shorter time to dry [30] .united states food and drug administration (usfda) has given the list of eligible antiseptic agents used in the non-prescription (also known as over-the-counter or otc) and listed in table 2 . this list is highly useful in selecting appropriate antiseptic active ingredients intended for use by health care professionals in a hospital setting or other health care situations outside the hospital [31] . recently, the united states pharmacopeia (usp) compounding expert committee (cmp ec) recommends the three formulations for compounding alcohol-based hand sanitizers for use during shortages associated with the covid-19 pandemic and listed in table 3 [32] . table 1 . chemical classification of commonly used disinfectants in hand sanitizer and their mechanism of antimicrobial action.examples mechanism of actiondenaturation of proteins in the plasma membrane chlorine compoundshalogenation/oxidation of cellular proteins table 2 . list of hand antiseptic ingredients approved by the food and drug administration (fda) used in healthcare and over the counter (otc) [30] .healthcare personal hand rub abhs in the form of a spray which trigger stream aerosol solution allows direct contact of the alcohol solution with the target surface. however, there are several limitations associated with the sprays, including overspray, breathed by patients and flammability. ready-to-use alcohol "hand sanitizing wipes (hsw)" is a pre-wetted towelette containing disinfectants, antiseptics, surfactants, etc. in a sealed package ready for use in topical disinfection. the advantage of hsw is eliminating the possible contaminations and transfer of pathogen due to towelettes reuse. however, the longer storage time could increase the probability of losing antimicrobial/viricidal activity due to the possible binding of active ingredients onto the towelettes or by the degradation of the active ingredient [33] .alcohol 60%-95% y n y n y benzalkonium chloride y y y y n benzethonium chloride y y n y n chlorhexidine gluconate n n n n n chloroxylenol y y n y n cloflucarban y y n y n fluorosalan y y n y n hexylresorcinol y y n y n iodine complex (ammonium ether sulfate and polyoxyethylene sorbitan monolaurate) n y n y n iodine complex (phosphate ester of alkylaryloxy polyethylene glycol) y y n y n iodine tincture united states pharmacopeia (usp) y n n n n iodine topical solution usp y n n n n nonylphenoxypoly (ethyleneoxy) ethanoliodine y y n y n poloxamer-iodine complex y y n y n povidone-iodine 5%-10% y y n y n undecoylium chloride iodine complex y y n y n isopropyl alcohol 70%-91.3% y n y n y mercufenol chloride y n n n n methylbenzethonium chloride y y n y n phenol (equal to or less than 1.5%) y y n y n phenol (greater than 1.5%) y y n y n secondary amyltricresols y y n y n sodium oxychlorosene y y n y n triclocarban y y n y n triclosan y y n y n combinations: calomel,keeping hands clean is a fundamental and essential step to avoid getting sick while limiting the transmission of germs to others. cdc recommends handwashing with soap and water whenever possible as it remarkably reduces the amount of all types of microbes and dirt on the skin surface [15, 34] . both the soaps and alcohol-based sanitizers work by dissolving the lipid membranes of microbes, thereby inactivating them ( figure 3) . thus, the sanitizer serves as an alternative when the soap and water are not readily available. the suggested minimum alcohol content of 60% is needed for it to exert the microbicidal effect. as compared to soap, alcohol-based sanitizers do not eliminate all types of germs, including norovirus and clostridium difficile, the common pathogens that can cause diarrhoea [35, 36] . while most people prefer to use sanitizers as they come in handy, and assume that the sanitizers may not be as effective as the soap at killing germs, this is because people may not use a sufficient amount of sanitizers to clean the hands [37, 38] . the liquid may evaporate before it is evenly rubbed all over the hands, therefore compromising the efficacy of the sanitizers [37, 39] . also, the sanitizer may not work well when the hands are grossly dirty or contaminated with harmful chemicals [40] . diarrhoea [35, 36] . while most people prefer to use sanitizers as they come in handy, and assume that the sanitizers may not be as effective as the soap at killing germs, this is because people may not use a sufficient amount of sanitizers to clean the hands [37, 38] . the liquid may evaporate before it is evenly rubbed all over the hands, therefore compromising the efficacy of the sanitizers [37, 39] . also, the sanitizer may not work well when the hands are grossly dirty or contaminated with harmful chemicals [40] . although hand sanitizers may be less effective than soaps in some situations, it is undeniable that they are the preferred form of hand hygiene in healthcare settings. the use of alcohol-based sanitizer may improve the compliance of healthcare workers to hand hygiene practices as they are easily accessible and take less time to use. around 2.5-3 ml of liquid (equivalent to two pumps from a dispenser) is deposited on the palm and rubbed all over the surfaces of both hands for 25-30 s to maximize the efficacy of the sanitizer [41] .abhs contains either ethanol, isopropanol, or n-propanol. a concentration of 60%-95% of alcohol by volume is said to exhibit optimum bactericidal activity [42, 43] . the antimicrobial effect of alcohols is attributed to their ability to dissolve the lipid membranes and denature the proteins of microbes. alcohols have broad-spectrum antimicrobial activity against most vegetative forms of bacteria (including mycobacterium tuberculosis), fungi, and enveloped viruses (human although hand sanitizers may be less effective than soaps in some situations, it is undeniable that they are the preferred form of hand hygiene in healthcare settings. the use of alcohol-based sanitizer may improve the compliance of healthcare workers to hand hygiene practices as they are easily accessible and take less time to use. around 2.5-3 ml of liquid (equivalent to two pumps from a dispenser) is deposited on the palm and rubbed all over the surfaces of both hands for 25-30 s to maximize the efficacy of the sanitizer [41] .abhs contains either ethanol, isopropanol, or n-propanol. a concentration of 60%-95% of alcohol by volume is said to exhibit optimum bactericidal activity [42, 43] . the antimicrobial effect of alcohols is attributed to their ability to dissolve the lipid membranes and denature the proteins of microbes. alcohols have broad-spectrum antimicrobial activity against most vegetative forms of bacteria (including mycobacterium tuberculosis), fungi, and enveloped viruses (human immunodeficiency virus [hiv] and herpes simplex virus). however, they are ineffective against bacterial spores that are found most commonly in raw materials. the addition of hydrogen peroxide (3%) may be a solution to this issue, but handling with caution during production is required due to its corrosive nature [41] .for alcohol-free products, various antiseptics have substituted alcohol as the main active ingredient. the mechanism of action of alcohols and non-alcohol compounds have been summarized in table 4 . table 4 . mechanism of action of alcohols and non-alcohol compounds.alcohol denatures protein and lipid membrane of microorganisms.optimum concentration 60%-95%.hydrogen peroxide inactivates contaminating spores in the bulk solutions or excipients.• concentration is as low as 3%. similar to alcohol, chlorhexidine works by disrupting the arrangement of cytoplasmic membranes, thereby leading to precipitation of cell contents [44] . it is most effective against gram-positive bacteria and has modest activity against a gram-negative bacteria, as well as enveloped viruses [44, 45] . as chlorhexidine is cationic, it is advisable to avoid using chlorhexidine-containing products with natural soaps and hand creams that contain anionic emulsifying agents as they may cause inactivation or precipitation of chlorhexidine, thus reducing its efficacy [44] [45] [46] . chlorhexidine gluconate 0.12% is likely to have antiviral activity against the coronavirus as it does against other enveloped viruses [47] .chloroxylenol is a common agent as a preservative in cosmetics or as an antimicrobial agent in soap. the antimicrobial effect of chloroxylenol is attributable to its ability to deactivate enzyme systems and alter cell wall synthesis in microbes. it is good at killing bacteria and enveloped viruses but less active against pseudomonas aeruginosa [48, 49] .iodine was once an effective antiseptic used for skin disinfection. it can penetrate the microbial cell wall and form complexes with amino acids or unsaturated fatty acids to impair the synthesis of cellular components. nonetheless, due to its potential to cause skin irritation and discoloration, iodophors have come into play to replace iodine as the active ingredient in antiseptics. the fda has not cleared any liquid chemical sterilant or high-level disinfectants with iodophors as the main active ingredient [50] .iodophors are a combination of either iodine, iodide or triiodide, and a high molecular weight polymer carrier such as polyvinyl pyrrolidone. this carrier is responsible for improving the solubility of iodine, enhancing the sustained release of iodine, and minimizing skin irritation [51] . the degree of antimicrobial activity determined based on the amount of free iodine present in the structure. having said so, formulations with lower iodophor concentration may have significant antimicrobial activity as well because the amount of free iodine tends to increase after dilution [52] .both iodine and iodophors exhibit germicidal activity against a gram-positive, gram-negative, and spore-forming bacteria, as well as various fungi and viruses [53] [54] [55] . however, the concentration of iodophors used in antiseptics (e.g., povidone-iodine 5%-10%) is usually insufficient to achieve sporicidal action. furthermore, the nasal povidone-iodine formulation has shown acceptable tolerability and favorable risk/benefit profile to help mitigate the perioperative spread of covid-19 in patient decolonization [56] .quaternary ammonium compounds are composed of four alkyl groups connected to a nitrogen atom in the centre. the typical examples include benzalkonium chloride, benzethonium chloride, and cetyl peridium chloride. they act by adsorbing to the cytoplasmic membrane, thus causing leakage of the constituents. they are more active against gram-positive bacteria and lipophilic viruses. the activity against fungi, mycobacteria, and gram-negative bacilli is comparatively weak [15] .at low concentration, triclosan is bacteriostatic due to its harmful effects to bacterial enzymes responsible for the composition of fatty acid from cells wall and membranes. at high concentrations, triclosan disrupts the bacteria membrane, leading it to death [8, 57, 58] . it has good activity against gram-positive bacteria, including methicillin-resistant staphylococcus aureus, candida spp. and mycobacteria. the efficacy of triclosan may be affected by ph, use of emollients, and the ionic nature of certain skin formulations [58] .a lot of sanitizers also include humectant, for instance, glycerine, in the formulation to reduce the incidence of dry skin associated with the use of alcohol-based products as the alcohol can strip away sebum that helps to keep the skin moist. though fragrance and colorant added to improve the aesthetics, it is generally not recommended to do so due to the risk of allergic reactions [41, 43] .the skin is composed of three main layers: a superficial epidermis (50-100 µm), a middle dermis (≈2 mm), and an innermost hypodermis (1-2 mm). it constitutes the first line of defence against invading microorganisms while providing protection against mechanical impacts and preventing excessive loss of water from the body.the vital barrier function of the skin resides primarily in the uppermost epidermal layer, the stratum corneum (sc). the sc contains layers of corneocytes that are terminally differentiated from keratinocytes that make up the basal layer of epidermis [15, 59] . the adjacent corneocytes are interconnected by membrane junctions called corneodesmosomes to enhance the cohesion of the sc [60] . the lipids that are derived from the exocytosis of lamellar bodies during terminal differentiation of keratinocytes will fill up the intercellular spaces between the corneocytes, and they play a role in maintaining the cutaneous barrier function [61] . the layer underneath the sc is known as the keratinized stratified epidermis. it consists of melanocytes that produce melanin, a skin pigment that provides skin with its color and protects the skin from ultraviolet radiation. apart from that, langerhan's cells, which are involved in the immune response and merkel cells that are responsible for light touch sensation, can also be found within this layer [62, 63] .though the skin serves as a barrier that protects one against harmful microorganisms, it hosts a wide array of beneficial bacteria such as staphylococcus epidermis, staphylococcus aureus, micrococcus spp., propionibacterium spp. and corynebacterium spp. [64, 65] . these bacteria may help to prevent the colonization of pathogenic microbes by either competing with them for nutrients or stimulating the skin's defence system. under normal circumstances, they exhibit low pathogenicity. however, when the skin flora distribution is disrupted, for example, due to the long-term use of topical antibiotics or frequent hand washing, they may become virulent [66, 67] . to reduce the incidence of infection, the microbiota balance is restored and maintained through constant skin regeneration. the whole process takes about 28 days, starting from the mitotic division of basal epithelium to desquamation. when the dead keratinocytes in the sc are sloughed off, it takes away the microbes that colonized the skin surface. this continuous process significantly limits the invasion of bacteria while achieving a balanced growth among the microbial populations.the virus sars-cov-2 is termed due to of its genome sequence similarity to sars coronavirus (sars-cov) [68, 69] . the covs belong to the same genus beta coronavirus, sharing similar morphology in the form of enveloped, positive single-stranded rna viruses [70, 71] . these viruses can be deactivated by certain lipid solvents such as ethanol, ether (75%), chlorine-containing disinfectants, and chloroform, except chlorhexidine [70] . ethyl alcohol, at concentrations of 60%-80%, is a potent viricidal agent inactivating all the lipophilic viruses (e.g., influenza, herpes and vaccinia virus) and many hydrophilic viruses (e.g., adenovirus, enterovirus, rhinovirus, and rotaviruses but not hepatitis a virus (hav) or poliovirus) [32] .the 2015 who model list of essential recommended ethanol at 80% (v/v) and isopropyl alcohol at 75% (v/v) under the category 'disinfectant: alcohol-based hand rub' [72] . ethanol (60%-85%) appears to be the most effective against viruses compared to isopropanol (60%-80%) and n-propanol (60%-80%) [23] . the study conducted with who-recommended alcohol-based formulations demonstrated a strong virucidal effect against emerging pathogens, including zikv, ebov, sars-cov, and mers-cov [73] . another study conducted in germany found that the ethanol in the concentration of 42.6% (w/w) was able to destroy sars coronavirus and mers coronavirus within 30 s [74] . the efficacy of various alcohol-based sanitizers at different concentrations was also investigated in several studies, as shown in table 5 . rf: reduction factor (calculated as the difference in the quotient of control titration and after incubation of the virus with the disinfectant). higher rf value indicates higher virus reduction potential. log 10 value of ≤1 is not significant or ineffective, log 10 value of 1-2 is indicative/contributable effective, log 10 value of 2-4 is moderately effective, and log 10 value of ≥4 is highly effective. undetectable level indicates a higher potential than is demonstrated.the most commonly reported skin reactions with the use of abhs are irritant contact dermatitis (icd) and allergic contact dermatitis (acd) [76, 77] . the symptoms of icd can range from mild to debilitating with manifestations like dryness, pruritus, erythema and bleeding, if severe. as for acd, the symptoms can either be mild and localized or severe and generalized, with most severe forms of acd being manifested as respiratory distress or other anaphylactic symptoms [78, 79] . sometimes, it may be difficult to distinguish between icd and acd due to the overlap and similarities of symptoms.hand hygiene products such as sanitizer and soaps can be damaging to the skin through several mechanisms: denaturation of the stratum corneum proteins, alteration of intercellular lipids, decrease in corneocyte cohesion and reduction of stratum corneum water-binding capacity [80, 81] . the biggest concern is the depletion of the lipid barrier, especially with repeated exposure to lipid-emulsifying detergents and lipid-dissolving alcohols as it may penetrate deeper into the skin layers and change the skin flora, resulting in more frequent colonization by bacteria [82] [83] [84] . in order of decreasing frequency of icd including handwashing soaps are iodophors, chlorhexidine, chloroxylenol, triclosan and alcohol-based products. among the alcohol-based formulations, ethanol has the least skin-irritant property compared to n-propanol and isopropanol [21] . there are, however, other contributing factors that increase the risk of icds such as lack of use of supplementary emollients, friction due to wearing and removal of gloves and low relative humidity [85] [86] [87] . abhs also has a drying effect on hands which can further cause the skin to crack or peel [88] [89] [90] .on the other hand, acd is caused by allergic reactions towards certain agents in the formulations such as iodophors, chlorhexidine, triclosan, chloroxylenol and alcohols [91] . individuals with allergic reactions to alcohol-based preparations may have true allergy to alcohol or allergy to impurity, aldehyde metabolite or other excipients like fragrances, benzyl alcohol, parabens or benzalkonium chloride [29, 92, 93] .the adverse effects caused by sanitizer or handwashing soaps can be easily prevented by identifying the trigger and countered with appropriate measures using one or a combination of following methods: selecting products with a less irritating agent, moisturizing skin after hand sanitation and avoiding habits that may cause or aggravate skin irritation [29, 41, 93, 94] .when frequent hand cleansing is expected, for instance, among healthcare workers, it is preferable to select products that have a good balance between effectiveness, safety and compatibility with all skin types. the concerns about drying and irritant effects of alcohol or certain antiseptic soaps may hinder the acceptance and ultimate use of these preparations [52] . hence, to reduce this problem, abhs containing humectants or emollients can be used instead [95] . in recent years, novel water-based antiseptic lotions are also being studied such as that using benzethonium chloride, which not only addresses the issue regarding cutaneous adverse effects but also broadens the efficacy against viruses and tackles concerns about flammability associated with conventional abhs [76] .temperature and humidity are considered as significant contributors to the risk factors of dermatitis. the retention of skin moisture is longer in tropical countries and places with higher relative humidity compared to cold, dry environments [96] . this aspect calls for a varying need of emollients concerning respective environmental conditions and climates according to geographical locations. some individuals, such as the elderly and healthcare workers who often wear occlusive gloves, are more prone to dry skin. therefore, it is a good practice for these high-risk individuals to use moisturizers containing humectants, fats or oils to enhance skin moisture and improve skin barrier function [96] .proper hand hygiene by washing hands or using alcohol-based sanitizer is one of the most critical measures to prevent direct or indirect transmission of the covid-19 as it reduces the number of the viable sars-cov-2 virus on contaminated hands. there are five instances that call for hand hygiene: before and after having direct contact with patients, before handling invasive devices for patient care, after exposure to body fluids or excretions, after contact with objects including medical appliances within proximity of the patient, and before starting any aseptic task [96] .the cdc recommends washing hands with soap and water whenever possible because handwashing reduces the amounts of all types of germs and chemicals on hands [97] . if soap and water are not available, using a hand sanitizer with a final concentration of at least 60% ethanol or 70% isopropyl alcohol inactivates viruses that are genetically related to, and with similar physical properties as, the covid-19.the action of handwashing can mechanically remove the microorganisms, but the removal of resident pathogens is more effective when hands are washed with preparations containing anti-microbial agents [96] . according to the policies and procedures on cdc, who and the infection control by ministry of health malaysia, the recommended duration for the entire handwash procedure spans between 40 to 60 s using the standard 7-step technique.comparatively, sanitizer containing at least 60% alcohol is more effective in destroying the microorganisms than handwashing with anti-microbial soaps due to their ability to inactivate and destroy the microbes [96] . however, it should be noted that the abhs may not be as effective if the hands are visibly soiled, dirty or greasy, so handwashing with soap and water is preferred under these circumstances. the duration to rub sanitizer all over the hand surfaces is approximately 20 to 30 s [96] .proper hand hygiene is one of the essential infection control strategies as it can undeniably lower the likelihood of direct or indirect transmissions of microorganisms. the use of abhs is becoming more common because of their rapid action and efficiency in killing microorganisms, mainly when handwashing using soap and water is not practical or convenient. there are, however, some situations in which handwashing is preferred as abhs are less effective when the hands are visibly dirty or stained and cannot cover certain kinds of pathogens. it is vital to select abhs with the appropriate amount of alcohol and practice the correct hand hygiene technique when cleaning hands to ensure all the microorganisms are effectively killed.author contributions: t.m. and r.j.c.b. conceptualized the purpose of the review. j.l.j.j. and t.p.y. jointly extracted the articles and involved in the initial preparation of manuscript. j.r.m. and n.t. cross-checked the extracted data which was further reviewed and edited by t.m. all authors have read and agreed to the published version of the manuscript.practices are relatively sensitive to immediate personalized feedback and to some extent the introduction of signs and prompts. it is important to note that intervention studies, as discussed, present participants a situation where sinks are presumed accessible, and/or incorporate a broad definition of hand hygiene that includes both hand washing and the use of hand-sanitizer gels. this broad hand hygiene definition is consistent with cdc recommendations (boyce & pittet, 2002) .hand-sanitizer gels or rubs have been well researched for their antipathogenic results, ease of use, and accessibility (e.g., dyer, gerenratch, & wadhams, 1998) .). in fact, investigators have shown through modeling strategies that nursing staff using hand sanitizer exclusively would save time without sacrificing the quality of patient care (voss & widmer, 1997) . this research suggests that 100% hand-washing compliance by nurses would take 17% of their total working time (voss & widmer, 1997; widmer, 2000) . in contrast, nurses that switched to using hand-sanitizer gels would take < 3% of their total working time. the inclusion of hand-sanitizer gels, as part of the hand-hygiene definition, underscores the behavioral importance of hand sanitizer's ease and accessibility of use sufficient for improving and maintaining hand-hygiene practices.since the outbreak of sars and h1n1, college student hand-hygiene practices have grown in importance and concern. consistent with the above, white et al. (2003) showed that students provided with easy and convenient access to hand-sanitizer gels were significantly less likely than a control group of students to suffer symptoms, illness, and absenteeism. over a six-week period of study, aiello et al. (2012) found that hand sanitizers coupled with facemask use reduced influenza-like illness between 48% and 75% per week as compared to a control group of residential-based students. the research presented below targeted university students' hand sanitizer use as associated with a dining hall setting during the lunch hour.our research began with a pilot study attempting to approximate natural frequency of hand washing of students prior to eating their lunch at a college cafeteria. researchers made 4,144 observations over 20 days, observing individual students from the time they entered the cafeteria until they began eating their food. these pilot observations revealed that the baseline frequency of students entering a restroom to hand wash demonstrated a floor effect. during the pilot observations interventions were implemented, including an (a) informational poster, and (b) informational leaflet 2 handed out by a female student serving as a change agent. both the poster and leaflet provided information about pathogen risk and encouraged hand washing. however, during the intervention phases, the number of students observed entering the restroom to hand wash did not change. interestingly, the behavior change techniques used in our pilot research have been previously shown to influence student hand hygiene (e.g., surgeoner, chapman, & powell, 2009) , the hand hygiene of food preparation staff (e.g., geller, eason, phillips, & pierson, 1980) as well as other important health behaviors (e.g., berry, geller, calef, & calef, 1992; williams, thyer, bailey, & harrison, 1989) . however, university students in this cafeteria setting were not influenced by these traditional intervention techniques. a potential reason for this non-effect points to the response-cost associated with students leaving their place in line in order to enter the restroom, access a sink, and wash their hands.thus, we examined an alternative to traditional hand washing; specifically we studied the use of hand-sanitizer gel. hand-sanitizer gels that contain 60% to 70% ethyl alcohol have both bacterial and viral killing activity (cdc, 2010; willis, 1995) . therefore, ethyl alcohol is an ideal hand cleaning method, particularly for busy university students, because in addition to disinfecting hands, it can be easily carried in a person's pocket, brief case or purse; does not require a restroom or faucet and sink; and applying hand sanitizer can take place almost anywhere and anytime. the main goal was to assess whether students would access handsanitizer gel, and which intervention conditions influence the use of hand sanitizer.participants included college men and women eating at a residential cafeteria on a university campus in mid-atlantic united states. the cafeteria served one dorm of 450 college students and was attached to the dorm by a covered breezeway. figure 1 shows the cafeteria had a single entrance/exit location, one cashier counter, one serving line for food, and an open eating area with tables and chairs. the cafeteria was one large room with an open floor plan, so that one could view the entire space from the back of the room. this open floor plan made it possible to observe patrons entering, paying, entering/exiting the restrooms, walking through the serving line, and finally sitting down to eat. the cafeteria had one men's restroom and one women's restroom. the men's restroom had one urinal, one stall, and one sink. the women's restroom had two stalls and one sink. on entering the dining hall, students were required to pay a cashier before going to the cafeteria-style serving lines. students would pass the two restroom doorways after leaving the cashier and before entering the serving lines. these restrooms were the only locations where students could wash their hands prior to eating. during the intervention phases, a round table outfitted with a dispenser of figure 1 table where the change agent stood and prompted hand sanitizer use. additionally, the layout indicates the distance measured from the cashier counter to the opposite wall (i.e., 3.1 m) and where the restrooms were co-located.hand-sanitizer gel and an information poster was placed next to the cashier counter. after leaving the serving line with their food and drink students moved to the open commons area where tables and chairs were located.observations took place during spring semester in the cafeteria at lunch time from 12pm to 1pm. data were collected monday through friday for four consecutive weeks. student observers sat at a side table in the eating area with their lunches. observers unobtrusively collected the following data: (a) number and gender of students entering the dining hall, and (b) number and gender of students entering the dining hall restrooms.when the hand-sanitizer dispenser was first implemented, two observers recorded the number of students who operated the hand-sanitizer dispenser. one observer sat unobtrusively in the dining hall at a table with her lunch. the other observer was a change agent who stood by the table and dispenser. she was instructed to stand next to the table and dispenser and ask students if they wanted to clean their hands, kill germs, and avoid getting sick by using the hand sanitizer. the change agent operated a hand held four-digit counter, clicking it once for each student using the dispenser. the change agent was instructed to make counts discreetly and to keep the hand-held counter hidden from students. she did not collect any other type of data.the study followed a five phase a-bc-b-bc-b design with phases, lasting three to five days, defined as:baseline (a). during the first phase, lasting three days, the number of patrons entering the restrooms to hand wash was observed without intervention. to compare the future intervention effectiveness of using hand sanitizer, students' use of personal hand sanitizers was observed. observations began when students entered the cafeteria line and ended when they began eating their lunch.hand sanitizer, information poster, and change agent (bc). during phases two and four, a round table was placed between the cashier and serving line (see figure 1 ). on the table was placed a white one-liter ceramic dispenser filled with the hand sanitizer, a 62% ethyl alcohol gel. to dispense the hand sanitizer, a user was required to press down on a spout-activated pump mechanism once, collect the hand sanitizer in the hand, and rub the hands together back and forth for several seconds until the hand sanitizer had covered the hands and dissolved. each press of the pump released a quarter size amount of hand sanitizer, approximately 2.50 grams. accompanying the table and dispenser was (a) a white 61.4 cm x 92.2 cm poster with the wording, "sanitize your hands to prevent cold and flu," (b) a sign attached to the ceramic dispenser labeling it "hand sanitizer," and (c) a change agent that encouraged and educated students about hand-sanitizer gels.hand sanitizer and information poster (b). phases three and five were the same as above except that the change agent was removed from the intervention setting.interobserver reliability was calculated for students' use of the hand-sanitizer dispenser. during bc and b phases, hand sanitizer use was observed 9 out of 17 days by two independent observers (i.e., the change agent and an observer in the dining area). for each day of the study, percent agreement was calculated by dividing the number of observations in which the observers were in agreement by the total number of observations. mean percent agreement for number of students using the hand sanitizer was 94.5%, ranging from 88% to 99%.a total of 6,454 observations were recorded across seven consecutive weeks, including 3,226 men and 3,228 women. the average number of observations per day was 208, ranging from 151 to 282. there were no significant gender differences in hand-hygiene behavior, p > .10. therefore, all data represent observations from men and women combined. additionally, during the baseline phase (a phase) students' use of their own personal hand sanitizers was observed. no students were observed using their own personal hand sanitizer.differences between phases are illustrated in figure 2 , showing a substantial increase in hand-hygiene behavior from baseline to the implementation of the interventions. during baseline (a phase) observations indicated that students did not use personal hand sanitizer (m = 0%), while the introduction of the handsanitizer dispenser, information poster, and change agent (bc phase) showed a dramatic increase (m = 60.44%) of student use of hand sanitizer from the dispenser provided. removal of the change agent from the table outfitted with the information poster and the hand-sanitizer dispenser (b phase) showed a substantial decrease in student use of the hand sanitizer (m = 17.96%). in phase four, subsequent return of the change agent (bc phase) saw another robust increase in hand sanitizer use (m = 60.96%). finally, in phase five the removal of the change agent (b phase) saw a large decrease in student use of the hand sanitizer (m = 14.83%). additionally, as can be seen in figure 2 , the number of students entering the women's or men's restroom was unchanged across all phases (m = 1.56%). thus, the interventions presented presumably did not influence students to wash their hands with soap and water in these restrooms.the present study suggests that a strategically-placed dispenser of hand sanitizer may prove to be an effective method of increasing student hand hygiene. although the use of hand sanitizer as compared to hand washing represents different behaviors, both operate to clean hands by removing or killing pathogens.the interventions presented here resulted in robust increases in hand hygiene, with both the hand sanitizer presented alone (m = 17.96%) and with a change agent (m = 60.96%). in both cases, the hand-sanitizer dispenser was placed in the dining hall where it did not interrupt the natural flow of students' accessing lunch lines. in one sense, the hand-sanitizer dispenser became an additional but inserted part of a chain of behaviors leading to food service (see figure 1 ). because of dispenser placement, students (a) did not have to leave the area to clean their hands in a restroom, (b) did not lose their place in the serving line, and (c) dispensing of hand sanitizer was quick and easy, a task taking a few seconds. in addition, the present findings are consistent with large-scale behavioral research showing that a prompt occurring in closer proximity to the opportunity to emit the behavior, also known as "point-of-purchase advertising," can be more effective than a more distal prompt (geller, farris, & post, 1973) .baseline hand washing may have been avoided because of the inconvenience or response cost of taking the time and effort. students often go to lunch with friends, and thus entering the restroom to wash one's hands means separating from lunch mates and breaking from the serving line. similar barriers have shown to decrease intentions to hand wash by medical staff, including such significant predictors as time inconvenience, number of sinks, sink location and availability (jenner, watson, miller, jones, & scott, 2002) . this factor of time and inconvenience may explain why students who did not enter the restroom to wash their hands did access the hand-sanitizer dispenser.the presence or absence of a change agent was reflected in different levels of hand sanitizing. in general, there was a more than three-fold increase in hand sanitizing when a change agent was standing next to the hand-sanitizer dispenser and information poster as compared to the dispenser and poster alone condition. however, the relative contribution made by each component to observed increases in hand hygiene must be considered with caution. the potential serial dependency may have obscured our understanding of how hand sanitizer presented without a change agent might influence student use. the justification of the current design was based on practical reasons. given the results of our pilot study that revealed low rates of students entering the restrooms to wash their hands, and (more importantly) student insensitivity to interventions, a treatment package of multiple components was deemed appropriate (see azrin, 1977; williams et al., 1989 for an example).because data collection was strictly observational, researchers were unable to question participants about the effects of the interventions, particularly the differential impact of the hand sanitizer with and without the change agent. beyond an ordering effect, the increased hand-hygiene behavior with a change agent may be understood in the context of social assistance. social assistants function presumably by providing socially-mediated consequences (e.g., approval, respect, and avoidance of negative admonishment). socially-assisted interventions have been found to improve safety-related behavior over and above the impact of the intervention alone (e.g., berry et al., 1992; williams et al., 1989) . social assistance is particularly useful when the natural contingencies governing behavior are non-direct acting (malott, 1988 (malott, , 1989 .the consequence of pathogen infection due to hand-born disease is likely a non-direct acting contingency with weak stimulus control properties. pathogen risk is not easily detectable by people. where, when and what pathogens are present, day to day, in the world of objects (e.g., doors, elevator buttons, atms and so on) adds to the probabilistic nature of pathogen risk. thus, it is difficult for a person to determine how and where he or she became exposed and infected by a disease (ansari, sattar, springthorpe, wells, & tostowaryk, 1988) . without reliable natural cues and direct acting consequences, establishing hand washing as a prophylactic response to pathogen risk will likely be difficult. malott (1988 malott ( , 1989 suggests that non-direct acting contingencies be supplemented with indirect acting contingencies, defined as establishing sociallycontrived consequences. during the present research, the change agent's association with the hand-sanitizer dispenser showed remarkable influence over hand-hygiene behavior. as mentioned in the method section, the change agent was instructed to educate students about hand-sanitizer gels, and encourage students to use the sanitizer dispenser. the interactions between the change agent and students over the course of the phases may have provided supplemental social consequences important to the hand sanitizer's effectiveness.however, the results suggest effectiveness of the change agent may be dependent on other intervention characteristics. in our pilot research, as mentioned in the introduction, a change agent was employed to distribute leaflets that stated the importance of hand washing before eating lunch. during this condition, the change agent, leaflet and poster intervention had no effect on students entering the cafeteria restrooms to hand wash. the difference between the pilot study change agent effectiveness and the present study may be due to the change agent's proximity to the hand-hygiene behavior (i.e., point-of-purchase advertising, geller et al., 1973) . in the present study, both students and the change agent were in close proximity to the sanitizer dispenser, and use of the dispenser was in full view of the change agent. thus, the change agent was able to apply immediate social consequences for hand hygiene. in contrast, in the pilot study the change agent's ability to give social consequences was impossible due to the distant location of the restroom and subsequent hand washing.in terms of research feasibility, the use of hand sanitizer was not financially prohibitive. combining the four phases in which sanitizer was used, it cost less than $30.00 to dispense the product to 1,375 students over 17 days. likewise, the cost of the signs was minimal, less than $25.00. the greatest expense would be associated with the change agent. although the change agent was an unpaid research assistant, her average hourly routine included 2 hours of work per day. alternatively, it may be possible for a trained cafeteria cashier to also serve as a change agent, offering students hand sanitizer after paying for their food.several limitations of this research are noteworthy. first, measurements of positive health benefits from increasing hand hygiene were not collected. at the time of this research no records were available to correlate health benefits to student hand-hygiene behavior. second, students studied were of a restricted age group. intervention effectiveness may show different results across a more diverse and mature group of people. third, individual student behavior was not tracked and measured over time. thus, we were unable to observe the strength of the intervention(s) to control individual variation (e.g., berry, gilmore, & geller, 1994) . fourth, although change agent plus hand sanitizer and hand sanitizer alone showed increases in hand hygiene, the shortness of the phases (i.e., 3 to 5 days) did not allow for observing long-term maintenance and trends. future research is encouraged to target issues of hand hygiene maintenance and trends, along with associated health measures to examine long-term health benefits. research on university student hand hygiene is clearly needed to better ascertain the effectiveness and viability of interventions to influence student hand washing and hand hygiene practices.the covid-19 outbreak is straining hospital and general response resources in many countries. one supply issue that has attracted global attention is personal protective equipment (ppe), in particular, filtering facepiece respirators (ffrs; the desirable n95 type or otherwise widely used face masks), which are suitable for airborne pathogens filtration and used by millions of healthcare professionals and public responders. n95 type masks are made by various manufacturers under different trade names. the term 'niosh n95' relates to a filter efficiency rating that means the mask materials block about 95 percent of particles that are 0.3 micrometers in size or larger. ppe options and mask availability will likely remain challenging given the ongoing divergence in the medical and public responses, as well as the apparent different strategies and local availability between the g20 countries and the rest of the world often with fewer resources. this means additional alternative, perhaps only temporary solutions must be established for the reuse, refreshing or extended wear of face masks. this could reduce competition for newly manufactured masks and ppe, and also allow resource optimization for countries with limited access to primary supplies. for the use and reuse of masks we expect continuing differences between large scale institutional approaches, strategies ideally suitable for hospital environments, and methods that can be quickly applied locally by non-experts with limited resources, for example the wide use by the general public of improvised homemade face masks. one of these options is thermal sterilization based on multiple reports of the successful deactivation of viral material in the 70-75°c regimes with less than 30 minute exposure, but with relative humidity perhaps also being a beneficial factor [1] . however, the survivability and reliability of multiple face mask types and their ongoing filtration effectiveness under thermal conditioning is less well known. in this study and discussion, we wish to address a few simple questions and provide guidance to the community dealing with mask and ppe availability for the covid-19 response, which touches on underlying material science aspects [2] :• from a materials point of view are there obvious shortcomings with the thermal conditioning of face masks? • is there sufficient material robustness as demonstrated by masks to withstand moderate over-temperatures and extended exposure times, i.e. beyond rapid 30 minute exposures at 75°c? as well as:• what is the retention behavior of simple spray-on disinfectant solutions and their active compounds on surfaces? • could simple spray-on solutions containing disinfectants of low toxicity aid mask reuse and also enhance the currently improvised face masks?following the h1n1, h5n1 and sars-cov-1 epidemics there were a number of journal publications and reports investigating disinfection/sterilization methods and retention of viral matter for ffrs [3] [4] [5] . these studies acknowledged that in a pandemic the current manufacturing capacity and vast ffr stockpiles (89 million per month in the usa) would need to be supplemented by reuse of ffrs. indeed, the current 2020 shortage of ffrs in many countries has precedence in the spot shortages experienced during the 2009-2010 influenza outbreak [6] . the pre-covid-19 research and the recent 2020 research into ffr reuse offers a number of strategies for disinfection, each with their own advantages and disadvantages.the similarities in chemical and physical stability of the sars-cov-2 virus to other viruses allows the assumption that methods used in the study of ffr decontamination of h1n1, h5n1 or sars-cov-1 can be used successfully towards sars-cov-2 [7] . this reasoning is validated by the first emerging investigations of sars-cov-2 stability which tentatively show it can be eliminated with the usual disinfectants, uv-c irradiation, or elevated temperatures [8] [9] [10] [11] . it should be noted that the substrate also may play an important role. chin et al. showed that after two days no infectious sars-cov-2 was detectable on fabric, but on a surgical mask significant levels were detected after 7 days [10] . given the preliminary nature of these studies there is still far more investigation and validation required including investigation of all decontamination methods to meet the resources available to the disparate users of ffrs.high energy irradiation has a long history as a method for sterilizing medical devices. energetic photons are known to cause degradation of nucleic acids, hence is effective in inactivating pathogens. gamma-irradiation of ffrs to 10 kgy (1 mrad) has been shown to have little effect on the fit of the masks (evaluated using the saccharin apparatus fit test), however, the filtration of 0.3 µm particles was compromised [12] . gamma-radiation is also known to cause degradation of polyolefins usually in the >50 kgy range with dependence on dose rate subject to an oxidative sensitivity [13] [14] [15] [16] . uniquely for masks here, radiation-induced charge carrier formation affecting the electret filter layers [17] could be a contributing variable resulting in the reduction of the ffr filter performance. access to gamma-radiation sources capable of reaching kgy doses is also not widespread, so taken together, irradiation may not be the most convenient choice for large scale ffr decontamination.ultraviolet (uv)-radiation in the uv-c region of the electromagnetic spectrum is another form of ionizing radiation and has a long history of use in sterilizing surfaces. unlike gamma-radiation it is readily available in most hospital and laboratory settings. a number of studies have highlighted the potential of uv sterilization from common 254 nm lamp sources [18] [19] [20] including use of laboratory bio-safety cabinets [11] and a high throughput process including steps for tracking ffrs [21] . however, there could be line-of-sight, penetration aspects for deeper disinfection (uv-c is much less penetrating than gamma) and potential surface degradation issues as polymers are relatively sensitive to uv-c (similar to gamma doses).hydrogen peroxide is a strong oxidant and is effective as a disinfectant either as a gas plasma, vapor or solution. for ffrs, hydrogen peroxide vapor (hpv) use is well-documented for not affecting fit or filter performance [19, 22] and is promising for high throughput disinfection. it is one technique that has been tested on ffrs inoculated with sars-cov-2 and shown to be effective, although the results are only preliminary [23] . it is currently being used in some parts of the us to disinfect large batches of ffrs for re-deployment to users [24] with detailed descriptions as to how to implement hpv use [25] . hydrogen peroxide gas plasma, however, has been shown to affect filter performance relative to a standard sodium chloride particle penetration assay, although no mechanism was proposed [19] .ethylene oxide (eo) gas is widely used in the medical device and food industries as a sterilization method and suitable for large scale operations. the gas itself is toxic and explosive so care is needed when handling it and absence of residual gas must be confirmed after treatment [23] . furthermore, a study into residual chemicals on ffrs after eo treatment showed the presence of toxic reaction products believed to be originating from reaction of the rubber straps [26] . other less conventional methods for decontamination include a novel oxidant mixture dimethyldioxirane [26] , high energy plasma generating electrodes as part of a mask [27] , and masks impregnated with copper oxide [28] . these strategies may be useful in the future but as yet they are unproven approaches.the use of heat to decontaminate ffrs is an approach that requires minimal resources since ovens are usually easily available. microwave heating is the exception, however, as it is known to cause deformation of ffrs, perhaps due to more uneven local heating [18] . previous work with h1n1 and h5n1 have shown that 70°c at 85% humidity for 30 minutes [4, 29] is sufficient to inactive the viruses on ffrs [30] .chemical-based sterilization is easily achieved by alcohol contact (ethanol or isopropanol) or the more classic anti-viral and anti-bacterial compounds than can be commonly found in many commercial products. it is important to distinguish between the momentary disinfection offered by alcohol contact and evaporation, and longer lasting effects that can be provided by less volatile active compounds remaining on surfaces. hand sanitizer usually has only isopropanol or ethanol as the active compound, whereas a disinfectant spray usually has a low amount of an additional active constituent. anti-viral properties are given by compounds such as benzalkonium chloride [10] , chlorhexidine gluconate [31] , or ionic substances such as citric acid or perhaps even edta, and likely also some anionic or nonionic surfactants that in essence have the ability to disrupt the viral envelope [32] . there is usually little distinction between their activity on enveloped (sars-cov-2 causing covid-19) or non-enveloped viruses (for example the bacteriophage ms2 simulant), except some comments have been made that ms2 might be more stable than the sars-cov-2. interestingly, citric acid based buffer solution containing nasal sprays were quoted to reduce the titer of an influenza a sydney/5/97 (h3n2) influenza strain by up to 3 logs after 1 minute contact time [32, 33] . similarly, some oils, such as tea tree oil or oil of thyme are associated with good anti-viral properties [34] . for any use on masks and on surfaces that are easily touched, it is of course important to use disinfectants that are low in toxicity and are ideally found in existing daily use items. benzalkonium chloride is a common anti-microbial substance still on the fda list for hand sanitizers [35] and also used in commercial disinfectant sprays, and citric acid or tea tree oil are part of consumer products.this brings up, again, the idea that masks could perhaps be simply sterilized by soaking in alcohol or combined solutions (alcohol plus secondary active constituent). however, there is evidence that some of the commercial n95 masks suffer in their filtration efficiency when 'soaked' with alcohol or ipa based disinfectant solutions, or similarly even under higher temperature steam environments [36] . this is due to their complex construction in terms of a hydrophobic or electrostatic layer that is relatively easily compromised in the presence of steam and concentrated alcohol solutions. however, we could also speculate that masks could perhaps be just surface sterilized with a carefully applied thin deposit of an active ingredient left behind from an alcohol solution, basically a top surface treatment rather than a deeper soaking. such an approach could be seen as the most basic momentary refreshing of a mask for extended wear or shorter term reuse if conditions require such action; in principle no different than often using hand sanitizer. of course, any disinfection will likely be limited to the immediate surface and not necessarily kill viral material trapped deeply within the filtration layers. further, there would need to be cross-checks whether suitable filtration efficiency is in fact maintained, and whether a treated surface has indeed the expected additional anti-viral property. we speculate that this will be less of a concern for simple cotton or fabric-based masks that are now often seen with the 'do it yourself' approaches. for these and similar more forgiving surfaces, the thoughtful application of ipa based spray-on solutions containing some longer lasting anti-viral compounds may be one avenue to increase the beneficial nature of such face masks. active ingredients should be selected based on proven low toxicity or compounds already in use with human contact, i.e. established anti-virals.any approach towards refreshing/sterilizing face masks or improving custom-made cloth masks with the application of small amounts of a spray-on solution offering added disinfectant properties, also requires us to consider how long active compounds may persist on the mask surface. contact infrared atr (attenuated total reflection) spectroscopy is an excellent method to probe how quickly thin layers in the micrometer range may disappear or could be retained. the exact anti-viral efficacy of specific compounds should be corroborated based on existing literature data, by additional bio-assays, or further established by our bio-medical and virology colleagues, and is outside the scope of our current study. instead, we wish to demonstrate how low amounts of active ingredients may display unexpected volatility or tend to stay on surfaces for extended time at rt and 37°c. this is an essential foundation to further consider the use of dilute alcohol based spray-on disinfectants, not only as the simplest method for quick mask surface sterilization, but also applicable to other ppe surfaces or shared equipment, key-boards, computer mice or similar.any existing sterilization and reuse methods, or alternatives currently under consideration for masks (filtering facepiece respirators), will need to be assessed on their own specific merits, with sterilization efficiency, filtration function and overall performance (mechanical properties and fitting) to be evaluated in parallel. this study wishes to provide further guidance for thermal disinfection approaches of mostly n95 masks, disinfection via the application of dilute spray-on solutions, and the retention of disinfectants on surfaces.subject to a limited supply of face masks, a preliminary screening study consisting of a set of multiple masks was sequentially aged in slightly vented dry circulated air laboratory ovens for 24 h at 65°c, followed by 24 h at 80°c and 24 h at 95°c. all masks remained in excellent condition after 24 h at 65°c, yet with some evidence for onset of material weaknesses during the final step of 95°c exposure. it became clear, that higher temperatures or extended times would certainly be pushing mask reliability into an unfavorable regime. one fresh set of masks was then aged for 24 h at 80°c, i.e. slightly above the target sterilization temperature range of 70-75°c, and another set for validation of additional robustness for 24 h at 95°c. these two sets were then inspected for signs of visual degradation while the elastic bands were tested in tensile mode by stretching a specific length (75 mm) by 100% (doubling of its length).it is important to point out that the aging conditions here involved low relative humidity simply generated by heating of ambient air in the ovens. there is evidence that humidity will aid virus deactivation on stainless steel at elevated temperatures (up to 65°c) [37] , however, in the current study the optimal thermal and relative humidity conditions for viral kill efficiency were outside the scope. our focus is rather on the materials aging behavior for which thermal oxidation and perhaps shrinkage or other immediate deformation could be important. additional relative humidity is not expected to negatively affect polyolefins and related materials because they take up very little water and are not hydrolytically sensitive, but the mask filtration efficiency and charge carrier capability can be impacted by humidity [36, 38] . the most suitable thermal exposure conditions should be derived based on balancing the primary viral disinfection needs with material thermal aging aspects, mask filtration performance and fitting behavior after exposure, and the availability of dry heat, commercial climate controlled incubation chambers, or perhaps relative humidity controlled sealed ovens by added salt solutions (deliquescence) [39, 40] . from a materials aging point of view, in particular here for polyolefins, exposure conditions of no more than a day in the temperature range of 75 to 95°c are not expected to result in significant oxidation, even if inexpensive and weakly stabilized commercial materials are involved [41, 42] . further, aside from an immediate response such as shrinkage or warping (some copolymers have lower softening points), thermal aging of polymers is often also of cumulative nature, meaning a total exposure condition can be composed of multiple successive exposure intervals [43, 44] . this means if a material can easily handle one day at 80 or 95°c, then one would expect a few repeated 1 h exposures at such temperatures to be no worse in terms of overall materials performance [43, 44] . the point is, thermal testing for a day gives confidence of material robustness and that several repetitive short sterilization steps ought to be achievable.we obtained face masks (summarized in table 1 and shown in fig. 1 ) that are commonly encountered in the us health system, and one example that is more suitable as a n95 dust mask for work under particulate conditions (moldex n95). commonly used mask production materials are polypropylene and polyester fabrics, usually as melt or electrospun fibers [45] . figs. 2 to 4 offer an overview of the layered structure of such face masks and the polymeric fabrics employed as analyzed by ir spectroscopy showing spectral absorbance versus wavenumber for material identification purposes. commercial ppe masks embrace similar filter materials (mostly polypropylene and polyester) and design principles. hence any conclusions on their thermal aging and filter performance behavior are likely to be more broadly applicable. table 1 : masks used for controlled aging (screening and 24 h at 80 and 95°c exposure) and subsequent filter evaluation. *due to limited availability the moldex mask was only cumulatively aged, but not separately exposed at 80 and 95°c. **visual checks only.model fig. 5 shows a set of thermally conditioned specimens including one face shield that clearly shows the weakness of a molded pet sheet. similarly, fig. 6 shows thermal conditioning at 95°c with more evidence for shrinkage of the halyard fluid shield level 3. fig. 7 and 8 show more details of the weaknesses in some mask types that could be visually recognized after thermal exposure. fig. 9 shows some of the edge cracking observed for the moldex mask type and its vent deformation at 95°c.summary for the 24h exposure at 80°c, i.e. the moderate aging condition:3m 1860/1860s -the aged mask appears near identical to the original un-aged specimen. it has the same color, but the ink printed on its front has diffused slightly into the fibers (blurry print). the nose foam and elastic bands are still intact, as much as the elastic bands retain their initial stretch properties. the elastic bands appear durable and can easily withstand the extended 80°c exposure with no obvious degradation.3m aura 1870+ n95 -this mask maintains its color, there is no obvious ink diffusion, and the elastics retains its original stretch ability. the nose foam remains attached securely and there are no apparent issues with this mask, thereby easily accommodating this 80°c exposure with no obvious degradation.kimberly-clark n95 -this mask maintains its color, but there is some ink diffusion, shrinkage and partial warping at 80°c. the top of the 'duckbill' has an embedded metal band to mold the mask to the user's nose. the bottom does not have the metal band and the plastic there is warped. this could affect the fit at the chin and could allow particulates to bypass the chin seal. also, the inner plastic lining (see fig. 8 ) appears partially fused together, and does not allow the 'duckbill' to be opened easily anymore without tearing the inner polymer liner from the filter sections (based on ir it is likely some ethylene copolymer with methyl acrylate). this inner lining would have to be kept apart while in the oven. it is also possible that wearing the mask may prevent any subsequent adhesion as the surfaces may no longer touch as effectively. it may help having the mask open in its 'duckbill' configuration prior to thermal conditioning (not lying flat and folded). for the exposure, here, we preferred not to open the mask to get a better picture of the intrinsic filter performance. similarly, other masks or objects should not be stacked on top to prevent this inner lining from coming in contact and fusing. the elastic bands performed with sufficient elasticity remaining.halyard fluid shield level 3 -this mask maintains its color, but there was some ink diffusion, shrinkage and partial warping at 80°c. in contrast with the kimberly-clark model, the bottom of the 'duckbill' does not have the metal band and the plastic is warped. again, this could affect the chin fit and allow particulates under the seal. as this mask does not have the inner plastic lining, there is no issue with any fused polymer liner due to a lower melting material. again, the elastic bands had sufficient elasticity remaining.medichoice face shield -this polyester (pet confirmed by ir) based face shield displays significant shrinkage and was completely destroyed. it cannot withstand 80°c for 24 h. we note that the foam on the forehead and elastic band was still securely attached, and there were no issues with the foam and elastic. this face shield also does not withstand shorter times and slightly lower temperatures (i.e. 30 mins at 75°c).moldex 2400 n95 -only a single mask was available as part of the initial cumulative screening exposure for 24 hours at 65, 80 and 95°c. this mask maintains its color and no obvious changes were observed after the initial aging at 65°c. after aging at 80°c for 24 hours the bottom edge of the mask started to crack slightly. again, this could affect the chin fit and could allow particulates under the seal. the elastic band performance retains its initial stretch properties after this cumulative aging schedule. aging at 95°c for 24 hours is too much for this mask as significant structural failures were observed. cracking at the chin section was more pronounced, and the high impact polystyrene (confirmed by ir) vent started to deform and warp.exposures for 24 h at 95°°°°c: : : : similar observations apply to all masks described above for 80°c. this means these masks and their polymeric materials have somewhat predicable behavior for elevated temperature exposure. the 3m 1860, 1860s and aura 1870+ n95 types are not anticipated to degrade significantly should they experience slightly higher temperatures or longer times than the bare minimum sterilization targets. these masks have some intrinsic thermal robustness. in contrast unfortunately, the 'duckbill' types (kimberly-clark 46767 n95 and halyard fluidshield level 3) have a specific material vulnerability with some warping as a material response, which could compromise their subsequent best fit. in addition, there is the potential adhesion issue between the two layers for the kimberly-clark n95 via the additional liner. we encourage any end-users to check for this behavior and its impact should thermal sterilization be applied.in summary, the 3m 1860, 1860s, along with the aura 1870+ n95 display better thermal performance. based on the exposure test results, these masks could certainly be thermallytreated at a target temperature of 75°c and be reusable, as long as effective viral deactivation is confirmed and their filter efficiency remains equally functional. a previous study similarly showed that dry thermal treatment had little influence on mask performance of a particular type [36] . the kimberly-clark and halyard 'duckbill' masks showed some deformations at the chin seal which could lead to a compromised fit. this would need to be verified on a few specimens with individual fit testing responses in parallel. we also recognize that the testing for 24 h at 80°c is perhaps more conservative than only a few sterilization exposures at no more than 75°c. this means the 'duckbill' type masks may still perform after limited thermal exposure. institutional large scale approaches for sterilization of masks and ppe exist as hydrogen peroxide vapor treatment, which has been extensively reported and is now approved by the fda [24, 25, 46] , and perhaps gamma irradiation when facilities are easily available (but polymer materials and filter reliability is to be confirmed) or uv illumination [12, [18] [19] [20] . we also recognize that aqueous solutions of isopropanol or ethanol are used in hospitals for quick momentary disinfection, with some discussions on the web that ethanol could be more effective than isopropanol for sars-cov-2. while hard surfaces are easily wiped down and that can be expanded to suitable ppe, alcohol soaking of masks is so far seen as detrimental to filtration efficiency and mask performance [36] . once the alcohol has evaporated there is also no extended sterilization effect on any cleaned surface, hence cleaning with wipes is temporary at best.this brings up the question of whether simple improvised alternatives may exist in which longer lasting anti-viral compounds are easily deposited on suitable surfaces including masks. this would offer an active surface or on-demand touch-up disinfection, beyond the mask being only an inert physical barrier. with the rapid propagation of custom-made cloth masks which have unknown filtration efficiency, there could be added value by such quick refreshing options, similar to the use of hand sanitizers. in this sense, we see value in improvised applications of a gentle mist of alcohol solutions containing a secondary active compound. this could also be carefully applied to the perhaps vulnerable surface of face masks, if no other quick disinfectant method is available and extended use is absolutely necessary. as mentioned earlier, covid-19 is a global pandemic which affects numerous countries with undoubtedly limited opportunities for high-tech mask/ppe disinfection and recycling technologies. we envisage simple disinfectant solutions and hand-held misters that are widely available. we also recognize that these may already exist and are likely used subject to existing experience and improvisation skills in local health services and communities. they may not offer comprehensive, i.e. deep disinfection of the mask, but can certainly address surface contamination and assist with repetitive handling.simple compounds with known anti-viral disinfectant properties are ionic surfactants, benzalkonium chloride, chlorhexidine gluconate or povidone-iodine and similar [10, 35, 47] . such substances are used in many products, for example disodium edta is added to freely available contact lens solutions, stearylkonium chloride is in hair conditioner, and chlorhexidine gluconate is an ingredient in mouthwash to treat gingivitis or periodontal disease. they were more widely available in the past before they have attracted additional fda scrutiny recently with ongoing reviews of over-the-counter antiseptic active ingredients [35] , however such compounds are recognized as the key ingredients in many anti-viral formulations [47] . ionic species and substances with strong hydrogen bonding are expected to disrupt the viral packaging layer or 'docking' surfaces described as trimeric spike glycoproteins [48] . from an alternative point of view, tea tree oil for example has also been reported as having good antiviral properties when applied on surfaces [34] , or citric acid which has strong ionic features in the low ph range that is regarded as anti-viral [10] . our intent here is not to specify the exact anti-viral properties and individual pro/cons of specific disinfectants, but rather to show how such active compounds could be easily applied in an improvised manner and whether they can remain on surfaces as very thin layers. atr infrared absorption spectroscopy as a surface sensitive technique is ideally suited to quickly explore the relative volatility and continued presence of any deposited compounds.we used a commercially available disinfectant spray and prepared a few representative solutions of anti-viral/disinfectant compounds dissolved in 70 vol% isopropanol for a simple screening study. a high fraction of isopropanol has two advantages, namely momentary disinfection behavior, but also a low solution viscosity which aids the generation of a fine mist. this is more difficult to generate from solutions that are richer in water resulting in larger droplets and more heterogeneous surface coatings. we evaluated the following solutions involving surfactants, commercial disinfectants, essential oils, or other ingredients that may have anti-viral properties such as edta or copper sulfate. povidone iodine may also be effective, but it was not obtained for the current study:• commercial lysol spray, ethanol 58% with alkyl (50% c 14 , 40% c 12 , 10% c 16 ) dimethyl benzyl ammonium saccharinate 0.1% as active compound • 70ml isopropanol and 30 ml di water, with added 25 ml pine-sol multi surface cleaner • 70ml isopropanol and 30 ml di water, with added 3 wt% citric acid and 1 wt% mild liquid hand soap (a small amount of soap was added to prevent crystallization of the citric acid after isopropanol/h 2 o evaporation • 70ml isopropanol and 30 ml di water, with added 1 wt% disodium edta and 1 wt% benzalkonium chloride and 1wt% chlorhexidine gluconate. this solution does not mix well, there is some colloidal precipitation, hence it needed to be shaken well before its application • 70ml isopropanol and 30 ml di water, with added 3 wt% tea tree oil (this compound was found to be quite volatile) • 70ml isopropanol and 30 ml di water, with added 3 wt% limonene (this compound was also quite volatile) • notes on solubility: edta is not easily soluble in 70/ 30 these solutions were deposited with two short squirts from a small hand held spray bottle at distances of 20-30 cm. spectral acquisition was started and monitored over 24 h at 25 and 37°c. the isopropanol carrier evaporated quickly leaving a thin film of the remaining active substance on the atr crystal.after a thin film of the alcohol/disinfectant solution was deposited on the atr crystal, the immediate spectral changes showed the rapid loss of isopropanol and water, usually on the order of 10 minutes at 25 and 3 minutes at 37°c. for the commercial disinfectant spray there was evidence of the active compound (quaternary ammonium saccharinate) remaining for a few hours at 25°c, but quickly disappearing at 37°c (fig. 10) . the residue of a commercial disinfectant cleaner product (pine-sol, mostly surfactant in water) easily remained on the crystal surface for 24 h at both temperatures (fig. 11 ). in contrast, despite its attractive smell and anti-viral properties [34] , tea tree oil dissolved in the alcohol/water mix quickly disappeared within 1 h at 25°c (fig. 12) . tea tree oil might be helpful for short-term disinfection, but clearly will not remain sufficiently on surfaces. a similar disadvantageous volatility was observed for limonene as the active compound. citric acid in combination with some small amount of surfactant, however, forms a persistent film within 10 minutes (sufficient time for complete solvent carrier evaporation) that does not display any further spectral changes (fig. 13 ). this is an example for excellent surface retention if such a deposited film is not touched after deposition. commercial disinfectants in 1% individual concentration applied here as a screening mixture of benzalkonium chloride, edta, and chlorhexidine gluconate forms a similarly stable film deposit (fig.14) . for visualization purposes only, a micrometer-sized thin film on a reflective bench top is shown in fig. 15 for the citric acid spray-on solution. this deposit is non-toxic and easily cleaned up. subject to proving that such very small amounts of residue will not interfere with the filtration efficiency of a mask, we suggest further evaluation of such simple disinfectant sprays for mask refreshing and extended wear options. basic disinfection solutions are easily improvised as well and hence widely available. of course, any choice for a specific solution and active constituent will need to be assessed on its own specific merits, with disinfection efficiency and filtration function to be evaluated. we wish to emphasize that surface retention is equally important and that relatively non-toxic disinfectant compounds are also available. considering the global impact of the covid-19 pandemic we also have to consider that stateof-the-art disinfection and reuse approaches may not be available everywhere. options such as hydrogen peroxide vapor exposure, irradiation, or basic thermal conditioning on a large scale may not exist for some countries. in such situations improvised approaches for the reuse of ppe and masks may be limited to visual inspection, perhaps cosmetic cleaning or no more than the application of small amounts of disinfectant sprays. as mentioned earlier deep soaking with isopropanol or similar, or actual washing of these masks is strongly discouraged as it negatively affects the electret filter layers [17] and is hence expected to reduce particulate filtering performance. but what about applying a minimal surface treatment to enable a momentary 'refreshing' of the external surface with disinfectant? as we showed above, isopropanol/water could act as a suitable carrier for common disinfectant additives and surfactants. in comparison, tea tree oil spray induced a thin surface deposit that is surprisingly evaporative. nevertheless, it would also have some residence time on the mask surface and aid in temporary surface disinfection, perhaps even via some penetration of vapors into the filter layers.we do not wish to recommend a particular formulation approach or comment on the exact effectiveness of individual compounds for their viral deactivation yields on mask surfaces and its substructure, other than that known disinfectants can be applied on the outer surface and are expected to have some benefit. our focus is on the technical feasibility of spray-on coatings using non-aggressive ingredients with established anti-viral properties. at the same time, we also believe that many options exist for suitable disinfectants combined with some surfactant in alcohol/water solution. we note that in related internal snl efforts for the cleaning and disinfection of hard surfaces, a combination of a 3% commercial all purpose surface cleaner (pine-sol) with only 0.3% benzalkonium chloride in water showed excellent kill efficiency for ms2 viral simulant in solution plating with a log reduction greater than 5 (< 10 ppm residual). traditional large surface cleaning is expected to be safer when it is only water based (less alcohol vapor exposure), but for the spraying of masks the isopropanol contribution generates a finer mist, meaning there is some additional advantage besides alcohol/isopropanol also offering some immediate contact virus kill efficacy. further, viral deactivation in solution is likely more effective than on dried surfaces which have a disinfectant deposit. hence, we explored spraying slightly higher concentrations than would be needed for cleaning/disinfectant solutions, with the discussion below showing some examples for this approach.we showed the surface retention of disinfectants on the atr crystal earlier, which was achieved with no more than two gentle squirts from a small hand-held sprayer. we added a tiny amount (droplet) of red food dye solution to our 'disinfectant solution' for the purpose of visualizing the spray deposits on masks. with a low-cost 50 ml fine-mist sprayer we were able to achieve a homogenous surface layer. solutions were prepared using 70/30 vol% isopropanol/water as a carrier with added active ingredients to enable a simple screening of how disinfectants could be deposited. a 3m aura 1870+ n95 mask was coated with a weak solution containing 3% citric acid and 1% liquid hand soap resulting in homogeneous coverage (fig.16) . the halyard mask was sprayed with added 25 % of a commercial cleaner (pine-sol having a non-ionic surfactant ingredient) as shown in fig. 17 , and the kimberly clark mask with a solution containing 1% pine-sol and 1% benzalkonium chloride (a rudimentary solution having a trace of surfactant and a known relatively easily available and low risk disinfectant). a 3m 1860 mask was coated with an addition of 1% benzalkonium chloride, 1% chlorohexidine gluconate and 1% disodium edta (the intent here being for basic ionic activity) for demonstration purposes only. in all cases, a thin coating could be easily applied. commercial sprayers with enhanced atomization features could of course more easily apply thin coatings on multiple masks in parallel.in situations when chemical based disinfectants may not be available at all, then the most basic approach could be a gentle exposure of the mask surface to some weak spray of isopropanol/water or similar as a carrier with some added surfactant as active ingredient. this is based on reports that even hand soap has some anti-viral properties [10] , as shown in fig. 17 . of course we recognize that meaningful disinfection in this case is likely not guaranteed, but a spray-on approach of this nature would at least assist the mask user to minimize surface contamination from repetitive handling and surface resident viral exposure. the filtration efficiencies of thermally aged and gently coated masks were characterized to assess if a discernible difference could be observed when compared against untreated n95 masks. a r&d filtration system at sandia national laboratories was used to quantify the efficiencies of kimberly-clark and halyard type masks as a function of particle size. the system simulates, where possible, the parameters defined by the national institute for occupational safety and health (niosh) for certification of filter materials for n95 respirators (niosh 2019) [49] . a detailed description of the system, instrumentation used, and methodology implemented, may be found in the relevant system description [50] .full mask geometries were mounted onto custom filter holders and inserted into the test section of the system. a polydisperse nacl test aerosol was used, and measurements upstream and downstream of the test articles were taken with a tsi scanning mobility particle sizer spectrometer (smps) 3938. each respirator was tested at two filter-face velocities as suggested for the evaluation of the filtration performance of cloth masks and common fabric materials [51] , which were derived from the lower and upper flow rates defined in the niosh standard. triplicate measurements were conducted for each test configuration. the filtration efficiency at each particle size measured was computed from the difference in aerosol concentration upstream and downstream of the test article. care was taken to ensure only statistically significant data are reported. uncertainties in these measurements were propagated accordingly through all calculations.the relative filtration performance of masks was examined in the 10 to 400 nm range, i.e. a particle size range that is very important to be effectively filtered out, by comparing the performance of treated specimens to a non-treated reference mask. the data for low and high flow conditions for the kimberly clark mask when treated at 80°c for 24h and sprayed with a 1% pine-sol and 1% benzalkonium chloride (70/30 isopropanol/water) solution are shown in fig. 18 . clearly there has been little effect of the two treatments, although there is some scatter in the data subject to the limited mask availability and our inability to test multiple face masks. we expect some underlying mask to mask variation anyhow, subject to different batches, perhaps handling during acquisition, or their relative age as well. also, while identical in appearance, these kimberly clark models were also provided with different branding depending on suppliers (i.e. one mask had an additional technol stamp on its rear surface). a comparison, again for low and high flow rate conditions, for the halyard mask is shown in fig.  19 . this mask type has intrinsically less scatter and despite the spray-on coating being generously applied (see fig. 17 ), evidence is that neither the disinfectant spray nor the thermal exposure at both 80 and 95°c had any measurable consequences on filtration performance.an additional filter efficiency study was conducted on a separate filter penetration test-bed (fpt) located at snl. as with the aforementioned system, this test-bed was also designed to follow, where possible, niosh guidelines for n95 respirator material testing. the fpt differs from the prior system in that it size-selects a mono-disperse nacl aerosol by utilizing a tsi 8020 electrostatic classifier and tsi 3081l differential mobility analyzer (dma) upstream from a 47 mm stainless filter housing. niosh guidance describes an aerosol with a particle size median diameter of 0.075 ± 0.020 μm with a geometric standard deviation not exceeding 1.86, which the fpt system verified. however, it is worth mentioning that the monodisperse aerosol does not capture the fda recommended mass median particle diameter of 0.3 μm. additionally, the filter housing diameter used by the fpt is smaller than the mounts used by tsi 8130 (120mm). therefore, flow rates were adjusted according to equivalent filter face velocities, so the filter housing geometry was mitigated. finally, in order to calculate filter efficiency, concentration was compared upstream and downstream of the filter material tested by a tsi 8022 condensation particle counter (cpc). five tests upstream and downstream were conducted with one minute intervals. mask performance tests yielding relative filtration efficiency are reported below, as summarized in table 2 , for two n95 face mask types (the 1860 and aura 1870+ from 3m) under multiple exposure conditions. once again, the results show that the disinfectant spray or the thermal exposure at both 80 and 95°c had no measurable consequences on filtration performance. we have focused on two directions to enable the extended use of ppe face masks. one avenue that has also been recognized by others (see recent literature) is the use of thermal exposure for mask disinfection in the 75°c range, subject to confirmation of the most suitable times and temperatures by our bio-medical colleagues. another strategy, particularly if local resources are limited and institutional large scale mask treatment approaches are not available, the subtle spraying of a mask's surface with a weak disinfectant solution might be an improvised option to enable some topical disinfection, or at least a refreshing of surfaces that are often touched and could be contaminated.from a material's performance point of view only a few minor issues during thermal exposure were observed. some masks showed warping and the beginning of material weaknesses, but most importantly no significant negative impact on filtration performance was observed due to thermal conditioning for no more than 24 h at 80 or 95°c. similarly, filtration performance was maintained despite the application of a spray-on coating on mask surfaces. there is good confidence for the feasibility of some repetitive thermal reconditioning steps, considering that the tested masks mostly withstood temperature and times higher than currently discussed for virus kill requirements.dilute and gentle spray-on alcohol-based solutions containing low risk non-toxic disinfectants, perhaps improvised due to lack of local availability of ingredients and when applied to the top surface only (i.e. avoid soaking), may complement the now ubiquitous custom-made face masks with their often unknown filtration effectiveness. similarly, this might be a viable option for any masks and other ppes to offer quick additional anti-viral properties or short term refreshing. we do not recommend a particular disinfectant formulation, but rather introduce the current concept, and wish to emphasize that specific viral kill efficacy of any disinfectant on mask surfaces has not yet been determined. we have, however, demonstrated that known low toxicity disinfectants can be applied to masks without affecting filtration and structural characteristics, and that benzalkonium chloride (still on the approved list for hand sanitizer [35] ) with surfactant in solution is effective against ms2 viral simulant, which corroborates disinfectant efficacy against covid-19 [10] . further, we have not addressed any inhalation risk, which due to the nature of needing some disinfectant cannot be zero. gentle spraying deposits collectively ~100 mg (for two sprays) of material on the mask surface, which for example with 1% active content means roughly 1 mg disinfectant mixed with some surfactant could be amorphously adhered to the outer mask surface. the risk of exposure to such quantities cannot be eliminated, but will have to be balanced against the needs to improve mask availability, longevity and anti-viral efficacy in the context of other options perhaps not being available. as with many other aspects of this pandemic, careful and informed compromises with of course individual preferences (including disinfectant choice) need to be pursued, as there are no perfect and zero risk solutions.our results on thermal and spray-on approaches represent some forward looking opinions that should not be misinterpreted. any use of thermal and spray-on disinfection on masks should be considered within the additional risks seen in the use of chemical disinfectants and mask fitting behavior after thermal reconditioning. further, a surface spraying is not expected to kill any virus particulates trapped within the interior filter layers. nevertheless, commercial masks embrace similar filter materials and design principles. hence any conclusions on their reuse and filter performance are likely to be more broadly applicable. however, continued good mask fits and general cleanliness are also important for extended use.these are subjective and personal opinions of researchers in the polymer materials reliability and bio-medical field in the context of the current global covid-19 pandemic only. there is no intent to challenge existing guidelines for ppe/mask use policies or give any preference to ppe/mask manufacturers and any specific technologies that may already exist or are under development. due to time constraints driven by the urgency of the covid-19 situation, these screening studies should not be considered as comprehensive evaluations with any implied recommendations and guidance outside the scope of these efforts. the parallel work of other researchers is expected to complement our understanding of mask and ppe performance. collectively this will guide us towards viable methods and approaches for mask/ppe reuse and additional application options. snl and qut do not endorse specific mask disinfection approaches; we only wish to report on their thermal responses. medical experts and virologists will have to make decisions based on covid-19 deactivation properties for suitable time and temperatures to enable mask and other ppe reconditioning.nuclear security administration under contract de-na-0003525. any subjective views or opinions that might be expressed above do not necessarily represent the views of the u.s. department of energy or the united states government.the new coronavirus, called 2019-ncov, is a new type of virus that was first identified in wuhan, china, in december 2019 (ghinai et al. 2020) . the 2019-ncov is from same family as severe acute respiratory syndrome (sars), communityacquired pneumonia (cap), and other common colds. the 2019-ncov is a relatively large virus with a size of about 1-2 nm and is from a group of enveloped virus family, containing a positive-sense single-stranded rna (fehr and perlman 2015; ebrahimi et al. 2020) . the virus is transmitted through direct contact with infected person's respiratory droplets (coughing and sneezing), as well as contact with infected surfaces. the 2019-ncov can survive for hours on surfaces, but a simple disinfectant can eliminate it (lai et al. 2020a ). covid-19 signs and symptoms include fever, cough, and shortness of breath. in more severe cases, the infection can lead to pneumonia or respiratory severe problems, and ultimately in rare cases, the disease will be fatal (huang et al. 2020a ).in the absence of a safe and effective vaccine, as well as a lack of specific drug treatment, the only solution is preventing its transmission, performing general education, and implementing appropriate prevention and control. precautions can help people prevent risk of infection, such as washing hands frequently with soap and water or an alcohol-based disinfectant gel, covering mouth with your bent napkin or elbow when sneezing or coughing, avoiding close contact with those who have symptoms, and being sure to see a doctor if have a fever, cough, or difficulty breathing (haybar et al. 2020) . the virus transfers through direct and close contact with respiratory droplets of the affected person (cough or sneeze) or contact with contaminated surfaces (ghinai et al. 2020; yu et al. 2020) , and it can survive for hours on surfaces, but a pure disinfectant can eliminate it.the covid-19 survival in the environment and its prevention and control common coronavirus viruses spread through respiratory and gastrointestinal tracts, and nose and mouth are their two main entry routes (fig. 1) . in vulnerable and susceptible individuals, these viruses often cause only common cold that usually recovers spontaneously and has no serious side effects. however, viruses such as sars, middle east respiratory syndrome-related coronavirus (mers), or 2019-ncov can cause an acute and lethal form of pneumonia or gastritis. the risk of environmental contamination by these three types of viruses is far greater than the other viruses . the outflow and spread of the virus from the body occur within about 6 days after infection and reaches its maximum 4 days later (jiang et al. 2020; nishiura et al. 2020 ). the environmental conditions necessary for the survival and spread of 2019-ncov are somewhat clear, but unlike animal coronaviruses, there is less and limited knowledge about the natural causes of 2019-ncov transmission (kamel boulos and geraghty 2020; khafaie and rahim 2020a) . although several studies on sars-cov have already been conducted, a limited number of studies have shown that humidity and temperature probably affect the activity and transmissibility of the 2019-ncov (table 1) . as simply can see in the table, most of the studies reported that temperature and relative humidity could have a significant impact on the incidence rate and transmission of sars-cov2.epidemiologic and field studies show that 2019-ncov, just similar to sars and mers, is spread through fine-grained particles (such as particles sneezing out of the mouth) (yu et al. 2020; schwartz and graham 2020) . in only a single old study (tang 2009 ), the survival of the airborne human coronavirus 229e (hcv/229e), a virus used in research as a representative or surrogate of coronary respiratory viruses, was studied under different temperature and relative humidity conditions. the study showed that under such conditions, the virus has a half-life of 27 and 67 h at 30% and 50% humidity, respectively, while its half-life at 80% humidity is only 3 h. when the temperature drops as 6 degrees, the virus's half-life is increased 3 h at 80% humidity. similar conditions and consequences have been reported for seasonal flu (lowen and steel 2014) . this severe effect of lowering the temperature on prolonging the virus's half-life at high humidity could help the 2019-ncov spread under these conditions. in spite of several clinical studies that claimed that spreading the virus into droplets can be prevented using appropriate masks, it is fig. 1 the importance of social distancing, close contact, particle size, percent of virus particle deposit in various regions of the upper airway, and the effect of humidity and temperature on the 2019-ncov activity challenging to prevent it from spreading into aerosol forms, as well as the type of mask makes no significant difference (long et al. 2020; wang et al. 2020b) . subsequent studies showed that viruses that had become airborne aerosols and spread through defective sewage were the possible cause of the sars coronavirus that killed lots of people in hong kong in 2003 (yu et al. 2004 ). in the same year, only one incident in sars contaminated 22 out of 120 passengers on a 3-h flight (olsen et al. 2003) . surprisingly, the contamination included people who were outside the person's 2-m distance, and viruses could not be transmitted to them through aerosols and droplets (la rosa et al. 2013) . although it is difficult to prove that the virus has spread only through aerosols and droplets, the relatively low humidity of the aircraft has undoubtedly contributed to the higher survival of the sars virus in the particles. but a later study did not observe that transmission of sars-associated coronavirus and suggested that the risk of transmission is not amplified aboard aircraft (vogt et al. 2006) . a research report from canada points to the fact that open oxygen masks can help to spread disease agents such as sars, in fact, viruses such as sars are transmitted through the droplets emitted from these masks (somogyi et al. 2004) . air exhaled through the oxygen masks transmits viruses in the droplets farther away, increasing the risk of the respiratory disease spreading to health facilities. further research is needed to fully determine that the sars virus and similar viruses can survive and stay live and spreadable in the warm and humid environment of oxygenated air.research findings on the impact of humidity and temperature on the survival of the virus in airborne particulate matter indicate contrary to that. li et al. conducted a comprehensive study on the spread of the sars virus at the hong kong hospital and found evidence of the transmission of the virus aerosols. they also suggested improving the air conditioning or ventilation system to reduce the risk of spreading such diseases . the 2019-ncov is claimed does not survive at temperatures above 26°c, but it can survive for approximately 5-10 min on the skin, 6 to 12 h on plastic materials, and 12 h on metal (fig. 2 ).because safety and ethical considerations do not allow the covid-19 infection test on the human specimen, researchers used human coronavirus, 229e (hcov-229e), as a surrogate to study the survival of the coronavirus on human hands. initial findings from these tests show that about 45% of hand-infected viruses survive and remain viable after 1 h (warnes et al. 2015) . such a survival time is much longer than other viruses, such as the para-influenza virus type 3, which disappears after only 10 min. in another study, researchers used human fingers to show that by washing only with water, the concentration of hcov-229e was reduced by 70%; however, with the use of hand-sanitized alcoholic disinfectants, the concentration of this virus decreased by 99.99% within 30 s (geller et al. 2012) . this study highlights the importance of effective hygiene and disinfection preventing and controlling of infectious diseases caused by coronavirus family.there is no evidence that corona is transmitted through food or drinking water and recreational water. one study shows that sars in the water can survive to a very limited degree (wang et al. 2005) .coronavirus is more stable and more resistant to environmental surfaces than other coated viruses (warnes et al. 2015; otter et al. 2016) . recently, molecular methods such as pcr have been studied for the transmission of pathogens to the environmental surfaces of aircraft (maris 1990 ). however, the detection of pathogenic viruses in environmental samples seems to be necessary to assess their potential ability to infect and spread the disease. mathematical simulations also confirm the fact that environmental levels play an essential role in the spread of coronavirus in health facilities (ikonen et al. 2018 ).three-level biosafety has been suggested for protectivity: (1) level 1 protection (disposable hats, disposable surgical masks, disposable isolation clothing, and disposable gloves) (wang et al. 2020c) ; (2) level 2 protection (level 1 but with medical protective masks such as n95, goggles or protective masks, and as outer cover a medical protective suit); (3) level 3 protection (level 2 but with the addition of face mask or a medical mask, goggles, or face mask to a full set or with an electric air filter respirator) (pei et al. 2020) .wearing a face mask is suggested for healthcare workers and people who have respiratory symptoms, but is not recommended for healthy people (organization wh 2020a). nonmedical masks made of other materials such as cotton fabric has not been well evaluated (esposito and principi 2020) .scientific research to date on the covid-19 has yielded no conclusions that the covid-19 outbreak will decline with the start of the warm season. many researchers have said it is too early to predict whether the covid-19 will decrease as the season progresses (mahase 2020) . studies have hypothesized that areas where covid-19 has suffered the most have similar weather patterns . countries located in the east and west of the globe did not have a significant impact on the prevalence of the disease among communities, and on the other hand, the north and south have provided a model for the relative prediction of disease outbreaks (gates 2020) , but now scenario has changed, and countries located on east and west of globes (usa & japan) have already declared emergency, and this statement was in contradiction with reality. also, it is estimated that this disease will reach saturation in the usa in july 2020 (arias velásquez and mejía lara 2020), and outbreak of covid-19 significantly correlated with average temperature, minimum temperature, and air quality (bashir and ma 2020) .there are striking similarities between average wuhan city air temperature in january (time of outbreak here) and other polluted places in february, as well as their humidity (vetter et al. 2020) . the temperature at meteorological stations in these areas between 4 and 9°c and in cities due to urban factors has been slightly above and between 5 and 11°c (sajadi et al. 2020b) . it can also be predicted that with the onset of summer in northern hemisphere of the covid-19, it may be slightly influenza-like in the tropics and spread simultaneously in the southern hemisphere (anderson et al. 2020 ).in addition to known factors influencing the transmission of viruses, such as population displacement and human-to-human contact, environmental factors can affect transmission of droplets and the virus's survival, but for covid-19 disease, the evidence is still very limited. absolute humidity, which is defined as water in the ambient air, is considered a robust environmental factor for virus transmission (huang et al. 2020b; oliveiros et al. 2020; islam et al. 2020; qi et al. 2020; berumen et al. 2020; guo et al. 2020; barreca and shimshack 2012) . in examining the relationship between climate and sars-cov-2, it is important to note that different regions of the world, which have had a high prevalence in recent weeks, have had different climates; also, no significant relationship has been found so far (sajadi et al. 2020b ) ( table 1 ). in analysis of regional regression, countries affected by high prevalence of disease are divided into different regions, and in these regions, climate will be examined and recorded in several changes. then, for first period, from first day of outbreak to day of study, regression of daily aggregate growth against average temperature and relative humidity will be taken (bukhari and jameel 2020b) . in this model, we try to control variables such as population and gdp (table 1) . however, temperature was not associated with epidemic growth of covid-19 and case counts (zhu and xie 2020).in a study by wang et al., the effect of air temperature and relative humidity on the transmission of 2019-ncov from 105 samples of viruses carrying infected and contaminated pairs calculated the number of daily virus production per 100 chinese cities with more than 40 confirmed cases. they reported that high temperatures and high humidity significantly reduced transmission of virus, respectively. also, 1°c significantly reduces temperature increase and 1% decrease in relative humidity of daily virus production. previous studies have shown that high temperature and humidity reduce the transmission of influenza and sars, which is consistent with wang et al.'s study. this study showed that the arrival of summer and rain in the northern hemisphere might effectively reduce 2019-ncov transmission .in a study by lou et al., they looked at the number of covid-19 reproductions across china's provinces and found that rising temperatures and humidity necessitated the arrival of spring and summer in the northern hemisphere alone without extensive public health interventions. it does not reduce the number of viruses . therefore, it is important to understand the impact of environmental factors on the increasing prevalence of covid-19 to support disease control decisions . it is especially important in areas with high temperatures and humidity, where the risk of transmission is minimized ). distribution of significant disease prevalence in the community at limited latitude and longitude, temperature, and humidity is consistent with the behavior of seasonal respiratory viruses. due to the fact that temperature and humidity are known factors in the survival of sars-cov, mers-cov, and influenza (chan et al. 2011) , the prevalence of covid-19 in long periods of time has occurred at certain levels of temperature so that conditions of prolonged exposure to this temperature range increase the risk of disease outbreak (rahman et al. 2020b ). in addition to prolonging half-life and survival of virus, other possible mechanisms related to temperature and humidity, including droplet stabilization and increased virus spread in the nasal mucosa, like other respiratory viruses, are further evidence that these two factors affect 2019-ncov (schaffer et al. 1976; shirbandi et al. 2020) . it is important to note that although colder areas are relatively free of 2019-ncov, they can affect the survival of the virus due to the low freezing cycle (lamarre and talbot 1989) . the researchers also found that low humidity was a factor in transmission of influenza in laboratory and onset of seasonal flu (lowen et al. 2007; shaman et al. 2009 ).many researchers and politicians have suggested that the covid-19 disease will go away on its own in warmer weather in the coming months in the northern hemisphere (roy 2020) . some have even said that the sars experience in 2003 is an evidence of this claim. what can now be said in response to this claim based on existing studies is that it is possible to reduce the transmission of 2019-ncov in hot and humid weather with the closure of gathering centers such as schools and universities, but it is not logical because these reductions do not occur alone or without any effective public health-related intervention. it should be noted that even sars does not disappear for natural reasons, but does not survive due to very severe public health interventions. these include isolating and quarantining infected people and people in contact with them, social distancing, and other targeted actions.therefore, it can be concluded that in case of 2019-ncov, it is expected that, like other beta-coronaviruses, virus may be slightly more effective at low temperatures, such as in winter, although the underlying mechanism is not well-known. therefore, the size of this change in transmission and pathogenicity of the virus is expected to be moderate and will not stop by itself. comparing to the pandemic, the 2019-ncov is expected to be less immune to humans and even easily transmitted outside the cold season. changing seasons and closing down gathering centers such as schools and universities may help, but it is unlikely to stop the transmission of the virus. to make effective policy, it is necessary to determine whether the closure of gathering centers such as schools and universities may help to reduce the rate of transfer effectively, in which if it would not be effective, the resources are wasted during such closures. for example, recent evidence suggests that children may be as susceptible as adults (bi et al. 2020) , so the critical question is whether the virus is easily transmitted under different temperature and humidity conditions. finally, except for a limited number of articles. it is currently being published and shows that there is no conflict in the results regarding the effect of these two variables on the survival and transmission of the virus.coated viruses such as influenza virus and coronavirus are much more vulnerable to disinfectant chemicals than other viruses such as noroviruses. even before detection of sars virus, disinfectants have been tested against other human and animal-infected coronaviruses. a comparative study shows that disinfectants needed to kill non-coated parvovirus are 20 to 500 times denser than disinfectants needed to kill coronavirus (maris 1990; lai et al. 2020b; organization wh 2020b) . the resistance of hcov-229e against disinfectants has been compared with the coxsackievirus, adenovirus type 2, and influenza virus type 3 using the quantitative laboratory method, which showed that coronavirus is much more vulnerable to disinfectant chemicals than two other uninfected viruses (maris 1990 ).the more practical and quantitative method of qct-2 showed that ethanol could kill 99.9% of hcov-229e (policy et al. n.d.) . other studies showed that alcohol-based mixture such as lozenge that contains amyl meta-cresol and dichlorobenzene alcohol could have direct and significant effects in reducing the infectivity of severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus (sars-cov) (oxford et al. 2005; morokutti-kurz et al. 2017) . another research evaluated the impact of alcohol-based hand sanitizer on positive cases of mers-cov and showed that using this mixture had a significant increase in the utilized amount of virus, as well as hand hygiene compliance rates increased to 88% (al-tawfiq et al. 2019).formaldehyde 4% is used as a complete sterilizer and disinfectant. however, for safety reasons, its use as a regular disinfectant is not recommended. this disinfectant can kill the tgv virus in 99.999% in 5 min, and a 2% solution can kill more than 99.9% of hcov-229e (sattar et al. 1989 ).phenolic-based ingredients have a long history of using coal tar soap with creosol. although some disinfectants use the same historically active chemical, changes in creosol have been made to make them more effective against germs. for example, o-phenyl phenol with a concentration of 200 ppm is quite effective against coronavirus (sattar et al. 1989 ). however, adding detergent or ethanol can increase its effectiveness and eliminate 99.9% of the hcov-229e within 5 min. similarly, chemicals made from phenolics need other helpers to be effective (shah et al. 2020 ).many studies were ongoing (according to clinicaltrials.gov database). according to this database, bacillus calmette-guérin (bcg) vaccine, which primarily used against tuberculosis (tb), will be intervening. other vaccines such as inactivated sars-cov-2 vaccine, lv-smenp-dc vaccine, measles-mumps-rubella vaccine, autologous dendritic cells loaded with sars-cov-2 antigens (av-covid-19), chadox1 ncov-19, angiotensin-converting enzyme (ace) inhibitors or angiotensin ii receptor blocker (arb), igm and igg antibodies, vpm1002 (development of the bcg vaccine) , and adoptive cellular transfer (act) are ongoing. there are no food and drug administration (fda)-approved vaccines to prevent or trial covid-19. however, fda issued emergency use authorization (eua) for emergency use of remdesivir for the treatment of hospitalized covid-19 patients (grein et al. 2020 ).the scientific evidence in this review article suggests that the spread of 2019-ncov may be influenced by climatic variables such as temperature and humidity. apparently, warm, humid weather may indicate less transmission of the 2019-ncov.considering the topic that seems to impose both the positive and negative data on the possible effect of environmental factors, especially humidity and temperature on the stability and transmissibility of the 2019-ncov, almost all available evidence revealed the possible positive effect.countries located in the east and west of the globe did not have a significant impact on the prevalence of the disease among communities, and on the other hand, the north and south have provided a model for the relative prediction of disease outbreaks (gates 2020) . the government and public health organizations can take steps to reduce the rate of covid-19 transmission in the future. for example, in addition to helping their people, leading countries can help low-and middleincome countries (lmics) prepare for the epidemic and most effectively fight against the disease (khadka et al. 2020) .many lmic health systems are now vulnerable, and a pathogen such as covid-19 can quickly lead to serious problems and challenges and eventually collapse of healthcare system. given the natural inclination of richer countries to give priority to their own people over other countries, this has led to a political and economic leverage in poor countries. pioneer countries can save the lives of their own people by slowing the global transmission of the covid-19 by helping to prepare african and south asian countries to fight the disease (gates 2020) .helping lmic is essential to strengthening the primary care system with the infrastructure to fight epidemics. welltrained healthcare workers not only provide vaccines but also monitor disease patterns as part of early warning systems that warn the world of a possible outbreak. given the limited testing capacity in african countries, the numbers of confirmed cases of covid-19 may greatly underestimate the true burden, although there was little evidence of unexplained outbreaks of the virus. at face value, the figures suggest that an african continent people had suffered fewer covid-19 deaths than the top list countries such as usa, russia, and uk (zhao et al. 2020b; khafaie and rahim 2020b) .according to epidemiologists, 2019-ncov is not among the thermophile viruses, so it will become inactive once the cold season begins. however, others suggested that 2019-ncov disappears at 30°c, which is a misconception about the virus. it is also reported in the multimedia that it is better to use fried food to eliminate covid-19, while the virus is coldfriendly and will survive longer with lower temperatures. based on the results of new studies on the 2019-ncov, the virus can survive on the surface for 4 to 28 days, but if the temperature drops to less than 30 to 40°c, the life span of the virus will be reduced rather than eliminated (casanova et al. 2010) . some scholars think that if the temperature reaches 30°c, the virus will not survive, which is a misconception, because at this temperature, the virus's survival will reduce and does not mean that the virus will completely eliminate . since the bats' body temperature is 48°c, so the 2019-ncov has nothing to do with these creatures (levesque et al. 2016) . the virus is also sensitive to humidity in addition to temperature; therefore, sars coronavirus and possibly 2019-ncov have a longer life span of 50% than 30% humidity (chan et al. 2011 ). according to published data, the human coronavirus can survive at temperatures of 20°c for up to 9 days, and if the temperature rises to more than 30°c, it perhaps decreases 2019-ncov viability, but the lower the temperature is associated with the more virus activity, in such a way that it can continue its activity for up to 28 days (casanova et al. 2010) . thus, the most effective way to reduce the activity of this virus is to use disinfectants such as ethanol 70%. these types of substances can kill the virus within a short minute.currently, in a modeling study, using the classification of covid-19 confirmed cases was investigated as one of the epidemic diseases. consequentially, the average daily temperature and relative humidity of hubei province in china and the number of covid-19 confirmed cases were selected. they demonstrated that the relative humidity and the maximum daily temperature had the highest impact on the confirmed cases. the daily temperature and relative humidity affected 2019-ncov positively, and extreme daily temperature, with an average of 15.4°c, affected this virus negatively (pirouz et al. 2020) . recently, a published evidence reports that 2019-ncov significantly contaminates air, surface environment, and protective equipment by droplets of an infected person, meaning that environment is an important issue to consider because it is a potential medium of transmission; thus, it is necessary for strict adherence to environmental and personal protection and hygiene, as well as social distancing (ong et al. 2020 ).we are poorly aware of their survival in the environment and the precise factors of their transmission. however, limited studies in this field show that 2019-ncov is more resistant to environmental factors than other coated viruses. the environmental conditions necessary for the survival and spread of 2019-ncov are somewhat clear, but unlike animal coronaviruses. the effect of humidity and temperature on the 2019-ncov activity is controversial. researchers in the field of epidemiologists believe that the 2019-ncov is not a thermophilic virus, so it will be activated with the onset of the cold season.according to published data, human coronavirus can survive for up to 9 days at 25°c, and if this temperature rises to 30°c, its lifespan will be shorter. the 2019-ncov is sensitive to humidity, and the lifespan of viruses in 50% humidity is longer than that of 30%. also, temperature and humidity are important factors influencing the covid-19 mortality rate and may facilitate 2019-ncov transmission. seasonal factors are recognized to play an essential role in the transmission of viruses responsible for various respiratory diseases. besides, most of these diseases reach epidemic proportions and key outbreak during winter. recently, researchers claimed that the two main causes contribute to the description of any association between viral outbreak and the seasonal factors, including changes in environmental parameters and human behavior. specifically, changes in temperature and humidity disturb the viral stability and transmissibility. thus, considering the recent and available evidence, it seems that low temperature, as well as dry and unventilated air, may affect the stability and transmissibility of the 2019-ncov.conflict of interest the authors declare that they have no conflict of interest.viral transmissions and infections have posed severe threats to human health and well-being throughout history, and have led to widespread socioeconomic disruptions. during the 2014 ebola pandemic in west africa, the gross domestic product (gdp) growth of liberia, one of the worst-affected countries, fell from 8.7% in 2013 to just 0.7% in 2014. 1 bolstered by the close-knit global connectivity we enjoy today, the threat of a global virus pandemic is greater now than any other time in human history, as viruses can spread across the globe at unprecedented rates. even a century ago in 1918, the "spanish influenza" pandemic caused a worldwide healthcare catastrophe, with more than 50 million deaths and 500 million infections. 2 a similar pandemic today will undoubtedly result in even more disastrous outcomes. 3 at the time of writing in early april 2020, the novel coronavirus causing covid-19 (sars-cov-2, or formerly known as hcov- 19) , which was first reported by china in late 2019, has resulted in more than a million confirmed cases of infections and almost 57,000 fatalities worldwide. 4 this is the largest coronavirus outbreak in human populations within the first 20 years of the 21st century, occurring on a larger scale than the earlier outbreaks of severe acute respiratory syndrome (sars) and middle east respiratory syndrome (mers) in 2002-2004 and 2012, respectively. 5 while government interventions can influence the rates and range of outbreaks, 6 individuals can play equally, or arguably even more important roles in limiting the spread of viruses in the public and healthcare arenas. 7 human-to-human transmission of common influenza viruses and coronaviruses can occur through virus-laden body fluids, as well as self-innoculation of the mucous membranes in the nose, mouth, or eyes by touching contaminated dry surfaces. 8 depending on the type of surface and ambient conditions, viruses can persist for as short as <5 min to greater than 28 days on inanimate surfaces. 9 the use of sanitizing agents for personal care and surface disinfection are clearly of paramount importance in limiting viral transmissions, by inactivating the viruses before they have a chance to enter the human body.in this review, we summarize the various types of sanitizing agents used in commercially available formulations scientifically demonstrated for their virucidal properties to inactivate viruses in suspension and on surfaces. viruses that require vectors for transmission, such as the chikungunya and dengue viruses, are not considered. these "virucidal" agents can either destroy viruses or alter their surface structures to prevent them from infecting potential host cells (section 2). they differ from "antiviral" compounds 10 which inhibits virus replication in host cells. the effective dose of each sanitizing agent, exposure time for effective virucidal activity, suitability for usage under domestic or healthcare/hospital settings and mechanisms of action are considered. we also explore what has been scientifically shown for some common myths believed to inactivate viruses and prevent their spread. finally, we present promising new research directions, materials, and strategies that have been shown to inactivate viruses but have yet to reach widespread commercial availability.viruses are typically composed of a viral capsid containing nucleic acids inside. the nucleic acid serve as the template information for replication, while the capsid and its associated proteins function both to protect the nucleic acid and bind to host cell receptors. 11 the coronavirus sars-cov-2, for example, uses the spike glycoprotein to bind to host cell sialic acid receptors. 12 outside of a host cell, viruses are unable to replicate and increase in number. however, they can often survive for long periods of time in this state. 13 when they encounter a suitable host cell, they will infect and enter the host cell, hijacking the cellular machinery for its own replication. viruses are able to infect cells, including even bacterial cells, and cause a range of commonly seen diseases (see table 1 ). this is exacerbated by the lack of effective treatment against several of these viruses.surfaces, including our hands, play an important part in the spread of viruses. viruses such as poliovirus and bacteriophage showed a much higher survival when they were transferred by direct contact of surfaces, as opposed to droplet aerosolization or dust containing viruses. 14 hand-to-surface contact of only 5 s was sufficient to transfer a significant proportion of the virus, and viruses could then spread by touching the mucosa of the nose or conjunctiva of the eye. 15 the chance of spread is in turn directly correlated with the viral survival time on the surface, which shows considerable variation between different viruses. for example, among different soft surfaces tested, enteric viruses were shown to survive on wool blankets for the longest period of time, poster card for the shortest period of time, and cotton fabric for an intermediate period of time. 13 a very recent study has found that the covid-19 coronavirus (sars-cov-2) can persist longest on propylene plastic surfaces and stainless steel, with viable viruses found up to 72 hr after initial application though at a greatly reduced viral titer. 16 much shorter persistence was observed on copper surfaces, with no viable viruses observed after 4 hr. while the closely-related sars-cov-1 coronavirus showed no significant statistical differences in half-life on these surfaces, sars-cov-2 could persist considerably longer on cardboard surfaces: 24 hr were required for no viable sars-cov-2 to be detected, compared with just 8 hr for sars-cov-1.the main measure of efficacy of the disinfectant is by the fold reduction in infectivity of the virus, and this is typically conducted by carrier tests and suspension tests. the key parameters that affect the efficacy of disinfection agents against viruses include the contact time, concentration of disinfection agent, and the particular virus involved. 17 the disinfection inactivation can be described by modified forms of the chick-watson law:where n o is the original number of microbes, n is the final number of microbes, c is the disinfectant concentration, t is the contact time, and k is the inactivation rate constant (specific to the microbe). 18 with a decrease in the concentration of the active disinfecting ingredient, the contact time will likely need to be increased to achieve adequate disinfection. 19 a reduction of viral infectivity by 4 log units correlates to a 99.99% reduction in the viral titer. the log unit reduction and percent (%) reduction are used interchangeably in literature to describe disinfectant efficacy. disinfection efficacy can also be influenced by environmental factors. if disinfection requires chemical reactions to take place, such as for formaldehyde, then the rate of disinfection will be higher at higher temperatures. under cold temperatures, certain disinfectants could be ineffective as the rate of disinfection would be exceedingly low. 20 humidity is also another factor that could affect disinfectant penetration to the virus. for reactions such as aldehyde disinfectants, a change in ph will also affect the disinfectant efficacy. 17 there are specific unique characteristics of viruses that influence inactivation by disinfection. there are three main types of viruses with different structures, classified here according to increasing difficulty of chemical disinfectant inactivation: enveloped viruses, large unenveloped viruses, and small unenveloped viruses (see table 2 ). larger viruses are generally more sensitive to disinfectants, although there are exceptions. 21 a few disinfectant solutions tested were all effective against the enveloped viruses herpes simplex virus and human immunodeficiency virus (hiv) type 1, although less effective against the small non-enveloped human coxsackie virus. 22 enveloped viruses contain a lipid envelope that is required for infection, and therefore interfering with the envelope could potentially reduce virus infectivity. lipophilic disinfectants can often be used to inactivate enveloped viruses. in contrast, non-enveloped viruses utilize a protein coat for infection, and therefore inactivation often requires denaturation of the redundant viral capsid proteins or essential replicative proteins. 23 disinfectants that disrupt proteins such as glutaraldehyde or sodium hypochlorite could be effective at inactivating non-enveloped viruses. 21 sodium hypochlorite was shown to inactivate the bacteriophage pao1, and further electron microscopy studies showed that there was extensive structural damage to the phage, including damage to capsid proteins. 24 however, the disinfectant might also need to penetrate to destroy the nucleic acids, as viruses such as polio retain infectivity with the rna alone. 21 while the enveloped virus influenza h1n1 could be inactivated by all the disinfectants tested, 25 it is much more challenging to inactivate small non-enveloped noroviruses, and several commonly available disinfectants are not able to sufficiently reduce infectivity. 2627 viruses also show resistance to disinfection due to the cellular materials that viruses are normally associated with. viruses are normally reliant on host cells for replication, so they are often found together with material such as cell debris, soil, and aerosolized droplets. 20 these are called viral clumping protective factors, and they can both reduce the penetration of the disinfectant to the virus, and can also interact and reduce the activity of the disinfecting agents. this has a big impact on the disinfectants, necessitating a much higher concentration for effective disinfection. disinfection is commonly associated with and reliant on cleaning processes, as the removal of organic material impurities first can allow for a better disinfection process. 28 viruses can also aggregate in the environment, for example, upon exposure to disinfectants, thereby making it more difficult for disinfectants to penetrate and access the viruses. 29 alcohols, specifically isopropyl alcohol (otherwise known as isopropanol and propan-2-ol) and ethyl alcohol (ethanol), are capable of inactivating a wide spectrum of bacterial, fungi, and viral activities. these actives play an important role in the healthcare industry for skin antisepsis and disinfecting small medical tools. although it is shown to be effective in annihilating infectious microorganisms, alcohols are not sporicidal 30, 31 and are often coupled with t a b l e 2 types of common viruses and overall resistance to disinfectants. other major biocidal actives to improve its disinfection efficacy. 31 potent biocidal agents eradicate viruses and bacteria by various mechanisms such as disrupting the structure of the cell, and coagulating and/or denaturing proteins in the microorganisms. although few studies have been done to fully understand the biocidal activity of alcohol, it is often believed that alcohols disrupts the cell membrane and denatures the proteins in general. 31, 32 viruses as well as many other microorganisms are commonly susceptible to this mode of action. previous studies have reported that with the inclusion of water in the biocidal system, the efficacy of alcohol increases as water would facilitate quicker denaturing of proteins. 30, 31, 33 additionally, the inclusion of water significantly increase the effectiveness of the alcohols as it delays the evaporation of the alcohol and increase its exposure to viruses and bacteria.generally, the efficacy of alcohols in eradicating microorganisms is optimum between 60% and 90% by solution in water (v/v). 30, 33 in one of the studies, it was reported that 80% ethyl alcohol was effective at eradicating hepatitis b virus under 2 min and 70% isopropyl alcohol of that within 10 min. 34 however, the virucidal activity of alcohol depends greatly on its concentration of the actives and the type of test viruses. ethyl alcohol is effective against enveloped viruses and a few non-enveloped viruses. studies have shown that ethyl alcohol inactivates enveloped virus such as herpes and influenza to select non-enveloped viruses such as adenovirus, rhinovirus, and rotavirus. 30 isopropyl alcohol, however, was reported to be effective against enveloped viruses but ineffective against similar non-enveloped viruses. 30 the differential virucidal action could potentially be a result of the lipophilic nature of isopropyl alcohol as compared to ethanol. 31 the efficacy of alcohols to inactivate viruses is heavily dependent on the surface properties of the microorganism. isopropyl alcohol, by nature lipophilic, interacts favorably with enveloped viruses and disrupts their activity effectively. the envelope layer of viruses mainly comprises lipid bilayers, which causes the membrane to be sensitive to the chemical and physical conditions. 35 non-enveloped viruses are generally known to be more resilient to disinfectants compared to enveloped viruses, and this includes alcohols. studies have been shown that both alcohols are potent virucidal agents against enveloped viruses such as hepatitis b virus 34 , herpes virus 36 ,sars-cov, 37 and human immunodeficiency virus (hiv) 38 , but not non-enveloped viruses such as hepatitis a virus 34 and polio virus. 39 although alcohols are effective in eradicating some types of viruses, other disinfectants such as quaternary ammonium compounds (qac), glutaraldehyde, and hydrogen peroxide quickly outshine its performance. 30 therefore, disinfectants with alcohol as its main active ingredients are generally not used to disinfect critical equipment or environment in the healthcare settings. 30 the use of isopropyl alcohol is also limited as it only inactivates lipid viruses. this greatly reduces the capabilities of alcohol as a broader use disinfecting agent. because alcohols are flammable liquids, large amounts of alcohol will increase the risks and dangers of it as a disinfecting agent. the flash point of a higher concentration of alcohol solution is lower than that of a lower concentration. 32, 40 according to boyce, 70% ethyl alcohol has a flash point at 20.5 • c, while the flash point of 30% ethyl alcohol is at 29 • c. 32 furthermore, prolonged and repeated usage of alcohol compromises the integrity of materials such as plastics and dyes. materials with constant exposure to alcohol may experience discoloration, cracking, and swelling due to the effects of alcohol. another difficulty with the use of alcohol is that it evaporates quickly when exposed to air, therefore reducing the contact time with the virus. achieving maximum disinfection is difficult unless the tools are immersed in a bath for a period of time.even though the capabilities of alcohol are limited, the active is still commonly used in various disinfectant procedures. it is imperative to note that together with other properties of alcohol, its role as a disinfectant is still irreplaceable. alcohols are often used as an effective disinfectant for thermometer, non-critical tools, and non-invasive probes in the hospital 30 . non-critical surfaces of medical instruments that are reusable are also disinfected with alcohol. another advantage of using alcohol as a disinfectant is that it is user friendly. alcohol solutions are non-staining, evaporates quickly, low toxicity compared to other forms of disinfectant, and have a mild acceptable odor. these characteristics are critical in the healthcare settings as it contributes to the efficiency and the necessary sanitization in the system.surfactants are amphiphilic moieties possessing both hydrophilic and lipophilic segments 41 and are further classified into cationic, 42 anionic, 43 non-ionic, 44 and zwitterionic 45 surfactants. they are often the active ingredients found in household disinfectants and detergents and have been demonstrated to be capable of inactivating viruses. [46] [47] [48] due to their amphiphilic nature, their main mechanism of viral disinfection is usually solvating and disrupting the lipidbased envelope of the virus. 46 enveloped viruses such as the family of coronaviruses, among which they include sars-cov-1, 49 mers, 50 and the new sars-cov-2 viruses, 51 are thus susceptible to these surfactants. however, some of the surfactants do not rely on solvating lipid envelopes to inactivate viruses. surfactants such as sodium lauryl sulfate (sls) possess strongly hydrophilic heads that readily target the capsid proteins, unfolding, and extracting them before gradually solubilizing lipid membranes. 43quaternary ammonium compounds (qacs) form the main bulk of the cationic surfactants 52 and they mostly inactivate viruses by solvating and disrupting lipid envelopes or membranes 46, 53 . they are characterized by the presence of a cationic ammonium group which is the hydrophilic head. 53 the ammonium group has four organic substituents such as alkyl or heterocyclic groups forming the lipophilic tail and the charge is balanced by an anion such as a halide or sulfate. 54 some of the most common qacs found in household disinfectants include benzalkonium chloride, 42 didecyldimethyl ammonium chloride, 46 alkyl dimethyl benzyl ammonium saccharinate, 55 and cetyl pyridinium chloride 56 ( figure 1 ). in addition to the common qacs, a new generation of qacs has also been developed and they are referred to as twin-chain or dialkyl quaternaries, examples include didecyl dimethyl ammonium bromide 57 and dioctyl dimethyl ammonium bromide. 58 they claim to retain virucidal activity better in hard water and also in the presence of anionic residues. 59 qacs are attractive as they are relatively nontoxic, colorless, and odorless. 60 they are well-known for inactivating enveloped viruses but their virucidal activity depends on concentration, duration of application, and temperature. 42, 61 tsujimura et al. evaluated the virucidal effect of three qacs, namely benzalkonium chloride, (bzk), mono; bis (trimethyl ammonium methylene chloride)-alkyl (c 9-15 ) toluene (mbat), and didecyldimethyl ammonium chloride (dda). 46 it is found that the qacs require warmer temperatures to exhibit more significant virucidal properties. 46, 62 the qacs at their highest recommended concentrations of 0.05% (w/v), 0.02% (w/v), and 0.02% (w/v), respectively, had no virucidal effect on enveloped equine herpesvirus type 1 after 10 min reaction time at 0 • c. 46 when the temperature is increased to room temperature, the virucidal activity of the qacs is found to be dependent upon duration of reaction. 46 reaction times shorter than 1 min produced no virucidal effect, while the f i g u r e 1 chemical structures of (a) benzalkonium chloride, (b) didecyldimethyl ammonium chloride, (c) alkyl dimethyl benzyl ammonium saccharinate, and (d) cetyl pyridinium chloride minimum effective concentration (mec) at 5 min is mostly double that of the mec for a 10 min reaction. 46 mec is defined as the lowest concentration of the biocide that reduced the virus titer value by 99.99% or greater as compared to control reactions. 46 this suggests that effective disinfection utilizing qacs is best achieved using warm water and longer reaction times. 62 an advantage of utilizing qac-based disinfectants is their relatively high tolerance toward the presence of contaminating organic matter; their ability to inactivate viruses is usually not diminished by the presence of organic matter 46,63 as seen in other common disinfectants such as alcohol and chlorine based disinfectants. 46 tsujimura et al. demonstrated that the virucidal effects of mbat and dda are unchanged by the addition of 5% fetal bovine serum (fbs) but the mec of bzk increased by four times when exposed to 5% fbs. 46 however, in another study by rabenau et al., 64 the authors demonstrated that the virucidal effect of bzk based disinfectants against sars coronavirus is not significantly reduced by the presence of albumin or sheep erythrocytes. the seemingly contrasting results might be attributed to the fact that bzk disinfectant formulations tested by rabenau et al. contain other active ingredients like glutaraldehyde and didecyldimonium chloride too. 64 qacs are regarded as lipophilic and target enveloped viruses by solvating their lipid-based envelope. 17 however, non-enveloped viruses are mainly characterized as possessing a protein capsid which is hydrophilic, 17 thus qacs may have lower affinity and also lower disinfectant ability toward these viruses. 17, 43, 65 it is possible that the cationic moiety interacts 42 the results suggest that the effectiveness of bzk varies with the virus and also concentration of bzk. at the highest tested concentration of 0.1% bzk, five adenoviruses are inactivated with virus titers >3log 10 units while the remaining two adenoviruses are insufficiently inactivated with reduced titers >1log 10 units but <3log 10 units. lower concentrations of bzk exhibited compromised ability to inactivate the adenoviruses. in another study by wood and payne, a formulation with a final bzk concentration of 0.2% (w/v) is found to be effective against nonenveloped human coxsackie virus after 1 min of exposure but was ineffective toward inactivating other more resistant non-enveloped viruses like poliovirus and human adenovirus under the same conditions. 22 the same bzk formulation is also found to inactivate only some of the enveloped virus like the herpes simplex virus but failed to inactivate other enveloped viruses like human immunodeficiency virus and human coronavirus after 1 min of exposure. 22 this shows that the virucidal effects of qacs are highly dependent upon the specific virus and the conditions of exposure to achieve virus inactivation needs to be tailored.sodium laureth sulfate, n-lauroylsarcosine, and sodium linear alkylbenzene sulfonate ( figure 2 ) are some common anionic surfactants present in detergent and personal-care products such as soaps, shampoos, and toothpaste, 66 and they have been demonstrated to be effective disinfectants towards a range of viruses. 48, 67 in the study by tsujimura et al., the authors demonstrated that the disinfection ability of sodium linear alkylbenzene sulfonate (las) against enveloped equine herpesvirus type 1 is dependent upon duration, temperature, and organic matter contamination. 46 las is able to effectively inactivate equine herpesvirus type 1 at 0 • c when applied at 0.05% concentration for 10 min. the minimum effective concentration (mec) is reduced by four times when the temperature is raised to room temperature for 10 min. however, when the duration is shortened to 1 min, the mec rose to >0.05%. in addition, mec value at room temperature and 10 min reaction duration increased by two times in the presence of 5% contaminating fbs.although the main mode of disinfection by surfactants is usually via solvating the lipid envelopes of viruses, 17 surfactants like sodium laureth sulfate (sls) that possess strongly hydrophilic heads have a different disinfection mechanism as compared to a more hydrophobic surfactant like n-lauroylsarcosine (ls). 43 the interaction between sls and viruses is dominated by ionic interactions instead of hydrophobic interactions. 43 sls thus solubilizes liposomal membranes at a slow rate but bind rapidly to the protein component of ca 2+ -atpase membranes causing unfolding and extraction of the proteins. 43 the viral penetration into cells can be divided into three stages, the first being the initial attachment of the virus to the cell surface heparin sulfate, followed by forming stable attachment to the heparin sulfate, and then fusion of the virus with the cell membrane leading to penetration of the virus into the cell. 43 piret et al. report that sls and ls reduce viral infection of cells by interfering with different steps of the viral penetration process. 43 incubating enveloped herpes simplex virus with ls reduced the first stage initial binding to cells while sls functioned by disrupting the fusion process between the viral envelope and cell membrane. as ls reduces the initial binding of the virus to cells, the virucidal effectiveness of ls requires the pre-incubation of the virus with ls in order to prevent future viral binding to cells. the lack of a pre-incubation period significantly reduced the virucidal effectiveness of ls. on the other hand, as sls does not reduce initial viral binding to cells, the virucidal effects of sls is less reliant upon pre-incubation of the virus with sls. moreover, it is also shown that sls can exhibit viral inactivation effects on viruses already firmly attached to cells. due to the complementary mechanisms of disinfection, the authors suggested synergistic combination of sls and ls in a single formulation. in addition, the authors also note that the presence of contaminating organic matter reduced the disinfectant ability of both sls and ls and consequently concentrations 5 and 2.5 times higher respectively are required to achieve viral inactivation.non-ionic surfactants are commonly used as emulsifiers and can be classified by the type of bonds between the hydrophobic and hydrophilic segments. 44 figure 3g ,h). these non-ionic surfactants inactivate viruses by solvating the viral envelope and disrupting the nucleocapsid. 44 their viral disinfectant ability is highly associated with the type of linkages between their hydrophobic and hydrophilic segments. 44 non-ionic surfactants with ether and amide linkages have high virucidal effectiveness while those containing ester and ether-ester linkages are much weaker at inactivating viruses when tested under the same conditions. 44 however, the high virucidal activity of the ether and amide containing non-ionic surfactants also corresponded to high cytotoxicity and would thus require high dilution factors. 44 zwitterionic surfactants are molecules bearing both cationic and anionic charges but with an overall neutral charge. 71 their virucidal activity is less investigated but they may possess interesting properties. crawford et al. demonstrated that a zwitterionic detergent, empigen bb®, an alkylbetaine based on a c12-c14 alcohol, is able to inactivate influenza a and b but still retain the biological activity of the surface haemagglutinin (ha) and neuraminidase (na) antigens. 45 the authors proposed that the mechanism of disinfection by the zwitterionic detergent is via viral disruption instead of solubilizing the surface proteins as cationic, anionic, and non-ionic surfactants do. 45, 72 this special ability to inactivate viruses but retain the biological activity of their surface antigens allows the zwitterionic detergent to be utilized during the development of vaccines. 45 disinfectants such as sodium hypochlorite, hydrogen peroxide, and peracetic acid utilize their oxidizing capability to inactivate viruses. for the small non-enveloped viruses such as noroviruses that are difficult to disinfect, strong oxidizing agents are among the most effective disinfectants. 73sodium hypochlorite, the active ingredient in household bleach, is a strong oxidizing agent. it dissolves in water to form hypochlorous acid, which can be reduced to form water and the chloride anion. the hypochlorous acid molecule can react with peptide bonds and thiol groups, chemically oxidizing proteins and other biomolecules and abolish function. 74 the efficacy of disinfection decreases with an increase in ph, likely due to the decreased proportion of hypochlorous acid group present. 75 sodium hypochlorite is fast acting, and is effective at low concentrations. at 10 ppm available chlorine, sodium hypochlorite is able to inactivate bacteriophage pao1 within 30 s, and further characterization studies showed that a large number of structural components were damaged or deformed by the treatment. generally, it was found that the extent of damage was proportional to the concentration of sodium hypochlorite and the contact time. 24 sodium hypochlorite at 0.5% (5000 ppm) could inactivate ebola surrogate bacteriophage phi6 with 10 min contact time on a stainless steel surface, but not a nitrile surface. 28 sodium hypochlorite was able to inactivate adenovirus together with 5% serum at a concentration of 1900 ppm with 1 min contact time, achieving a mean log 10 reduction of infectivity of 4.87. 76 sodium hypochlorite can be used for difficult to disinfect non-enveloped viruses such as noroviruses. sodium hypochlorite could inactivate norwalk virus, a type of norovirus, at a concentration of 160 ppm after 30 s exposure, as quantified by rt-pcr. 77 sodium hypochlorite could also inactivate the norovirus surrogates, feline calicivirus and murine norovirus, to greater than a 5 log10 reduction of infectivity with a concentration of 2700 ppm and 1 min. 78 sodium hypochlorite at 0.5% concentration with 1 min contact time was able to deactivate the hepatitis a virus, while another oxidizing agent peracetic acid was unable to do so. 79 sodium hypochlorite at high concentrations of 1000 ppm is regularly used for clinical disinfection. however, it has an odor and can be irritating to mucous membranes at high concentrations. less concentrated hypochlorous acid solutions are less stable to environmental factors such as temperature and light, and the oxidizing potential can be used up by impurities. 80 in terms of application, a concentrated stock of 5% sodium hypochlorite that is more stable is typically recommended to be diluted 100× to 0.05% before use so as to mostly avoid the downsides of concentrated sodium hypochlorite during the disinfection process. the most common oxidizing agent disinfectant in the united states is aqueous solutions of 5.25-6.15% sodium hypochlorite, also known as household bleach. 81 sodium hypochlorite is sensitive to the presence of organic material, and a significantly higher concentration is required to achieve the same disinfectant efficacy. while 100 ppm sodium hypochlorite can effectively disinfect a clean surface of hiv-1 virus in 30 s, the activity is reduced in the presence of organic material. a higher concentration of 500 ppm and 1-2 min is required in the presence of 80% serum, and around 10,000 ppm (1%) is required in the presence of 80% blood. 82 sodium hypochlorite at 50 ppm was found to disinfect hiv in saline alone, but a 50-fold higher concentration of 2,500 ppm was required to disinfect in the presence of 10% plasma, and 5,000 ppm (1%) was required in the presence of blood. 83 in a review guidance for clinicians, noncritical surfaces that are contaminated with blood or other tissues are suggested to be cleaned first to remove organic material before spot decontaminating with sodium hypochlorite solution. 84 compared to sodium hypochlorite, sodium dichloroisocyanurate has disinfectant activity that persists for longer, is more tolerant to the presence of organic material, and has a higher disinfectant efficacy overall. sodium dichloroisocyanurate could inactivate the bacteriophage phi6, an ebola surrogate, at 0.5% concentration in 10 min on multiple different surfaces, while sodium hypochlorite could not inactivate sufficiently on nitrile surface. 28 sodium dichloroisocyanurate at 50 ppm was found to disinfect hiv in saline alone, but a 50-fold higher concentration of 2500 ppm was required to disinfect in the presence of 10% plasma, and 5,000 ppm (0.5%) was required in the presence of blood. 83 sodium dichloroisocyanurate at 10,000 ppm shows disinfectant activity in the presence of 70% serum, while sodium hypochlorite only shows similar activity in presence of 20% serum. 85 this is postulated to be because only 50% of the total chlorine is in the available hypochlorite/hypochlorous acid component form that can be neutralized by serum, while the rest of the chlorine can be progressively pushed toward hypochlorite/hypochlorous acid to maintain the chemical equilibrium.hydrogen peroxide is a strong broad spectrum inactivation agent. it decomposes to form water, oxygen and the highly reactive hydroxyl free radicals, which can cleave or crosslink a large range of biomolecules including proteins, nucleic acids and lipids. 17 a 13% solution with a 5 min contact time was able to inactivate to greater than 5 log 10 reduction both the enveloped virus herpes simplex virus, and the non-enveloped virus poliovirus, showing a similar broad spectrum virucidal activity. 86 . an accelerated hydrogen peroxide-based (ahp) disinfectant at a concentration of 0.5% and a contact time of 1 min showed a log 10 reduction in infectivity of over 4 for both enveloped and non-enveloped viruses, including hiv, coronavirus 229e, poliovirus, and rotavirus (wa). 87 the ahp solution at concentration 0.5% was tested with another set of enveloped and non-enveloped viruses, and showed effective inactivation of the enveloped sindbis virus and non-enveloped reovirus within 5 min. 88 hydrogen peroxide was also effective against noroviruses, although at generally higher concentrations than sodium hypochlorite. at a concentration of 0.18% and 5 min contact time, the ahp disinfectant was able to inactivate feline calicivirus, and at 3.5% and 10 min contact time, the ahp disinfectant was able to inactivate surrogate murine norovirus to greater than 5log 10 reduction. 78 a 2.1% liquid hydrogen peroxide solution with 10 min exposure could inactivate murine norovirus and bacteriophage phi x174 on stainless steel surfaces by 4 log 10 units. 89 a disinfectant comprising of hydrogen peroxide and peracetic acid could inactivate surrogate feline calicivirus by 99.9% at an effective peroxide concentration of 0.1% and 15 min contact time. 90 even when reused, a 7 % solution with a contact time of 5 min was able to show an almost 5 log 10 reduction in infectivity of poliovirus, showing that some disinfectant activity was still present. 91 a sonicated hydrogen peroxide system with a cartridge containing hydrogen peroxide at 31.5% and 2 min contact time showed that it could attain a mean log 10 reduction of 5.20 for human papillomavirus (hpv). 92sodium dichloroisocyanurate (c) hydrogen peroxide (d) peracetic acidperacetic acid decomposes in an analogous manner to form the highly reactive hydroxyl free radicals, as well as acetic acid and oxygen. 93 peracetic acid at 0.2% could inactivate adenovirus 8 in hard water in 5 min, with a mean log 10 reduction of infectivity of 4.75. 76 peracetic acid at 0.23% and at a contact time of 15 min could reduce the infectivity of coliphage ms2 by greater than 3 log 10 units. there was much more effective deactivation as compared to hydrogen peroxide tested under the same setup. 94 peracetic acid at a low concentration of 85 ppm (0.0085%) and contact time of 1 min could reduce the infectivity of a murine norovirus surrogate by 3 log 10 units in suspension, and reduced virus infectivity on surfaces of fruits and vegetables by 4 log 10 units. 73 a peracetic acid and hydrogen peroxide-based disinfectant, at an effective peroxide concentration of 0.1% and contact time of 15 min could reduce infectivity of feline calicivirus, a norovirus surrogate, by 4 log 10 units in the absence of feces, while a higher concentration of 2% was required in the "fieldlike conditions" with feces as organic material impurity. 90 powder forms of peracetic acid at 0.5% concentration and 15 min contact time could reduce the infectivity of porcine epidemic diarrhea virus by more than 99.99% (4 log 10 units). 95 these forms of peracetic acid were developed to provide higher stability and which could be dissolved in situ to form the disinfectant solution.povidone iodine is an example of an iodophor, which is a mixture of elemental iodine and a carrier polymerpolyvinylpyrrolidone in this case. the carrier polymer has no virucidal activity on its own. 96 iodine, the active and powerfully-virucidal agent, exists as a complex mixture of many species (e.g. i 2 , i − , i 3 − , io − , io 3 − ) at equilibrium in water, but aqueous iodine solutions can be cytotoxic and cause irritancy. 97 hence, the polyvinylpyrrolidone polymer entraps the various iodine-containing species by hydrogen bonding (figure 5a) , providing a reservoir of iodine for its sustained release in small doses at a time, maintaining its virucidal properties for prolonged periods while decreasing toxicity. povidone-iodine is a broad-spectrum virucidal agent manufactured in formulations containing 7.5-10% iodophor in solution, and are used in clinical applications such as sterilizing agents for pre-and post-operation skin cleaning, in surgical swabs, scrubs and ointments, as well as everyday products including antiseptic handwashes, mouthwashes and gargles that contain lower concentrations of the iodophor. 98 povidone-iodine is not suitable for use with silicone products such as silicone catheters as iodine can cause accelerated deterioration of the material. 99 the iodophor is capable of inactivating (≥ 4.0 reduction of log 10 viral infectivity) a large range of viruses which include the enveloped coronaviruses, influenza a 100 and vaccinia virus, as well as non-enveloped polyomavirus and adenovirus 101 within 1 minute (table 3) .for the most-resistant non-enveloped polioviruses however, aqueous formulations of povidone-iodine (betaisodona ® solution, containing 11% available iodine), required at least an hour for reduction of infectivity of ≥ 4.0log 10 units. in contrast, alcohol-containing povidone-iodine formulations (e.g., betaseptic mundipharma®, containing 10% available iodine and ca. 40% 2-propanol and 40% ethanol) could inactivate these polioviruses within 5 min, 101 owing to the synergistic virucidal activity of the iodophor and the alcohols.although it is generally safe and more effective in inactivating viruses than many other antiseptic agents (e.g., benzalkonium chloride, chlorhexidine digluconate), 102 povidone-iodine may cause thyroid dysfunction with long-term prolonged use, 103 as well as allergic contact dermatitis, 104 necessitating careful medical monitoring. the origins of the broad virucidal efficiencies of povidoneiodine has still yet to be fully elucidated, and is likely to occur by multiple mechanisms, reducing the likelihood of chance viral mutations conferring resistance. there is evidence that iodine can block the receptors of the virus responsible for attachment to the host cell surface. 100 furthermore, iodine can inhibit the activity of viral enzymes (e.g. neuraminidase) essential for virus release from host cells, preventing its spread to other uninfected cells. 98 for enveloped viruses, it has also been suggested that virus membrane can be destabilized by the reaction of iodine with the unsaturated c=c bonds of membrane fatty acids. 105chlorhexidine is a broad-spectrum cationic bisguanide biocide ( figure 5b ) found in many antiseptic products. an active ingredient in handwashes, mouthwashes and oral gels (e.g., corsodyl®), disinfectants, and preservatives, chlorhexidine has generally low irritability, good substantivity on skin, and rapid bactericidal activity. however, its activity is highly dependent on its formulation, being reduced by the presence of organic matter, including serum, as well as anionic surfactants and phospholipids 106 as well as being ph-dependent. 17 compared to bacteria, its virucidal activity is more variable and significantly less effective and slower-acting than povidone-iodine. generally, chlorhexidine is ineffective against non-enveloped viruses (polio and adenoviruses), but shows variable potency for inactivating enveloped viruses (e.g. herpes simplex virus, influenza a, cytomegaloviruses and hepatitis b virus) ( table 3) . against human coronavirus hcov-299e however, chlorhexidine showed limited effectiveness, with a 1.0 mm solution showing only a 3 log 10 reduction after 1 hour. 107 mechanistically, the viral inhibition of chlorhexidine has been proposed to arise from interactions with surface glycoproteins on enveloped viruses, which may reduce the activity of viral enzymes such as dna polymerase enzymes for the hepatitis b virus. 108 this chlorhexidine-receptor binding is suggested to account for its effectiveness, albeit slow, against rotaviruses, 109 which are non-enveloped viruses containing surface glycoproteins that allow host cell infection.chloroxylenol, also known as para-chloro-meta-xylenol (pcmx) (figure 5c) , is a halogenated phenolic-type f i g u r e 6 chemical structures of (a) formaldehyde (b) glutaraldehyde and (c) ortho-phthalaldehyde antiseptic used as the key active ingredient in dettol®. commonly-used for household disinfectants, wound cleaning, and for disinfecting surgical equipment, it is most effective against bacteria, but its virucidal activity is variable. a 1998 study of chloroxylenol against a number of human viruses found it to be effective against the enveloped viruses herpes simplex 1 and hiv (table 3 ), but was practically ineffective against the non-enveloped polioviruses, adenoviruses and coxsackie virus, as well as the enveloped human coronavirus atcc vr-759. 22 however, a later study using the murine hepatitis virus as a surrogate for the sars coronavirus found it to be highly effective (≥4.50 log 10 reduction) within a 30 s contact time. 111 in spite of its widespread commercial use for a long time, surprisingly little is known about its mechanism of action against both bacteria and viruses. chloroxylenol is generally safe to humans for external use, but has been reported to cause irritant contact dermatitis and contact depigmentation. 112formaldehyde is the simplest aldehyde ( figure 6a ) and a powerful high-level disinfectant with potent viral inactivation capabilities. often sold as an aqueous solution called formalin, it has been used to inactivate viruses for vaccine production 113 and for scientific study 114 as a high-level disinfectant, it can effectively and quickly inactivate many different types of viruses (table 3 ) both in suspension and on surfaces, by chemically alkylating the amino (nh 2 ) and sulfhydryl (sh) groups of proteins, 115 as well as the amino groups of nucleic acid bases (e.g. adenine) of dna and rna. 116 as these functional groups are more reactive at alkaline phs than acidic ph, formaldehyde is most effective as an alkaline solution. however, its high reactivity renders its usage health-hazardous: other than being a mutagen and suspected carcinogen, 117 it causes irritation of exposed body surfaces (e.g. skin and eyes). 118, 119 furthermore, its pungent odour can be detected at concentrations lower than 1 ppm. as a result, other than usage in a well-ventilated area, strict regulations for human exposure govern its use as a disinfectant and sterilizing agent in hospitals and healthcare facilities, and thus it is not used as a household disinfectant. formaldehyde has been shown to be a slower-acting disinfectant than glutaraldehyde. 17like formaldehyde, glutaraldehyde (or sometimes known as glutardialdehyde) (figure 6b) , is a powerful broad-spectrum disinfecting and sterilising agent which is highly effective against many viruses after short exposure times (table 3) . this dialdehyde is usually sold as an acidic solution, but its reactivity can be "switched on" by making the solution alkaline at ph > 7.5. in an alkaline solution, glutaraldehyde has a limited shelf-life and stability, as its tendency to polymerise 120 can reduce the number of reactive available free aldehyde groups essential for its virucidal activity. to determine the reactivity of glutaraldehyde solutions, chemical tests have been developed, though the manufacturer's instructions must be carefully adhered to for accurate results to be obtained. 121 in a similar manner as formaldehyde, the aldehyde linkages of glutaraldehyde can react with the reactive groups on proteins, rna and dna. however, as a dialdehyde, its two reactive functional groups can form inter-and intramolecular crosslinks with these biomolecules that destroys their activity. 122 for instance, glutaraldehyde inactivates the hepatitis a virus and enteroviruses by reacting with lysine residues on their surfaces. 123 reactions with capsid proteins are also proposed to account for its virucidal effectiveness against polioviruses. 124, 125 glutaraldehyde solution (2.0%) is usually used to decontaminate surgical equipment, endoscopes, and dialyzers in clinical settings, but it needs to be used in a well-ventilated setting by trained personnel due to its strong and unpleasant odour. although not suspected to be carcinogenic, 126 it is known to cause dermatitis and irritation to mucous membranes in eyes, nose, and mouth. 127 due to these reasons, it is not used as a household disinfectant. generally, metals, rubber, plastics, and lensed instruments are tolerant to glutaraldehyde, though it has been recommended not to be used to disinfect non-critical surfaces due to its cost. 128ortho-phthalaldehyde, or 1,2-dicarboxybenzaldehyde ( figure 6c ), is another high-level disinfectant. like both formaldehyde and glutaraldehyde, its virucidal properties stem from its reactions to crosslink reactive groups of proteins and nucleic acids. although it is a less potent crosslinking agent than glutaraldehyde, this deficit is made up for by its more lipophilic aromatic nature which enhances its uptake by the lipid membrane, and has even shown faster bactericidal activity than glutaraldehyde. 129 while opa's bactericidal properties are well-documented, 130 its efficacies against viruses is less well established (table 3) . a study in 2006 using stainless steel careers showed that a 0.55% opa solution could gave 4.84 log 10 reduction in adenovirus 8 after 1 min exposure. 131 0.3% and 0.5% opa solutions gave > 3 log 10 reduction in the respective infectivities of surrogate hepatits b and c viruses on glass surfaces after a 1 min exposure. 132 to assess the effectiveness of opa against coronaviruses, a study using the surrogate mouse hepatitis virus on stainless stell surfaces showed 1.7 log 10 reduction in infectivity after 1 min contact with 0.55% opa. 133 however, the same concentration of opa was found to be ineffective against a suspension of human papillomavirus type 16 after a 45 min incubation. 134 there us a current dearth of studies on the effectiveness of opa against suspended viruses, and more studies are required to establish the general virucidal efficicacy of opa against a wider variety of viruses.opa has numerous advantages over glutaraldehyde. first, it is chemically stable between ph 3 and 9 and does not require any further activation prior to usage. second, it does not have a strong perceivable odour and does not irritate the skin, eyes, or nasal mucosa. 135 as a result, exposure monitoring is not required for its usage, unlike glutaraldehyde. furthermore, its excellent material compatibility 129 allows its usage as a disinfectant in many clinical settings such as for endoscopes 135, 136 and urological instruments. however, opa can stain exposed skin grey, and hence has to be rinsed off with copious quantities of water, or used with personal protective equipment (e.g. gloves and eye protection). for this reason, it is not used as a common household disinfectant.the practice of maintaining adequate personal hygiene and environmental sanitation can be considered to be the single most consistent strategy that has been employed throughout the evolution of healthcare methods in combating the various epidemics the world has faced. 146 advisories issued by governmental agencies and the healthcare sectors alike have stressed its importance, ingraining in the minds of a wide audience the need for the procurement of viable sanitizing agents.the global outbreaks of highly infectious viruses such as the sars-cov-2 have thus understandably seen rises in the mass purchasing of sanitizers and disinfectants, resulting in the issues of maintaining adequate supplies around several countries in the world. without this option, a segment of the population has turned to the possibility of do-it-yourself formulations or alternative products that, along with the rise of social media, have largely been proliferated on the internet.during the course of pursuing these options, it is of high imperative to consider the efficacies of these alternatives to ensure that ineffective options do not lull consumers into a false sense of security.commonly used in a variety of skincare products to treat dermatological issues such as acne, essential oils were known to be both topically safe and able to combat a variety of skinassociated pathogens. yet, their explored germicidal activities are mostly bacteria-related, and hence cannot be directly extrapolated into effective disinfection of all viruses. 147 in terms of research into the anti-viral or viral inhibiting efficacies of common essential oils, several oils have been proven effective against select viruses, such as the herpes simplex virus type-1 or the bovine viral diarrhea virus. 148 the operative mechanism of action, however, varies greatly between the different essential oils, and, depending on the stage of inactivation, render them effective against only certain specific strains. 149 through the study of star anise oil and some essential oil constituents, for example, it was identified that the oil itself, as well as the specific compounds trans-anethole, farnesol and -caryophyllene were capable of direct inactivation of the herpes virus, potentially through the disruption of the virion envelope, prior to host cell infection. 149 other reports indicate that anti-viral activities of essential oils do happen through similar mechanisms, including the virucidal effects of sesquiterpenes against various enveloped viruses, 150 and the inhibitive effects of eugenol against the herpes simplex virus. 151 due to the lack of research investigating the specific virucidal actions of these compounds against the selected viruses, it is unsafe to assume that effective sanitization can occur broadly over all recommended types of essential oils. when considering several of the aforementioned cases as examples, most of which act upon the virion envelope, it is possible to conclude that they would be rendered ineffective in the disinfection of non-enveloped virus species.at the same time, it is also important to note that their purported antiviral activities may not be directly relevant to the purposes of sanitization or disinfection. antiviral activities such as the inhibition of viral replication or gene expressions, while potentially effective in the treatment of viral infections, may not necessarily be what the user is expecting in terms of a topical or surface disinfectant.the development of global anti-microbial resistance due to the over-prescription of antibiotics is indicative of their high exposure to the public community. this could potentially allow for growth in public sentiment with regards to the belief that antibiotics are capable of treating a variety of diseases, including those caused by various viruses. an early survey of the public in the netherlands showed that almost half of the population incorrectly believed in the ability of antibiotics in treating infections caused by viruses. in the same study, 90.9% believed in the need for antibiotic treatment when faced with pneumonia, and another study in a different area reported a 94.2% of the population sharing this belief. 152153 this set of patient beliefs could have a negative impact on the decisions of healthcare professionals due to the pressure of catering to patient demands, even though it was shown to have no effect on the patient recovery and satisfaction. 154 in fact, statistical evidence has shown that the inappropriate use of antibiotics prescribed by medical professionals has been observed to be high even up till recent years, where it was estimated that up to 30% of antibiotic prescriptions among outpatients may have been inappropriate. 155 this could have potentially stemmed from a variety of reasons, including perceived patient expectation 154 and misdiagnoses due to the similarities in the manifestations of clinical symptoms. 156 as such, the correction of patient beliefs is still fundamental in the prevention of antibiotic overuse in such clinical settings.there has been a long history of the employment of ultraviolet light in the elimination of microbial pathogens, whereupon its efficacy has been regarded highly enough for it to see use even in the disinfection in the laboratory and healthcare settings. 157 it can thus be anticipated that there will be the resulting perpetuation of the notion that uvgi will be an effective agent in the combating of viruses. while this belief does hold merit, it is important to examine the restrictive conditions under which this does hold true.first, as the efficacy of uvgi is dependent on the absorption by the target dna, which has a maximum absorption wavelength of 260 nm, microorganisms have been found to be selectively vulnerable to the exposure to light at wavelengths specifically at or in close range of 253.7 nm. 158 when tested against the strain of bacteriophage virus φx-174, it was shown that the wavelength could be increased to up to 280nm without significant reduction of virucidal efficiency, but a significant decrease was observed upon the increase to 301 nm. 159 second, it has been shown that the germicidal activity of uvgi is compliant with the bunsen-roscoe reciprocity law, where it was established that the efficiency of inactivation is dependent on uv dose, which is the product of uv intensity (mw/cm 2 ) and exposure time (seconds). 160 the resulting implications in the translation into application mean that, upon a reduction of uv intensity, the virucidal action of uvgi can be compensated through the increase of exposure time. 161 when tested for four different strains of airborne bacteriophages: ssrna (ms2, atcc 15597-b1), ssdna (φx-174, atcc 13706-b1), dsrna (phi 6 with envelope lipid, atcc 21781-b1), and dsdna (t7, atcc 11303-b1), it was reported that the required uvgi dose required was approximately increased twofold when attempting to increase 90% inactivation to 99% inactivation. 162 in the same study, it was also observed that certain strains of viruses were more vulnerable to uvgi than others. the uvgi doses required were, in increasing order, 339-423 μws/cm 2 for ssrna, 444-494 μws/cm 2 for ssdna, 662-863 μws/cm 2 for dsrna, and 910-1196 μws/cm 2 for dsdna. 162 a similar ranking was reported when it came to observing the sensitivities of similar virus classes on a surface medium (as opposed to aerosol). 158 the susceptibility of viruses to this method was thought to be dependent on several factors, such as physical size, molecular weight, dna conformation, repair enzyme, and chromophore presence, clumping propensity, etc., which could all affect the uv dose required. 163 as such, while there is a high potential for uvgi to serve as a virucidal technique, and even solar radiation to play a major role in environmental virucidal activity under appropriate conditions, 164 it is important to consider the set of circumstances under which these are true.a popular dietary supplement, vitamin c has had a history of being recommended in popular literature for the purposes of treating respiratory infections. 165 while earlier studies have demonstrated its ability to prevent and alleviate the symptoms of virus-induced respiratory infections, its mechanism of action, as well as its virucidal potency, were not examined. 165 prior to this, vitamin c was the subject of various studies that investigated and concluded on its potential to inactivate the poliomyelitis virus under in vivo settings, but the route of its administration was either through injections 166 or nasal instillation. 167 it was however reported that, in this case, the dosage required was sufficiently low to be achieved via supplementation. 168 another in vivo study of viral inactivation involving the herpes virus also was achieved via injection. 169 apart from these, various other studies involving different virus strains, such as rabies 170 and enteroviruses 171 , have reported in vitro viral inactivation.the sum of gathered literature so far suggests, however, that the desired properties of ascorbic acid are achieved mainly through a combination of its ability to inactivate the virus, inhibit intracellular virus replication, as well as the other beneficial effects of the vitamins, which in turn render it capable of alleviating the severity of a range of virus-related diseases. 168 while indicative of the potential of the use of vitamin c to supplement medical therapy, this does not necessarily imply its potency as a virucidal disinfecting agent.the basis of some of these myths stems from their common association with antimicrobial properties. garlic is commonly associated with fairly broad-spectrum antimicrobial effects, exhibiting antibacterial, antifungal, antiviral and even antiprotozoal activities. its constituents that render it effective against viruses have been discovered to include allicin, diallyl trisulfide, and ajoene. 172, 173 it has displayed antiviral effects against a variety of viruses, including influenza a and b, rhinovirus, hiv, herpes simplex 2, cytomegalovirus, viral pneumonia, and rotavirus. 174 in specifically considering its virucidal range, garlic has been shown to be effective against herpes simplex virus type 1 and the parainfluenza virus type 3. 173 the virucidal effects of garlic and its active compounds do not cover the entire range of virus strains, and they have been shown to be ineffective against certain types, such as the coxsackievirus. 175 high concentrations of garlic extract have also been shown to be toxic to cells, therefore caution is advised when garlic is attempted to be used. 175 thus, prior to turning to garlic as a viable alternative to conventional disinfectants, it is imperative to consider the strain of microbes to be eliminated, as well as whether garlic can be applied in a safe yet effective manner.apart from the aforementioned, there have also been various other myths circulating in the online community with regards to the prevention of the infections, especially with the case of the latest covid-19 pandemic, leading to the need for the clarification that has been conducted by the who and the official media of various countries. as mentioned in the previous segment, another commonly perpetuated belief is the inability of rinsing of the nose with saline solution, or gargling with salt water, to treat viral infections. possibly due to its location of action, this is commonly associated with the treatment of upper respiratory tract infections and has a historical basis in the ancient practices from india. 176 upon investigation of its in vivo efficacy, it was shown that hypertonic saline nasal irrigation was capable of reducing the duration of illness by 22%, over the counter medicine use by 36% and illness in household members by 35%. thirty percent more individuals also saw a reduction in viral shedding by ≥0.5 log 10 per day, which could serve as a reason for the lowered transmission rates. 176 the result shown, however, was not necessarily always positive, as some studies into the hypertonic saline nebulization of children with respiratory syncytial virus bronchiolitis showed no significant alleviation of their symptoms. 176 the studies regarding saline solutions thus far, however, have mostly been investigations into its clinical effects, which, while somewhat suggestive of its potential in symptom reduction, are not sufficient to prove if it does possess virucidal behavior for disinfection purposes.to expand the repertoire of virucidal compounds available, there has been considerable research effort to develop new active materials which exhibit broad spectrum virucidal activities, yet pose low toxicities to humans. three main types of virucidal agents are receiving significant research attention: small discrete virucidal molecules (section 5.1), metal nanomaterials (section 5.2), and virucidal polymers (section 5.3). there is a considerable push towards utilizing naturally-occurring molecules to exploit their intrinsic virucidal properties as much as possible. in this section, we will give a broad overview of emerging directions towards virucidal agents and materials, which are not yet commercially available, and/or their virucidal properties are only demonstrated under controlled lab settings and not yet conclusively proven under real-life usage conditions.-cyclodextrins ( cds) are naturally-occurring macrocyclic molecules comprising of 7 covalently-joined glucopyranose units, possessing a hydrophilic exterior and a hydrophobic interior cavity which can encapsulate non-polar molecules in water. a family of sulfonated cds was recently studied for their virucidal activities ( figure 7a ), which differed in the length of the flexible alkyl groups between the anionic sulfonate groups (cd1 and cd2), as well as rigidity of the spacer unit (cd3). 177 cd1 displayed broad-spectrum virucidal activity against many viruses from different families, including from herpes simplex virus type 2 (hsv-2), respiratory syncytial virus types a and b, human metapneumovirus and human parainfluenza virus type a, while being ineffective against enterovirus d68 and influenza virus h3n2. the long alkyl linker of cd1 appeared to be the key to its high virucidal activity, giving complete hsv-2 inactivation within 15 minutes, and whose virucidal activity was not affected by dilution. compared to cd1, a shorter linker in cd2 and a more rigid one in cd3 made the cyclodextrin derivatives less effective. it was proposed that-cyclodextrin alkyl sulfonates 177 and (b) 1,3-bis(bithiazolyl)tetra-para-sulfonato-calix [4] arene. 107 cd1's best virucidal activity against hsv-2 stemmed from its ability to bind to most numbers of glycoprotein b found on the viral surface, blocking the proteins' fusion loop and induces conformational changes to these proteins.in addition to cyclodextrin derivatives, macrocyclic calix [4] arene derivatives also showed promising virucidal activities. 1,3-bis(bithiazolyl)-tetra-para-sulfonatocalix [4] arene (c [4] s-btz) ( figure 7b ) was shown to show better virucidal activities against human coronavirus hcov-229e than the frequently used antiseptic, chlorhexidine (chx) (section 3.5). 107 firstly, c [4] s-btz were not cytotoxic towards l-132 cells, whereas chx and hxm showed notable toxicities with ic 50 values of 4.3 × 10 −6 and 3.8 × 10 −5 mol/l, respectively. in addition, c [4] s-btz demonstrated a faster virucidal rate as compared to chx 107 . at a concentration of 10 −3 mol/l, a 5 min-incubation of hcov-229e with c[4]s-btz reduced viral titers by 2.7 log 10 units, as compared to just 1.4 log 10 reduction for the same concentration and duration of chx.interestingly, some compounds found in food were found to exhibit virucidal activities. cinnamaldehyde, an organic compound that is responsible for cinnamon's flavor and odor, was effective against norovirus surrogates and hepatitis a virus 178 . carvacrol, a natural monoterpene derivative of cymene, also known as a natural food additive was found to inactivate two norovirus surrogates completely at a concentration of only 0.5%. 179 the grape seed extract was also shown to reduce the hepatitis a virus and feline calicivirus on infected lettuce and pepper after a minute of incubation 180 . these edible food extracts could be potentially used as virucidal agents in self-sanitizing food packaging applications.silver and its salts have had a long history of use as antiseptics and disinfectants, and their broad-spectrum biocidal properties are well established. 181 silver dihydrogen citrate, for instance, can reduce the infectivity of feline calicivirus, a surrogate for the human norovirus (which causes diarrhea and vomiting), by > 4 log 10 units after 1 and 30 min in suspension and on glass surfaces, respectively. 182 silver nanoparticles (agnps) are a class of silver nanomaterials and are defined as dispersions of silver particles between 10 and 100 nm in size. generally, agnps are effective biocides in small doses, 183 although their potential toxicities to humans are still under intense debate. 184, 185 modern methods have enabled agnps of well-defined shapes, particle sizes, and polydispersity to be synthesized, 186 which are important parameters that dictate their eventual biocidal activities, biological fate and toxicity. 187 the virucidal properties of agnps are still largely unexplored, but initial reports are encouraging. agnps can inhibit viruses by a number of mechanisms, including binding to and interacting with viral surface proteins, 185 as well as denaturing enzymes by reacting with amino, carboxyl, imidazole, and sulfhydryl groups. 188 in a study using 30-50 nm agnps surface-coated with polyvinylpyrrolidone against various strains of hiv-1, the agnps were found to bind onto surface glycoproteins (gp120) and chemically modifies it by denaturing its disulfide-bonded domains. 189 this prevents the virus from binding to receptor proteins on potential host cells which are necessary for viral entry and infection. dilute agnp solutions could elicit significant virucidal activity, as inhibition of 50 % of viral infectivity could be attained at agnp concentrations of ≤ 0.91 mg/ml. compared to commonly-used biocidal silver nitrate and silver sulfadiazine, the agnps were found to be more effective against the hiv-1 strains, suggesting that the release of ag 0 atomic clusters from the agnps is more potent virucide than ag + itself. such destruction of viral surface glycoproteins has also been suggested to account for the virucidal effects of agnps against the influenza virus. 190 agnps have also been incorporated into polymer films comprising of poly (3-hydroxybutyrate-co-3-hydroxyvalerate), a biopolymeric material, which achieved the dual function of stabilizing the agnps and bringing about virucidal behavior against norovirus surrogates. 191 agnp-containing products are appearing increasingly in the market, including clothing, wound-dressings, ointments, and food packaging materials, 192 whose biocidal activities are a result of slow sustained-release of the silver nanomaterials. however, it should be noted that like all disinfecting agents aforementioned, the virucidal efficacies of agnps differ from virus to virus. furthermore, the quantities, shapes, size, and types of silver nanomaterials released depend on their real-world settings and applications, 193 all of which affects their virucidal properties. thus, the effectiveness of these agnp-containing products against viruses in real-life settings, as well as their toxicity towards humans, need to be carefully evaluated and studied.other than agnps, gold nanoparticles (aunps) are also promising virucidal agents. aunps synthesized using garlic extract with an average size of 6 nm showed virucidal activity against the measles virus by also binding to surface viral receptors and preventing subsequent host cell binding and infection. 194 however, due to the cost of the gold chemical precursors, aunps are unlikely to become cheap and commercially widely available disinfecting agents.the use of metal nanomaterials to form self-disinfecting surfaces have gained traction in recent years, as viruses can persist on contaminated surfaces for prolonged periods. selfdisinfecting surfaces are capable of inactivating viruses in contact with them in situ, reducing the chances of virus transmissions via human contact with contaminated surfaces. in one design, the self-disinfecting surface was established with photoactive metal nanocrystals which required visible light stimulation for viral inactivation. these surfaces, fabricated from nanocrystals of cuinzn 4 s 6 (cizs) with band gaps within the visible light range, could absorb visible light and produce active oxidative species that inactivated the influenza a virus by oxidizing the amino acid residues presented on the viral envelope proteins (figure 8 ). while highly virucidal, visible light must be present to guarantee the self-sanitizing effect, thereby limiting the practicality of the system.polymers capable of inactivating viruses are a new and exciting area of research. a large number of polymers capable of killing bacteria and preventing their proliferation are known today, 196 but comparatively very few are known to be virucidal. such polymers can: (1) act as carriers for controlled release of bioactive virucidal molecules, or (2) possess intrinsic viral inhibitory properties on their own due to the chemical functional groups present on the polymer structure. compared to the former, whose virucidal efficiencies are limited by diffusion and initial loadings of the bioactive agents through the polymer matrix, the latter has the advantage of showing long-term activity. furthermore, these intrinsically viralinactivating polymers can be formulated or cast into various forms for customized applications, such as disinfecting coatings, binders in pharmaceutical products, water purification filters, and as additives in paper or common household materials. for these reasons, we discuss only intrinsically-virucidal polymers here.the vast majority of viral-deactivating polymers are charged. in 2006, klibanov reported that hydrophobic polyethylenimine (pei) derivatives can inactivate enveloped viruses such as the influenza a virus. 197 cationic and zwitterionic (possessing equal numbers of positive and negative charges) pei derivatives ( figure 9a ) showed close to complete the virucidal activity in 5 min. on the other hand, much slower virus inactivation was reported for anionic pei, reaching 89 % virucidal activity only after 2 hr, while the neutral derivative showed no virus inactivation. notably, an alcoholic solution of these polymers could be painted onto glass slides to form virucidal coatings. the inactivation was proposed to arise from the interaction of the erect charged polymer "tentacles" with ionic sites within the hydrophobic lipid membranes of the influenza a virus. a similar mechanism of action likely accounted for the virucidal activity of cationic pyridiniumtype polyvinylpyrrolidones ( figure 9b ), which damages the lipid envelop of influenza a and leads to virostasis. 198 pyridinium polymers with a high degree of chemical crosslinking which are insoluble in water are also effective in removing viruses from water. 199 the lack of a lipid membrane in non-enveloped viruses (e.g. adenoviruses) necessitates a different strategy for inactivation. the cationic quaternary phosphonium polymer in figure 10 achieves this by interacting with the binding fiber proteins on the virus, preventing them from binding to cellular receptors necessary for entry into cells. at aqueous concentrations as low as 100 ppm, these non-cytotoxic polymers have a virucidal efficiency of 86.5%. 200 in 2013, cationic chitosan derivatives ( figure 11 ) were shown to be highly potent for inhibiting the replication of human coronavirus hcov-nl63, a common cold virus. 201 the combination of chitosan and the specific cationic quarternary ammonium substituent appears to be essential for its activity, as unfunctionalized chitosan, -and -carrageenans and heparin were ineffective in vitro despite their ionic nature. the chitosan derivatives bearing different degrees of substitution were also highly selective in their virucidal activity, being effective against only murine hepatitis virus and a number of human coronaviruses (hcov-nl63, hcov-229e, hcov-oc43, and hcov-hku1). 202 their virus inhibition occurred from the formation of a complex with the s protein of the coronaviruses, which prevents the viruses from binding to its cellular receptor for infection.airborne transmission of viruses is another major route of human-to-human transmissions and can occur in the form of aerosols (a cut-off droplet size of < 5 μm is typically chosen). 203 these aerosol microdroplets settle slowly from the air, and as long as the virus particles remain viable, are respirable and can result in direct viral transmission to the alveolar region. the airborne stability of viruses varies greatly, and depends on relative humidity and temperature. lower humidity is generally favorable for viruses with more lipids, whilst viruses with low or no lipid content show stability at higher humidity. 204 the effects of humidity on virus stability is also dependent on temperature-for instance, lower temperatures can enhance the stability of non-enveloped rhinoviruses at high relative humidity. 205 airborne transmission is one of the major routes of transmission of the enveloped influenza a virus, 206 and has been implicated in sars-cov-1 superspreading events during the 2002-2004 outbreak. 207 a recent study has also revealed that the covid-19-causing sars-cov-2 virus possesses similar aerosol stabilities as the sars-cov-1, remaining viable for the 3-hour duration of study. 16 furthermore, given the high momentum of the multiphase turbulent gas cloud emitted from sneezing and coughing, virus-laden droplets may possibly be spread for distances larger than the 1-2 m recommended separation for sars-cov-2. 208 in fact, sars-cov-2 virus particles were found in the ventilation systems of the hospital rooms housing covid-19 patients in china. 209 clearly, methods and disinfectants capable of disinfecting the air are thus valuable in limiting viral transmissions, especially within indoor environments.methods for disinfecting indoor air is currently an active field of research, though much more remains to be understood, and no perfect solutions yet exist. while uvgi can be effective and efficient in inactivating viruses in aerosols, 210 it can also lead to significant skin and eye discomfort. 211 photocatalyst (silver ion-doped tio 2 )-coated air filters 212 and ionisers 213 have also been recently studied and demonstrated to be effective in removing viable viruses from the air, though they are not expected to be stand-alone solutions. thus far, very few chemical disinfecting agents have been studied for inactivating airborne viruses.in 2016, the use of extremely low concentrations of chlorine dioxide (clo 2 ) was reported to inactivate airborne viruses. 214 using the model bacteriophage viruses (ms2 and φx174), 0.01 and 0.02 ppm of clo 2 could reduce the number of viable bacteriophages by > 2 log 10 units after 3 hours in an exposure chamber. concentrations of clo 2 lower than 0.1 ppm has been shown to show no human toxicity. clo 2 is a stable free radical and is a powerful oxidizing agent, and can inactivate viruses by oxidizing a critical tryptophan residue in their binding site. 215 low concentrations of clo 2 has been found to decrease the infection of mice exposed to aerosols of influenza a virus, 216 and instances of respiratory diseases in a japanese army base, 217 suggesting the possibility that the gas can control and limit airborne viral transmissions. however, more research to understand the long-term effects of clo 2 exposure needs to be carried out.the various classes of disinfectants/sanitizing agents inactivate viruses via different mechanisms and their potency against viruses is highly dependent upon the type of virus and application conditions such as concentration, exposure duration, temperature, ph, and organic load. therefore, knowledge of the target virus and careful control of the application conditions are crucial to achieve effective disinfection. in general, it is observed that disinfectants/sanitizing agents like povidone-iodine, aldehydes, and oxidizing agents that inactivate viruses by chemically modifying their surface groups are fast-acting and highly potent towards most viruses but their application is also often limited by their higher toxicity and damaging effects to surfaces 101, 103, 118, 123 . on the other hand, disinfectants like alcohols and surfactants that mostly rely on dissolving the lipid envelopes tend to only show potency towards a narrower range of viruses and may require longer exposure durations, but are often more biocompatible 32, 42 . an ideal disinfectant/sanitizer would be one that is effective towards a broad range of viruses with fast-action and high potency but still suitable for long-term use, exhibiting good biocompatibility and mild effects towards surfaces. a potential direction may be to develop potent disinfectant agents from natural compounds 218 as they may have less toxicity allowing the product to be child-safe 219 and also safe for long-term usage. new generation sanitizers with viral inactivation mechanisms that can enhance and balance broad disinfection efficacy with biocompatibility are thus likely to have good potential in becoming the preferred choice of consumers.the hands of some health care workers may become persistently colonized by some pathogenic flora such as staphylococcus aureus, gramnegative bacilli, or some other kind of microorganisms.in the recent pandemic, covid-19, which is stands for "coronavirus disease 2019," is introduced as the cause of world acute respiratory infection crisis and outbreak. 2 in this context, public health guideline recommended by world health organization emphasized on frequent and correct washing hands with standard hand rubs to prevent transmission and reduce the spread of the mentioned pandemic diseases. based on these protocols and recommendations, use of alcohol-based hand rubs has become very common around the world. although it is true that hand hygiene is the most important way to break the infection chain transmission but using proper solution with the standard formula should be consider strongly. although handwashing with water and soup is the most recommended procedure but due to lack of access in some situations, ethanol-containing hand rubs are used frequently as a substitute for mentioned method.in the recent crisis due to the fact that the consumption of hand rub solutions has greatly increased in the world, several cases of related risks have been proposed, which are discussed in this article, so evaluation the alcohol concentrations should be considered in quality control procedures meticulous. due to the fact that handwashing can be performed with different methods and compounds, so this instruction should be considered and assay both in terms of behavior and the risk of production formula. governments and health policy makers should encourage local production but monitoring the hand rub formulations to have enough efficiency and safety.another problem about hand rubs is skin complications. due to the excitement in the world and overuse, the alcohol-based hand rubs have caused adverse effects on the skin of many people who used it frequently. figure 1 for example, it has been cleared that methanol is used instead of ethanol in some products. while methanol itself is not a type of toxin, but when adsorbed to the human body, it metabolized by dehydrogenase enzymes into formaldehyde and formic acid. these end products are toxic and may cause metabolic acidosis, brain injury, blindness, cardiovascular instability, and death. 3, 4 methanol toxication most frequently results via oral, industrial inhalation, and transdermal routes.one of the dangers of widespread use of alcoholic solutions in society especially by ordinary people is eliminating many skin normal florae that are very important for the health system, and this is because those such compounds do not differentiate between foe and friend bacteria. 5 another important point about alcohol products is its production based on the nonstandard formula, especially situation-based protocols.in standard alcohol-based hand sanitizers, varying amounts (60%-80% most effective, higher, and less are not most effective) and types of alcohols are used. in these compounds, isopropyl alcohol, ethanol (ethyl alcohol), n-propanol, or a combination of two of these are used. 6 this group of sanitizers is found effective at killing many types of bacteria including gram-positive and gram-negative types and also different virus families including influenza a virus, rhinovirus, hepatitis a virus, hiv, and coronaviruses. however, they have virtually no activity against bacterial spores, protozoan oocysts, and very poor activity against nonenveloped (nonlipophilic) viruses. 7, 8 although alcohols with the mentioned points are rapidly germicidal when applied, but have no significant residual activity and f i g u r e 1 demonstrating a contact dermatitis in two cases and an exacerbation of atopic dermatitis on the palm regrowth of bacteria occurs after use of alcohol sanitizers. for this reason, some compounds such as chlorhexidine, quaternary ammonium compounds, octenidine, or triclosan are added to alcoholbased formulations to increase persistent activity of hand rubs.according to the recent crisis, food and drug administration released a temporary compound producing guideline for certain alcohol-based hand sanitizer products during covid-19 pandemic on march 14, 2020, as the public health emergency. 9 based on such emergency instructions, produced antiseptics solutions have not proper effect and cannot cover all introduced pathogens especially all kinds of nosocomial infections. although this single alcoholbased sanitizers with no persistent compounds may be effective on the infectious agent causing the 2020 crisis (sars-cov-2), according to its limited activity against certain groups of microorganisms, this will cause selection pressure on ethanol-resistant microorganisms. this clonal selection, especially in hospital settings, will lead us to emerge and re-emerge of some controlled microorganisms that will cause a new crisis.the emergence of novel pathogens, bacterial or viral, have always posed serious challenges to public health around the globe. one of these dangerous pathogens is "severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2" or sars-cov-2, more commonly known for causing coronavirus disease 2019 or covid-19, which has been declared a global pandemic by the world health organization in early 2020. since its discovery in december 2019 in wuhan, there have been over three million confirmed cases worldwide by april 2020 (1) . with cases increasing exponentially around the world, it has caused significant burden on all aspects of society despite aggressive isolation methods to prevent the spread of the virus. currently, therapeutic strategies to deal with covid-19 are only supportive, making prevention aimed at reducing transmission the best method.one of many ways implemented to prevent the spread of this virus, as with previous contagious pathogens, is frequent and effective handwashing. in both healthcare and community settings, alcohol-based hand sanitizers have become a popular alternative to the traditional handwashing with soap and water. alcohol based hand sanitizers have been utilized as an effective alternative to handwashing to prevent the spread of bacterial and viral infections, making it one of the essential protocols in decreasing healthcare burden (2, 3) . a range of hand sanitizers are available with various combinations of ingredients and modes of delivery. given the popularity of hand sanitizers during this pandemic, it is important to understand which types of hand sanitizers work best against this novel virus. in this review, we will discuss the role of various types of alcohol-based hand sanitizers in effective elimination of bacterial and viral pathogens with the focus on the effectiveness against enveloped viruses, such as sars-cov-2.viruses are relatively simple structural infectious agents with a minimum of two structural components. first, they contain genetic material, such as dna or rna. the genetic material inside viruses are either single stranded (ssdna or ssrna) or double stranded (dsdna or dsrna). the strands are also either positively or negatively sensed. positive sense dna suggests it is directly translatable into protein if it were rna. negative sense rna, on the other hand, is the complementary strand for messenger rna. in order to protect and encapsulate the genetic material, all viruses also contain a protein coat, called a capsid. viruses can then further be divided by the presence or absence of a lipid envelope, which determines whether viruses are "enveloped" or "non-enveloped". despite being composed of various structural and functional elements that are common to many life forms, such as genetic material and lipid envelopes, viruses must have a host in order to replicate, and hence are not typically described as living entities. bacteria are single-celled living organisms that, unlike viruses, do typically survive without a host and are viewed as living agents. the genetic material is freely floating dna, and similarly to viruses, bacteria lack nuclei. like viruses, bacteria are diverse in their structure.they typically have an inner cell membrane and an outer cell wall, though exceptions do exist.peptidoglycan, a component of the outer cell wall, is a polymer consisting of sugars and amino acids. bacteria contain varying thicknesses of peptidoglycan which partly explains whether bacteria stain purple or pink during the gram-stain procedure, and thus determines the classification of "gram-positive" or "gram-negative" bacteria. there is, however, bacteria that lack peptidoglycan and therefore do not stain. these are known as "atypical bacteria". there are two large categories of hand sanitizers: 1) non-alcohol-based hand sanitizers (nabhs) and 2) alcohol-based hand sanitizers (abhs). the most common primary active ingredient of nabhs, benzalkonium chloride, a quaternary ammonium, is a commonly used disinfectant (4). disinfectants with benzalkonium chloride are generally less irritating than those with alcohol, though more recent evidence suggests it may cause contact dermatitis more often than previously thought (5) . although abhs are less user-friendly on skin than nabhs, abhs predominate in healthcare settings given their low cost and efficacy of reducing infectious transmission (6) . non-alcohol-based hand sanitizers, however, are less worrisome regarding their flammability and abuse potential (6) .hand-sanitizer preparations containing alcohol on the other hand can include ethanol, isopropyl alcohol, n-propanol, or a combination of these (7), water, as well as excipients and humectants. solutions containing alcohols between 60 -95% in volume are most prevalent and effective. humectants are included to prevent skin dehydration and excipients help stabilize the product as well as prolong the time needed for the evaporation of alcohol, thereby increasing its biocidal activity (8).the compound, n-propanol, is the most commonly used alcohol compound in biocides (7). it is not known with much confidence the exact mechanism of alcohol's antimicrobial activity, however, it may be related membrane damage, and inhibition or uncoupling of mrna and protein synthesis through effects on ribosomes and rna polymerase (9), or associated with protein denaturation (7). for activity against bacteria, its optimal bactericidal efficacy is achieved at concentrations between 60% to 90% (10). in fact, absolute alcohol, or alcohol that is no more than one percent water, is less bactericidal than alcohol between the aforementioned range (10).water is thus critical in the protein denaturation process. no matter which process, if not multiple, are affected by alcohol, essential metabolic pathways, membrane damage and loss of cellular integrity ultimately occur (7). it is important to note, however, that alcohols exhibit bactericidal activity against vegetative bacteria -those undergoing metabolism and binary fissionthe viral targets of alcohol-based hand sanitizers are predominantly the viral envelope, if present, which is derived from host lipid envelopes, the protein capsid, which contains and protects the genetic material, and the genetic material itself (7). given that all these components are necessary for the viral life cycle (e.g., attachment, penetration, biosynthesis, maturation, lysis), and thus critical for its ability to transmit to another host, it can be presumed that altering the structure or function of any of the aforementioned components will typically render the virus ineffective.while less is known regarding the specific mechanism of action of alcohols agents against viruses compared to bacteria, it is understood that ethanols have a broader and stronger virucidal activity than propanols. in fact, high concentrations of ethanol has shown to be highly effective against enveloped viruses (12) and thus is effective against the majority of clinically relevant viruses (13) . it is also interesting to note that adding acids to ethanol solutions can increase its efficacy against viruses that are more resistant to ethanol alone (13, 14) . despite the potential synergy of ethanol and acidity, it remains known that most hand sanitizers continue to be ineffective against non-enveloped viruses (15) .similar to alcohol-based hand sanitizers, benzalkonium chloride (bc), the primary ingredient of nabhs, is generally not effective against non-enveloped viruses (16, 17) , though a study demonstrating its efficacy against the non-enveloped human coxsackie virus suggest exceptions exist (18) . despite this exception, it appears that the lipid envelope of either bacteria or viruses are critical structures for bc's effectiveness.the cationic "headgroup" of bc is progressively adsorbed to the negatively charged phosphate heads of phospholipids in the lipid bilayer, and as a result, increase in concentration (19) . the consistent increase of bc concentration results in reduced fluidity of the membrane and thus the creation of hydrophilic gaps in the membrane (19) . in addition, the alkyl chain "tail" component of bc further perturbs and disrupts the membrane bilayer by permeating the barrier and disrupting its physical and biochemical properties (19) . protein function is subsequently disturbed and the combination of the aforementioned effects results in the solubilization of the bilayer constituents into bc/phospholipid micelles (19) . bc also interrupts intercellular targets and compromises the conformational behavior of dna (20) .bacteria and fungi:traditionally, bacteria on hands can be categorized as resident and transient floras.enterococcus faecalis, which colonize deep layers of the skin and are resistant to mechanical removal (21) . on the other hand, transient floras such as s. aureus, escherichia coli, and pseudomonas aeruginosa, colonize the superficial layers of skin (21) . there are also numerous bacterial strains that can be transmitted to the host from other sources that can potentially develop into a variety of bacterial infections. abhs are very effective for quickly destroying many pathogens by the action of the aqueous alcohol solution without the need for water or drying with towels. according to the centers for disease control and prevention (cdc), alcohol-based hand sanitizers have excellent in vitro antimicrobial activity, including multidrugresistant pathogens, such as methicillin resistant s. aureus, vancomycin resistant enterococcus (22) . specific in vitro studies show that hand sanitizers containing 60% to 80% ethanol produced 4-to 6-log reduction in 15 to 30 seconds against a range of bacterial and fungal species (23) .numerous studies have also documented in vivo antimicrobial activity from contaminated hands (24, 25) . while different alcohol-based hand sanitizers all demonstrated antimicrobial effects against various gram-positive and negative bacteria using the kirby-bauer method, which uses antibiotic-impregnated discs to test the susceptibility of strains, propanol based sanitizers were more effective compared to ethanol with the greatest zone of inhibition (4, 21) .with increasing use of hand sanitizers as an infectious control measure, it is also important to note any potential tolerance mechanisms from bacteria. an in vitro alcohol tolerance assay using a lower concentration of isopropanol showed that newer isolates of e.faecium were more alcohol-tolerant than their predecessors (26) . other similar studies on other pathogens have also demonstrated increasing tolerance when exposed to lower concentrations of alcohol (27) . tolerance is not only limited to alcohols, but also exists for bc (28, 29) . the presence of any selective pressure in environments encourage microbes to adapt and evolve resistance to such pressures, and in the case of bc, researchers have observed resistant strains that were able to survive certain concentrations of bc (0.1-0.4%) since the 1960's (30, 31) . given this, tolerance to quaternary ammonium compounds is not a novel observation. as time goes on and the use of both alcohol and bc continue in hand sanitizers and disinfectants, it is inevitable that tolerance will only increase. while future studies are conducted to determine novel mechanisms of tolerance, it is essential to emphasize adherence to hand hygiene protocols that require adequate exposure, volume, and concentrations of hand sanitizers to minimize selective pressures and thus tolerance.although viruses are more difficult to directly study in vivo compared to bacteria, numerous studies have attempted to validate the effectiveness of hand sanitizers on viruses. the world health organization recommends alcohol based hand sanitizer formulations against bovine viral diarrhea virus (bvdv), hepatitis c virus (hcv), zika virus, murine norovirus, and coronaviruses as shown with effective inactivation in quantitative suspension tests (32, 33) . other formulations from sterillium® that contain isopropanol as the main ingredient also completely inactivated enveloped enteric and respiratory viruses, such as h1n1 influenza a virus (34) , but failed to inactivate non-enveloped viruses, except rotavirus. a number of in vivo studies have also been conducted where the virus is applied to fingertips and the efficacy of the hand sanitizers in reducing the numbers of viral particles recoverable from the hands is determined (35) . many of these finger pad tests show moderate efficacy against most non-enveloped viral strains, which are known to be more resistant to disinfectants than enveloped viruses (36, 37) . it is crucial to keep note of the type of viral strains as most commonly ren fact, high concentrations of ethanol has shown to be highly effective against enveloped viruses (12) and thus is effective against the majority of clinically relevant viruses (13) . that being said, although nonenveloped viruses such as hepatitis a and enteroviruses require 70 -80% alcohol to be reliably inactivated, sattar et al suggest that 60% ethanol was sufficient to reduce the titers of rotavirus, adenovirus, and rhinovirus by >3 log10 within a 10-second contact period (36) . even with non-enveloped viruses, satisfactory activity can be achieved with higher alcohol concentrations and extended contact times (3, 38) .as evidence on the novel sars-cov-2 continues to rapidly emerge, data from previous coronaviruses can be extrapolated in the context of the efficacy of hand disinfection given their structural similarity. a systematic review examining the 2002-04 sars outbreak indicated that 9 out of 10 small case-control studies pointed towards the idea that hand washing decreases the likelihood of nosocomial and community transmission, although only three showed statistical significance, partly explained due to the small sample sizes of the studies (39) . a portion of the studies varied in the specific method of hand washing; some studies used hand sanitizers, while others did not specify whether it was achieved through soap and water or sanitizers. although direct in vivo confirmation of virus inactivation after hand sanitizer use is infeasible to achieve in a standardized method, in vitro studies have confirmed that alcohol-based hand sanitizers can be effective in decreasing the viral load. specifically, in vitro studies using sputum cultures of sars-cov infected patients with four different alcohol-based hand sanitizer formulations were all able to inactivate the virus below the limit of detection (40) .transmissions of sars-cov-2 have been described with incubation times of up to 10 days, facilitating its spread via droplets, contaminated hands, or surfaces (41) . as such, it is important to note the efficacy of inactivating viruses on all modes of transmission. alcohol based disinfectants have also been shown to effectively inactivate sars-cov and mers-cov (middle east respiratory syndrome-related coronavirus) on inanimate surfaces, such as metal, glass, and plastic (42) .one of the key limitations for analyzing the true efficacy of hand disinfection arises from the method of data collection via retrospective self-reporting, which can lack standardization and objectivity in frequency and method of handwashing (39) . there is also a myriad of confounding variables, especially in hospital settings, such as frequency and extent of contact with infected persons and the use of personal protective equipment. as hand hygiene is one aspect of a multi-component intervention to reduce infection rates, it is difficult to truly assess the effectiveness of hand sanitizers independently.numerous hand sanitizers, consisting of different ingredients and methods of application, have been compared. however, the centers for disease control and prevention (cdc) recommends washing hands with soap and water whenever possible over hand sanitizers (22) .the superiority of handwashing stems from various factors, such as elimination of a wider spectrum of pathogens and chemicals, and removal of bioburden on soiled hands. a 2016 systematic review supports the historical skepticism about the use of hand sanitizers in food preparation settings and suggests that hand washing with soap and water is more effective than alternative hand disinfection methods for removal of soil and microorganisms from hands (43) .nonetheless, we wanted to specifically compare the efficacy of hand soaps and sanitizers on their efficacy on inactivating enveloped viruses. an in vitro quantitative suspension test comparing three different ethanol-based hand sanitizers and three different antimicrobial soaps all demonstrated a 4 log10 (>99.99%) reduction in the test enveloped viruses (44) . although there is limited evidence in direct comparison between soap and sanitizers, numerous studies have confirmed the effectiveness of sanitizers on various enveloped viruses (13, 32) . when pertaining to non-enveloped viruses, finger pad testing showed that hand washing with soap and water is sufficient to remove >5 log10 virus particles of human norovirus gi and mnv1, while alcohol based hand disinfectants were not able to effectively inactivate these same viruses (34) .alcohol-based products achieve rapid and effective inactivation of various bacteria, but their efficacy is generally lower against non-enveloped viruses. this might even explain the speculation that the use of alcohol-based hand sanitizers might be a risk factor for norovirus outbreaks that were previously described in long term care facilities (45, 46) .on the contrary, scientific studies have shown that after hand washing, as many as 80% of individuals retain some pathogenic bacteria on their hands (47) . moreover, hand washing removes the body's own fatty acids from the skin, which may result in cracked skin that ultimately provides a potential entry portal for pathogens (48) . to overcome the limitations of plain hand washing, hand sanitizers were introduced claiming to be effective against those pathogenic micro-organisms as well as to improve skin condition due to the addition of emollients in it (49) .three common modes of delivering the active ingredient in hand sanitizers, whether alcohol or other disinfectants, are foams, gels, and sprays. there is limited research on comparing the efficacy of various sanitizer delivery systems on virucidal efficacy. one study with 30 human volunteers showed >3 log10 reductions of h1n1 viral counts on finger pads with foam, gel, and wipes with no differences in efficacy among delivery types (50) . similar findings were seen by grayson et al, comparing ethanol based gel and liquid forms on h1n1 (51) . both of these studies suggest that there could be some varying differences in efficacy due to the method of mechanical friction that could contribute to physical removal of pathogens, but there needs to be further research conducted to compare the efficacy between the various hand sanitizer delivery systems.aside from virucidal efficacy, the formulations of hand sanitizers were identified as one factor influencing compliance to hand hygiene, though conflicting results exist. a single pump from foam dispensers provides approximately 1.1 ml of hand sanitizer (52) . manufacturers suggest different recommended volumes for application, but a recent study compared gel and foam hand sanitizers and found no statistically significant difference of complete hand coverage upon usage of equal volumes (52) . it did, however, conclude that volumes <2 ml resulted in high rates of poor coverage (67 -87%), whereas volumes ≥ 2ml generated a lower rate of incomplete coverage (13 -53%). the world health organization does not have a specific volume of sanitizer they suggest but recommend to "cover all surfaces of the hand" (challenge fg. who guidelines on hand hygiene in health care: a summary. geneva: world health organization. 2009). contrary to the previous results (52), a study comparing foam and gel with equal concentrations of ethanol determined that foam spreads more than gel and that the average log10 reduction of foam was superior against escherichia coli bacteria than gel (53) . to translate these experimental findings to clinical practice, however, the compliance of utilizing adequate amounts of foam sanitizer must be met. a study reviewing the potential compliance of various hand sanitizer varieties found that foams containing 62% ethanol have a long drying time, and given this, healthcare workers in clinical practice likely use inadequate volumes of the product in order to quicken the drying time, and consequently do not use a sufficient amounts of foam hand sanitizer for complete hand coverage (54) . indeed, a focus group of nurses strongly rejected high volumes (3ml) of hand sanitizers in gel, foam, or liquid form as "there is not enough time to apply such large doses whilst working on a busy ward" (55) . moreover, the gel and foam formats were considered more desirable than the liquid due to some key desirable properties, including fast absorption, soft/moisturized hand feel, clean non-sticky feel, and low smell (55) . another study compared the tolerability of gel and liquid forms with varying ingredients (ethanol or propanol) among dental students and found that all types were tolerated (56) . multiple studies suggest that there are other factors, such as sanitizer ingredients, addition of skin moisturizer, and accessibility in the workplace, that affect compliance and ultimately make it difficult to directly compare the different types of hand sanitizers. further studies need to be conducted to determine the long-term compliance of the various sanitizer forms, which are more useful in settings where consistent hand hygiene is crucial.with the current research in the literature, it is difficult to confidently suggest one mode of hand sanitizing delivery over the other. what we can state, however, is that soap and water is superior to sanitizer, and when hand washing is unavailable or inconvenient, a sufficient volume of sanitizer is important to ensure complete hand coverage, and compliance is critical for appropriate hand hygiene. and finally, with extrapolating the virucidal data on viruses of similar structure to sars-cov-2, this virus can be effectively inactivated with current hand hygiene products, though future research should attempt to determine this directly.the global disaster covid-19 pandemic has various reasons for its dramatic increase worldwide. some researchers opine that the sars-cov has its origin from bats and the prevalence of this virus to humans was through palm civets: the intermediate source between bats and human population. 1, 2 the most responsible reasons for it include the large human population gathering and human intervention which have violated the ecosystem globally. the population of the world intrudes the various untouched ecologies and put themselves before the unknown viruses and bacteria without knowing their threat or impact of exposure to humankind. 3, 4 the coronavirus can travel beyond species boundaries. earliest infection of sars-cov-2 was in wuhan (china), and the who has called this pandemic as corona virus disease 2019 . initially, it was thought, that this virus also has its origin from the animals to humans, as some of the infected people were from a wholesale seafood market in wuhan. at a later stage, infections were found in humans, those who have not even visited that particular market. thus, making clear that this virus can also spread by human to human exposure [5] [6] [7] .there can be various ways of transmission for this virus to infect the human population. spreading or transmission of covid-19 can be through close contact of human beings or by touch or the aerosol spreading of the virus. [8] [9] [10] the most common way of spreading of this virus is through respiratory droplets as the infected one coughs or sneezes. these micro-droplets containing the virus can infect a healthy human by settling on the face (mouth, nose, ears, eyes) or hands 11 . this virus can sustain for a long time on various surfaces which is also considered as a significant reason for its transmission. frequent touching of the facial area, handshake and unavoidable touch to different surfaces while travelling (through various transport means) is also a significant threat to humans. also, the transmission is known as "hidden transmission" by the carrier unknowingly spreading the infection to other population exists 12 .coronavirus can last on for long durations on different metal surfaces, ranging from hours to days 13, 14 . recent studies show that the coronavirus can last about three days on a plastic surface as well as on stainless steel surface, it can also sustain for a period of whole one day on cardboard whereas it can only sustain for about four hours only on a copper surface 15 .the use of disinfectants decimates microorganism of virus or bacteria on inner layers or inert surfaces by acting as an antimicrobial agent. disinfectants are not always impressive against all kinds of microorganism like bacterial spores as sterilisation, which kills all types of life by the use of extreme physical or chemical procedures 16 . disinfectants play a critical role in decimating microorganisms outside the human body or on various surfaces. it separates disinfectants from antibiotics and antiseptics, which acts inside the human body or on living tissues, respectively. mechanism of disinfectants involves the destroying of the cell wall of microbes and enters into their metabolism to destroy or inactivate them.there are many sanitizers available in the market to disinfect different metal surfaces. these were having composed of chemical substances capable of disinfecting microorganisms which may be suspended in various media like air, alcohol and alcohol plus quaternary ammonium cation based compounds, aldehydes, oxidizing agents and the biguanide polymer polyaminopropyl biguanide etc. table 1 shows various disinfectants and their role. these are sporicidal and fungicidal and inactivate the organic matter partially.the mechanism involves the oxidising of the cell membrane, which leads the virus to death or in the activity. chlorine and oxygen are powerful oxidisers.these are also very good oxidants and effective in disinfection of viruses and bacteria.these are the ingredients of disinfectants and found in mouth wash, soap and hand wash.quaternary ammonium compounds also known as "quats" and shows a very high tendency with alcohol to kill viruses like norovirus, rotavirus, or poliovirus, which are non-enveloped.it has the solution of chlorine, hypochlorite, or hypochlorous acid which is capable of destroying the viruses, bacteria, mycobacteria and the spores. chlorine is considered as an excellent disinfectant of water, whether it is drinking water, pool water or wastewater 23 .sanitizers are the substances that disinfect and clean simultaneously, and these kill more germs than the sanitizers 24,25 . disinfectants are frequently used in hospitals, clinics, and also in the bathrooms and kitchens to kill infective organisms. from the above table, we can decide the role of disinfectants in human life.a comparative study of sars-cov-2 and sars-cov-1 viruses is done to estimate their decay rate on different metal surfaces and in an aerosol. they have used a bayesian regression model to study the decay rate of the virus on different surfaces. around ten experiments with different conditions involving the above two viruses were done for five different environmental conditions. these include four metal surfaces and aerosol. plastic, stainless steel, copper, and cardboard were the four metal surfaces taken to consideration. the reason behind to take theses metal surfaces was the use of these materials in our day to day life, whether the population is travelling, shopping or doing work in the office. study on the aerosol showed that sars-cov-2 could sustain it for up to three hours. one important observation was that during the time the virus reduces its infecting capability, from 103.5 to 102.7 tissue culture infective dose (tcid) 50 per litre of air. a similar tendency of sars-cov-1 is also observed in this study and identified that the infection capability of covid-19 virus has reduced from 104.3 to 103.5 tcid50 per millilitre 26 . table 2 gives a comparative study of both viruses and shows that sars-cov-2 and sars-cov-1 have significant sustaining time on different surfaces. although the behaviour of both the viruses is almost similar on some metal surfaces like in the first three environmental conditions, they show linear decay in infection capability [27] [28] [29] [30] . however, in aerosol, plastic and stainless steel, the concentration of virus on the medium is different, but the differences are insignificant. under the tested experimental conditions, sars-cov-2 was similar to sars-cov-1. these viruses include high viral load having the potential to infect the peoples, and before spreading, the affected person may be asymptomatic [31] [32] [33] [34] [35] .from the available data, an analysis is made on the infection capability and duration for which a particular virus can sustain in a medium or on a surface to depict the trend of decreasing infection tendency of the virus ( figure 1 and 2) . thus, to make these two graphs, the lower concentration values were taken from the table no. 1, as those are the correct values of concentration at the end of sustaining time of virus on different metal surfaces. it can be derived from figure 1 and figure 2 , that, the sustainability of sars-cov-2 is more or less similar to sars-cov-1 for the given environmental conditions. we see a linear decrease in the infection capability of this virus, with respect to time, and the same varies according to the medium (surface). this linear decrease shows the exponential decay in virus titre in per litre of air or millilitre of medium with time. the green line shows the linear decay of infection capability in the graphs. graphs for both sars-cov-2 and sars-cov-1 are confined from 1 to stainless steel, 4-copper and 5-cardboard.coronavirus can sustain for a long time on various surfaces which is a major reason for its transmission. this virus can contaminate on different metal surfaces and stay on them from hours to days, with a maximum span on plastic and stainless and least on the copper surface. the alcohol-based disinfectants can significantly reduce the survival and decay time of the virus. the two important coronaviruses (sars-cov-2 and sars-cov-1) have significant sustaining time on different metal surfaces, and their behaviour is almost similar on various metal surfaces and in aerosols.over-crowding, poor sanitation and indoor air pollution are known risk factors for covid-19 spread. poverty also contributes to covid-19 risk by presenting impossible tradeoffs between preventing disease and sustaining access to food and medicine. many pwh in east africa rely on crowded public transportation for work and procurement of basic amenities. several pwh recently lamented that, although they understand the risk, they must ride public transportation every day to work so as to pay rent and other expenses. although aware of the benefits, many pwh cannot afford to purchase protective gear, such as masks, which help to protect against the virus. in response, we have seen many hiv clinics developing public-private partnerships with neighborhood tailors to produce masks at low prices from available scraps of material. moreover, physical distancing is a luxury that many in east africa do not have the option of practicing. the median household size in the region is five people with few owning homes with multiple rooms [6] . in many of these homes, hand washing poses a challenge as they have limited to no access to running water, soap or sanitizer [7] . in response, we have seen hiv clinics and local businesses produce hand sanitizers using readily available materials such as locally brewed alcohol and curl activator hair gel.many pwh in east africa depend on agricultural production and unskilled manual labor for survival [6] . shelterin-place orders reduce their ability to produce, sell and buy basic goods [8] . there have been reported cases of attempted suicide in our hiv clinics for this reason. covid-19 could cause a stark increase in food insecurity that could kill many more people than the virus itself [9] . concurrently, east africa is experiencing a plague of desert locusts of a scale "unprecedented in modern times" [10] and floods that could bring an acute food shortage to over 25 million people [11] . in combination, these natural disasters are likely to affect pwh more than the general population, as pwh are more susceptible to food insecurity [12] . food insecurity, in turn, is known to interfere with hiv care, leading to poor clinic attendance, poor antiretroviral therapy (art) adherence, poor immunological and virologic responses, lower efficacy of art, higher mortality and increased hiv transmission risk [13] . during the current covid-19 crisis, for example, many pwh report being unable to take their art on an empty stomach for fear that the drugs will make them sick.hiv healthcare providers in africa are partnering with pwh to develop individualized solutions to food insecurity. in some areas, national governments are providing food handouts. in other areas, local charities provide food. for some pwh, the best solution is to temporarily relocate to relatives who are in the process of harvesting their crops.we are witnessing a concerning rise in feelings of helplessness among people with hiv. the proliferation of misinformation about the virus on social media feeds into these sentiments [14, 15] . many pwh have access to smart phones and receive much of their news from whatsapp or other mobile applications [16] . "if only i knew what to believe" complained several pwh. for example, rumors have spread that the thermal scanners used at entrances to facilities can cause brain cancer and that masks cause people to develop lifelong lung disease. there are also many messages promoting the use of herbal remedies for prevention of covid-19 despite the fact that these herbs might adversely interact with art [17] . the lack of understanding of coronavirus and its effects on hiv leads pwh to be more fearful, given what they know about their condition. this stress and sense of impending doom can lead to a fatalism that is reminiscent of the advent of the hiv epidemic. "if god wills it, i will die from the coronavirus," we were told by more than one pwh. this same sentiment of hopelessness debilitated pwh and families for decades at the beginning of the aids epidemic. hiv counselors and pwh have dealt with rumors and fatalism before, and they are using lessons learned form the past to address these new challenges. in some populations of patients, such as adolescents, counseling is more effective if conducted in groups. some clinics are therefore planning group counseling and support sessions when the clinic is otherwise empty to allow for physical distancing and honest conversations.many pwh are afraid to go to hiv clinics, fearing exposure to coronavirus. many hiv clinics in africa are situated within large public hospital campuses. several pwh have informed us that they don't want to go to their hiv clinic because it is located in a hospital where coronavirus patients are admitted. in addition, many hospitals require patients to bring their own masks to gain entry and some pwh have been denied entry into hospitals because they were not able to afford a mask. for these reasons, many pwh have opted to obtain art at health facilities closer to home. in some cases, though, this has resulted in unintended disclosure of hiv status in their communities.in some crowded hiv clinics, strict physical distancing may not be sustainable. in response, many east african hiv clinics have moved waiting areas outside to allow for sunlight and space (fig. 2) . hiv nurses together with pwh are figuring out ways in which transportation to the hiv clinic can be made safer. many crowded areas can be avoided, for example, with proper planning and walking or biking instead of using public transportation. when safe travel to the hiv clinic is not possible, community healthcare workers trained to adhere to covid-19 safety protocols can delivery art to the homes of pwh.covid-19 related interruptions in art could have profound long term repercussions, setting us back after many years of progress [18] . interrupted treatment increases the risk of treatment failure, opportunistic infections, virologic resistance, transmission of hiv from mothers to children, death and increases hiv transmission in the community [19] .fortunately, hiv programs in sub-saharan africa have been at the forefront of improving efficiency of care delivery for years and they are now rising to the challenge of covid-19 [20] . one solution that enhances efficiency of hiv care and reduces covid-19 transmission risk is extension of art prescription durations to 3 or more months, a strategy that was gaining traction long before the covid-19 pandemic [21] . for countries that only allow three-month prescriptions of art, doctors and nurses are sometimes providing two prescriptions for stable patients with suppressed viral loads so that they do not need to return for 6 months.covid-19 is new; but the fear, stigma, and poverty that determine health for much of the world, are not. we have much to learn from pwh about resilience and resourcefulness. as we plan the response to covid-19 in sub-saharan africa, we should start by listening to pwh. chances are they have faced similar challenges before and have solutions that are more likely to be successful in their context than global mandates designed for different settings, cultures, and resources. the number of hospital-acquired infections (hais) has been growing exponentially worldwide since 1980, especially due to the emergence and wide spread of multidrug-resistant (mdr) bacteria. multidrug resistance is an intrinsic and inevitable aspect of microbial survival and has been a major problem in the treatment of bacterial infections. 1 -4 the evolution of bacterial resistance is a consequence of the indiscriminate use of antibiotics and of the transmission of resistance within and between individuals. 5 -8 also, the lack of new clinically relevant classes of antibiotics constitutes a major threat to public health.hais are among the major causes of death and increased morbidity among hospitalized patients, with a minimum of 175000 deaths every year in industrialized countries. 9 -12 several investigations showed that .60% of worldwide hais have been linked to the attachment of different pathogens to medical implants and devices, such as venous and urinary catheters, arthroprostheses, fracture-fixation devices and heart valves. 13 -18 as a direct consequence, the replacement of implants, which entails significant costs and suffering for patients, often remains the only efficient therapy. 19 additionally, it has been demonstrated that the increased incidence of hais is related to cross-infections from patient to patient or hospital staff to patient and to the presence of pathogenic microorganisms that are selected and maintained within the hospital environment (including equipment). 1,11,20 -23 poor infection control practices may facilitate patient-to-patient transmission of pathogens; for instance, in the accommodation of multiple patients in the same room. however, failure of the immune system due to illness and/or the use of immunosupressors and other therapeutic drugs can increase the patient's susceptibility to infections. moreover, the use of antibiotics can inadvertently select antibiotic-resistant microorganisms. 21 since the environment serves as an important reservoir for infectious organisms, the control of hospital infections is a matter of great concern and a major challenge. the introduction of optimized disinfection products and processes is critical to control and prevent the spread of nosocomial infections, cross-resistance and persister cells. 24 within recent decades, requirements regarding the antimicrobial activity of disinfectants in the medical field have been defined in various european standards. 25 also, guidelines have been developed by the cdc, which recommend hospitals to thoroughly clean and disinfect environmental and medical equipment surfaces on a regular basis. 26 however, there is a variety of products available on the market with moderate or even insufficient antimicrobial action. 25 new products and technologies with 'permanent' antimicrobial activity without the risk of generating resistant microorganisms are needed. 12 hence, this manuscript provides information on the main pathogens causing hai and the relevant in-use and emergent strategies for their control.the increase in hai is associated with the higher capacity of bacteria to resist and adapt to harsh environmental conditions, including the presence of antimicrobial agents. deadly pathogens can survive for long periods of time on hospital surfaces, making the environment a continuous reservoir of infectious agents. the adhesion of pathogens to a surface followed by biofilm formation in ,24 h is a critical microbiological problem for healthcare # the author 2013. published by oxford university press on behalf of the british society for antimicrobial chemotherapy. all rights reserved. for permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com j antimicrob chemother 2013; 68: 2718 -2732 doi: 10 .1093/jac/dkt281 advance access publication 18 july 2013 services. 10 in fact, the concentration of disinfectants required to kill sessile bacteria may be 1000-fold higher than that required to kill planktonic bacteria of the same strain. thus, antimicrobial therapies fail to kill biofilms most of the time. 27 -30 furthermore, there are few prevention techniques to control biofilm formation without causing side effects. 31 some of the most important pathogens involved in hais include methicillin-resistant staphylococcus aureus (mrsa), clostridium difficile, pseudomonas aeruginosa, vancomycin-resistant enterococcus spp. (vre), acinetobacter baumannii and some enterobacteriaceae strains. 1, 21, 32, 33 to a lesser extent, pathogens such as candida species, viruses [adenoviruses, noroviruses, rotaviruses, influenza, parainfluenza, hepatitis b viruses and severe acute respiratory syndrome (sars)-associated coronaviruses] can also survive on surfaces and medical equipment, although there is little evidence of possible survival. 2,32 -34 most of these pathogens can survive for months on surfaces. 32, 35 some examples of the most persistent hospital pathogens are summarized in table 1 along with some of their characteristics. some investigations have proposed that gram-negative bacteria persist longer than gram-positive bacteria and, although it has been suggested that the type of surface does not influence the period of persistence, it has also been shown that longer persistence may occur on plastic or even on steel. 32, 36 in terms of environmental conditions, lower temperatures (4 -68c) and high humidity (.70%) improved the persistence of several bacteria, fungi and viruses. 32 moreover, the frequency of contamination has been shown to vary depending on the body sites at which patients are colonized or infected. it was demonstrated that 36% of surfaces sampled in the rooms of patients with mrsa in a wound or urine were contaminated, compared with 6% of surfaces in the rooms of patients infected with mrsa at other body sites. 37 pathogens can spread from patient to patient through contact with inanimate surfaces, including medical equipment and the immediate patient environment. 38 there is clinical evidence suggesting an association between poor environmental hygiene and the transmission of microorganisms causing hais. 39 cheng et al. 40 found a strong correlation between environmental contamination by mrsa and hospital infection rates. drees et al. 41 demonstrated an increase in vre infection risk for an occupant of a room where a patient with this infection was previously treated. it was also demonstrated that nosocomial transmission of norovirus, c. difficile and acinetobacter spp. was correlated with contaminated environmental surfaces. 15 in another study, a positive and measurable effect on the clinical environment was demonstrated with the introduction of one extra cleaner, which apparently protected the patients against mrsa infection. 42 the potential for contaminated environmental surfaces to contribute to pathogen transmission depends on two important factors: the pathogens must survive on dry surfaces and the contamination has to occur on surfaces commonly touched by patients and healthcare staff at a sufficiently high level to enable transmission to patients. 35 moreover, pathogen transmission will also depend on the infectious dose and route of transmission, along with host susceptibility.shared clinical equipment that comes into contact with intact skin, despite being unlikely to introduce infection, can also promote the transfer of microorganisms between patients. 43 the most frequently contaminated surfaces are floors, doorknobs, television remote control devices, bed-frame lockers, mattresses, bedside tables and toilet seats in rooms previously occupied by an infected patient. 1, 12, 35, 44 wilcox et al. 45 found that 50% of commodes, toilet floors and bed frames sampled at a hospital were contaminated with c. difficile. medical devices, including stethoscopes and otoscopes, are highly prone to be contaminated with bacteria and have been implicated as potential vectors of cross-transmission. 46 moreover, bacteria were found on various plastic items in the hospital, including pagers and cell phones. 47 cotterill et al. 48 provided suggestive evidence that contaminated ventilation grills were sources of mrsa outbreaks in hospitals. additionally, an estimated 20% -40% of hais have been attributed to cross-infection via the hands of healthcare personnel, who have become contaminated from direct contact with the patient or indirectly by touching contaminated environmental surfaces. 15, 38 in fact, hand hygiene is a major contributing factor to the current infection threats to hospital inpatients. 49 barker et al. 50 showed that norovirus is consistently transferred via the fingers to melamine surfaces and from there to other typical hand-contact surfaces, such as taps, door handles and telephone receivers. pessoa-silva et al. 51 demonstrated that hands become increasingly contaminated with commensal flora and potential pathogens during neonatal care and that gloves do not fully protect the workers' hands from contamination. pittet et al. 52 concluded that bacterial contamination increased linearly with time on ungloved hands during patient care. this demonstrates the importance of decontaminating hands before every patient contact. fendler et al. 53 concluded that the use of an alcohol gel hand sanitizer decreased infection rates during a 34 month period and can provide an additional tool for an effective infection control programme. the same conclusion was reached by hilburn et al. 54 the gloves of medical staff are also easily infected from direct contact with an infected patient or, indirectly, by touching contaminated surfaces, which serve as a carrier for pathogenic microorganisms. 11 in a study focused on mrsa infection, 42% of personnel gloves that contacted the furniture/surfaces of a patient room but had no direct contact with infected patients were contaminated. 37, 44 more significantly, it was found that 65% of the nursing staff that had directly treated an infected individual contaminated their gowns/uniforms with the organism. 55 the white coats, shirts and ties of doctors have also been found to contain potentially pathogenic flora. 56 maintenance of a good hospital environment requires the implementation of adequate strategies. such strategies are described in guidelines proposed by several committees, particularly the healthcare infection control practice advisory committee. 57 for instance, in the case of surfaces with blood contamination, a disinfectant with activity against tuberculosis and hepatitis b virus (hbv)/hiv or a 5.25% bleach solution, at a final dilution of 1 : 10, can be used. 11 these documents describe procedures to be implemented in healthcare facilities in order to achieve efficient cleaning and disinfection and also review the main uses of review disinfectants as well as their mechanism of action and activity. rutala and weber 58 developed a set of guidelines for hospital environment cleaning.cleaning is related to the clearance of foreign material from a surface or equipment, allowing the removal of some organic material and microorganisms by detergents. 11, 33 however, this process does not kill bacteria, which, under favourable conditions, can redeposit elsewhere and form biofilms. 31 consequently, cleaning must always precede disinfection and sterilization in order to eliminate infectious microorganisms. 59 a significant amount of microorganisms is destroyed by the disinfection process, which involves the use of chemical agents such as quaternary ammonium compounds, aldehydes, alcohols and halogens, or radiation and heat. 11, 31, 33, 60 the control of hospital infection must involve both disinfection and sterilization processes and sometimes the use of aerosols to clean the air. 11, 33 a biocide can target different locations on a cell as it may interact with the surface, the bacterial cell wall and the outer membrane, or it may penetrate the cell, where it can cause reversible or irreversible changes by interacting with nucleic acids, inhibiting enzymes and cell growth. 24, 60 when choosing a disinfectant, several factors must be taken into account, such as its efficiency, compliance with regulations, user acceptability, instrument compatibility, the types of surfaces and medical equipment, and the pathogenicity, infection rates and persistence of the microorganisms. 61 a disinfectant must be safe, easy to use and effective against a wide range of pathogenic microorganisms and should not leave toxic residues. 31, 61 the efficiency of the disinfectant depends on several factors, mainly surface characteristics (hydrophobicity, charge and roughness), the amount of organic and inorganic matter, temperature, ph, the chemical structure of the biocidal agent and the type of infection and pathogen. 11, 24, 31 the mode of action of the disinfectant and the route of entry into the cell (porin channels in the case of hydrophilic disinfectants and the hydrophobic path for hydrophobic disinfectants) also play significant roles. 24 the risk of infection of the room/surface/ equipment must also be considered in the choice of the disinfectant, as well as its concentration and exposure time. 24, 62 hospital areas should be defined according to the risk of infection in order to establish and promote proper cleaning/disinfection. areas where contamination is expected, e.g. laboratories, operating theatres, ambulatory surgical units, labour and delivery rooms, areas with blood or body fluid spills, and neonatal and burn units, must be cleaned and disinfected frequently (often several times per day). 1 areas of low risk, such as administration and waiting rooms, only require a daily cleaning.according to its efficiency and ability to kill bacterial spores, an antimicrobial product can belong to one of four distinct groups: sterilants or high-, intermediate-and low-level disinfectants (table 2) . given the increased resistance to antimicrobial agents displayed by bacteria upon biofilm formation, this hierarchy is only a rough guide. 60, 63, 64 a disinfectant is almost never 100% effective due to the resistance of some bacteria to specific compounds and due to inefficient cleaning protocols. 1 once a disinfectant is removed, the surviving bacterial population can potentially regrow. moreover, viable spores still attached to various materials can remain undetected by current sporicidal tests, resulting in overestimation of the sporicidal activity of sterilizing agents. 65 the efficacy of diverse chemical disinfectants in inhibiting and killing some of the most clinically relevant bacteria, pathogenic fungi and yeasts has been evaluated by several authors. the activity of a disinfectant is generally analysed in terms of its mic and mbc. however, the most suitable measure is the log 10 reduction of the number of cfu. the time taken to obtain a 5 log 10 reduction is also a reference to assess disinfection efficacy. 61 the use of biocides has evolved over time. alcohols such as ethanol have a long history of antiseptic use; around the 19th and 20th centuries phenolics and hypochlorites started to be employed and, later, quaternary ammonium compounds. 66 more recently, the most common products have been chlorhexidine and silver salts, peroxygens, glutaraldehyde and ortho-phthalaldehyde. 66, 67 alcohol disinfectants cause protein denaturation and are effective against vegetative bacteria, fungi and viruses, but have no effect on spores. 61, 68 chlorine-releasing agents can oxidize membrane proteins and are very effective in removing biofilms from surfaces, requiring short exposure times for growth inhibition. 57, 61, 68 however, these chemical agents are corrosive to metals and can be inactivated by the presence of organic matter. 57, 61, 69 moreover, in the last few years the use of chlorine has been associated with the formation of carcinogenic compounds and some pathogens have been shown to be resistant to chlorine. 70 the aldehyde-based disinfectants disrupt proteins and nucleic acids by alkylation and have antimicrobial activity against spores, bacteria, viruses and fungi. 61, 64 quaternary ammonium compounds and phenols solubilize the membrane and the cell wall. 68 hydrogen peroxide and peracetic acid promote protein denaturation, and are active against several groups of microorganisms and pathogens implicated in nosocomial infections. 38, 57, 61, 64 the mechanism of action of different disinfectant categories has been presented elsewhere in greater detail. 64, 71, 72 countless studies have been performed regarding the antimicrobial action and efficacy of different disinfectants. rutala and weber 69 reviewed the use of inorganic hypochlorite (bleach) in healthcare facilities for disinfection of medical devices and environmental surfaces, and concluded that the many advantages of chlorine (e.g. fast microbiocidal activity, cost-effectiveness and good track record) are likely to support its continued use in healthcare settings. griffiths et al. 73 evaluated the efficacy of several disinfectants (sodium dichloroisocyanurate, chlorine dioxide, 70% industrial methylated spirits, 2% alkaline glutaraldehyde, 10% succinedialdehyde and formaldehyde mixture, 0.35% peracetic acid and a peroxygen compound at 1% and 3%) against different strains of mycobacteria and showed that disinfectants based on sodium dichloroisocyanurate were more effective. moreover, they concluded that clinical strains were more resistant to biocides than laboratory type strains. 73 other studies have shown that chlorhexidine at 0.5% concentration is the best choice, among several antiseptics and surface disinfectants (including betadine, hydrogen peroxide, sodium hypochlorite, alcohol and ultraviolet radiation), to kill clinical yeast isolates, either in planktonic cultures or in biofilm. 74 oie et al. 75 analysed the effects of four different chemical treatments (0.2% alkyldiaminoethyl glycine, 0.01% or 0.1% sodium hypochlorite and 80% ethyl alcohol) on the disinfection of porous and smooth surfaces contaminated by s. aureus in a university hospital. the results demonstrated that the disinfection of porous surfaces was more difficult and none of the disinfectants was effective, highlighting the need for more frequent disinfection and the use of high-level disinfectants on these surfaces. 75 more recently, speight et al. 76 evaluated the effect of 32 disinfectants on spores of c. difficile by a suspension test and only eight products gave .3 log 10 reduction in viability within 1 min (to have a more realistic simulation of probable real-life exposures) under dirty conditions (3% bsa). these results underscore the importance of carefully selecting the disinfectant to eliminate spores of this particular microorganism. 76 kim et al. 77 review concluded that not all biocides used in hospitals can kill this microorganism. also, the efficacy of disinfectants was higher for planktonic cells (reduction to undetectable levels). 77 bridier et al. 78 studied the effects of three common disinfectants (peracetic acid, benzalkonium chloride and ortho-phthalaldehyde) on 77 bacterial strains and found that mycobacteria demonstrated a marked resistance to all the biocides. benzalkonium chloride was inefficient even at very high concentrations. also, resistance was dependent on the strain within the same species. 78 gutiérrez-martín et al. 79 analysed the activity of 16 active compounds and 11 commercial disinfectants against campylobacter jejuni by performing a suspension test in the presence and absence of serum. high levels of reduction (.6 log 10 ) for some disinfectants [chloramine-t, povidone iodine (1% available iodine), cetylpiridinium chloride, ethanol, isopropanol, chlorhexidine digluconate, formaldehyde, phenol and 10 of the 11 commercial formulations, especially those based on quaternary ammonium compounds] were obtained, regardless of the presence or absence of organic material. 79 table 3 compiles some of the available information regarding hospital disinfectants.disinfection methods employed in many intensive therapy units and other healthcare facilities include the use of antimicrobial wipes. such products might be efficient in removing a microbial bioburden from a surface. 80 the use of alcohol wipes was also demonstrated to generally decrease the mean daily bacterial load on toilets where wipes were made available. 81 however, in most cases, antibacterial wipes used in hospitals were found to spread germs rather than eradicate them. wipes can act as sources of cross-contamination when they are used on surfaces next to patients or on those commonly touched by staff and patients (e.g. tables, keypads). 82 moreover, many hospital personnel use a single wipe several times to clean and disinfect multiple surfaces before discarding it. instead, they should use a wipe on a single discrete surface that requires only low-level disinfection.a description of methods for hospital equipment disinfection with an analysis of the exposure time and the type of disinfectant and a summary of advantages and disadvantages of some chemical sterilants can be found elsewhere. 11, 57 nevertheless, it has to be taken into account that some of these studies were performed with culture collection strains, whose responses to the presence of these disinfectants may differ from those of clinical isolates. 60 furthermore, some studies evaluated only a single strain of the species. therefore, the results obtained may not always be representative of what occurs in clinical practice. most of the presented investigations were performed on a laboratory scale, which may not truly reflect the complexity of a hospital scenario.the need for appropriate disinfection procedures is enhanced by the multitude of outbreaks that have resulted from improperly decontaminated patient-care items. 83 the disinfection processes previously described are executed by the application of chemical agents in solution. however, this kind of disinfection has some disadvantages: the application of disinfectants requires an exposure time of at least 5-10 min; the chemicals might react with acids; they might lose their activity in contact with organic substances; and some of them can cause skin, eye and respiratory tract irritation. 23 in this context, new disinfection strategies must be developed and their efficiencies must be evaluated in terms of their potential applications in hospital settings. this need for novel control methods has been emphasized by the increased resistance of bacterial species to some disinfectants, mainly as a consequence of biofilm formation. 31 one of these alternative strategies is steam vapour disinfection, which has been evaluated by different groups. tanner 84 demonstrated a reduction of 7 log 10 in mrsa, vre and p. aeruginosa (to undetectable values) within 5 s of application of a steam vapour system. sexton et al. 23 applied a steam vapour system to combat mrsa, total coliform bacteria and c. difficile cells, attaining a 90% reduction in bacterial levels. hydrogen peroxide vapour (hpv) is also used for decontamination of clinical surfaces and equipment. otter and french 85 found that vegetative bacteria and spores (6 -7 log 10 cfu) survived on surfaces for .5 weeks, but were inactivated within 90 min of exposure to hpv in a 100 m 3 test room. initial inocula of m. tuberculosis ( 3 log 10 ) and geobacillus stearothermophilus (6 log 10 ) were exposed to hpv at 10 locations during room experiments and both microorganisms were inactivated in all locations within 90 min of hpv exposure. 86 falagas et al. 38 reviewed other studies of disinfection with hpv against mrsa, c. difficile and other pathogens in several sampled hospital locations (including surgical wards, ward side rooms, single isolation rooms, multiple-bed ward bays and bathrooms); complete or almost complete disinfection of the sampled hospital sites was achieved with airborne hydrogen peroxide. hpv appears to have low toxicity and has good compatibility with most inanimate materials. 87 uv light exposure has also been applied for room decontamination. it has been used in air-handling systems and upper-room air-purifying systems to destroy microorganisms and can also inactivate microorganisms on surfaces. 88 uv-c was demonstrated to be effective in eliminating vegetative bacteria on contaminated surfaces (both in the line of sight and behind objects) within 15 min and in eliminating c. difficile spores within 50 min. 89 in other study, a mobile uv-c light unit significantly reduced aerobic colony counts and spores of c. difficile on contaminated surfaces in patient rooms. 88 it was also demonstrated that ceiling-mounted uv germicidal irradiation lamps were effective in reducing the viability of both bacillus cereus and bacillus anthracis vegetative cells and spores after a minimum exposure time of 1 h at an intensity as low as 8 mw/cm 2 . 90 both the hpv and uv light methods have demonstrated good results. however, they require the removal of patients and healthcare personnel from the room, have a high acquisition cost and increase room turnover time. 91 moreover, they do not replace standard cleaning and disinfection. 92 bacterial adhesion to stainless steel surfaces (the most commonly used material in industry and hospitals) is one of the major reasons for cross-contamination in many scenarios. 93 thus, more recently, different strategies for the production of antimicrobial surfaces with the purpose of reducing hai have been extensively investigated and developed. researchers have focused on the development of surfaces with antimicrobial coatings in order to inhibit biofilm formation by either killing the bacteria or preventing their adhesion. bacterial growth control can then occur by three different modes of action: biocide leaching, which involves the release of a cytotoxic compound to kill attached microorganisms; adhesion prevention, which uses a super-hydrophobic review 2723 jac continued review 2725 jac covering in order to prevent microbial adhesion; and contact killing, which consists of disruption of cell membranes in contact with the surface. 13 many of these techniques consist of surface modification by introduction of antimicrobial substances such as antibiotics, metals (such as copper and silver) and antiseptics. 93 -98 these surfaces can be obtained by different methods, including adsorption, ligand -receptor pairing and covalent binding. 94 surfaces that release antimicrobial products can work quite efficiently, although they eventually become exhausted and the diffusible antimicrobials pose the potential problem of inducing microbial resistance, since the surfaces are continually releasing active compounds to the environment for a long period of time. 55, 99 alternatively, the design of surfaces that kill microbes on contact and do not release biocides may solve this problem. the covering of surfaces with transient metals, such as copper and silver as mentioned above, is a well-established strategy. moreover, surfaces that catalytically produce biocides using externally applied chemical, electrical or optical energy are an interesting alternative. 99 an example of biocide leaching is the use of surfacine, which incorporates an antimicrobial compound (silver iodide) in a surface-immobilized coating (a modified polyhexamethylenebiguanide). 83 this compound interacts with the microorganism by electrostatic attraction, penetrates the cell and finally kills it. 83 surfaces treated with silver iodide resulted in excellent elimination of vre at challenge levels of 100 cfu/in 2 for at least 13 days. 11 furthermore, these surfaces retained the antimicrobial effect even after cleaning. 11 photocatalytic oxidation on surfaces coated with titanium dioxide (tio 2 ) is also a possible alternative. in the presence of water and oxygen, highly reactive oh 2 radicals generated by tio 2 and mild uv-a are able to destroy bacteria, thus reducing bacterial contamination. 100 another example of a product that releases an organic antimicrobial is microban w , which contains triclosan [5-chloro-2-(2,4-dichlorophenoxy)-phenol] as the antimicrobial agent, making the surface resistant to the growth of microorganisms. 55 this antimicrobial technology can be found in hundreds of consumer, industrial and medical products around the world.covalent immobilization of bioactive compounds onto functionalized polymer surfaces has also seen rapid growth in the past decade in such industries as biomedical, textiles, microelectronics, bioprocessing and food packaging. 101 table 4 presents some examples of the application of these surfaces.furthermore, other kinds of surface are stimulating intensive research and some of them are already used, while others are promising candidates for practical application. 102 -104 examples include materials for medical implants (such as catheters), devices and instruments that are in contact with patients, surgical gowns and other protective clothing (such as surgical masks, caps) and polymeric coatings on surfaces such as shower walls. 102, 103 antimicrobial polymers provide a very suitable strategy for achieving this objective since they can be applied to diverse objects. polyelectrolyte multilayers (pems) have also been investigated extensively as biomaterials and biomaterial interfaces and also for bacterial contamination prevention. 104 gas plasma is another promising alternative to sterilization that can be applied in healthcare services, although it is mainly targeted to equipment rather than to surfaces. plasma consists of a mixture of photons, electrons, ions, atoms and radicals (such as atomic oxygen, ozone, nitrogen oxides, hydroxyl and superoxide). as a result of air plasma discharges, the gas enters an ionized state (by energetic transfer) and exhibits antimicrobial properties. 9, 20, 105, 106 two types of plasma can be defined according to the conditions under which the plasma is formed: thermal and non-thermal plasmas. compared with non-thermal plasmas, thermal plasmas require higher pressure and are characterized by higher temperatures and a local thermodynamic equilibrium. 105,106 these systems have many advantages over more conventional disinfection techniques as they enable the disinfection of the interior of some types of equipment and materials, such as needles, at low cost and with easy handling. 107,108 furthermore, gas plasma does not require chemical products and it is not toxic to the skin. 20 shimizu et al. 108 performed treatments with plasma using a surface micro-discharge device, under different temperature and humidity conditions. the antimicrobial effect was tested on escherichia coli and enterococcus mundtii with a reduction of 5 log 10 after 15 and 30 s of plasma treatment for e. mundtii and e. coli, respectively. 108 other researchers have developed a large-scale plasma dispenser and evaluated its effect on e. coli and candida albicans in agar plates in the presence and absence of textiles. 107 their results demonstrated that the system was not affected by the presence of the textile, and in both cases a 15 s treatment caused a 5 log 10 reduction and, after treatment for 5 s, the fungi were reduced by 4 log 10 . joshi et al. 10 studied the biocidal efficacy of non-thermal dielectricbarrier discharge plasma against e. coli, s. aureus and mrsa in biofilms and planktonic cells. the planktonic cells were completely eliminated after 120 s of treatment, whereas the mrsa growing in biofilms were killed by .60% within 15 s, suggesting that the effectiveness of a plasma system is highly dependent on exposure time and cell density. 10 recent investigations evaluated the effect of non-thermal gas plasma on biofilms of staphylococcus epidermidis and mrsa on glass surfaces; a log 10 reduction of 4 and 4.5 was observed after 1 h of exposure, respectively, and greater reductions could be attained with more prolonged exposure times. 9 burts et al. 20 tested an atmospheric non-thermal plasma as a disinfectant for hospital pagers by analysis of mrsa reduction, and found complete disinfection within 30 s. different cell densities and exposure times were also evaluated and a 4 -5 log 10 reduction was obtained within 10 min. more information regarding this disinfection strategy has been reviewed by moisan et al. 105, 106 these novel disinfection techniques are important means of reducing the high numbers of nosocomial infections and are more efficient than conventional disinfection methods.there is great concern about the growth and prevalence of hai due to the increased incidence of resistant bacteria. furthermore, the development of new antibiotics is a difficult task because of high research costs and regulatory issues. conventional cleaning methods for the eradication of hospital environmental contamination seem to be inefficient. this manuscript reviews several new disinfection alternatives as attempts to overcome these problems. most of the data currently available have been generated by the manufacturers and need to be validated by independent investigations. moreover, studies concerning bacterial biology and physiology allied to genomics and computer analysis should be applied to identify and understand the pathogenesis associated with resistant bacteria and crucial targets for novel biocides. thus, further evaluation and implementation of new measures and new disinfection methods are necessary, not forgetting their validation in terms of effectiveness, safety and disposal. additionally, it is important always to evaluate the risk of emerging phenotypic resistance when developing new disinfection strategies. none to declare.a unique water optional health care personnel handwash provides antimicrobial persistence and residual effects while decreasing the need for additional products among the many variables impacting the success of an infection control program, none is of greater importance than routine hand decontamination of the health care personnel. since the times of ignaz semmelweis, numerous articles have been published showing a strong positive correlation between adequacy of hand hygiene practices and incidence of nosocomial and iatrogenic infections. 1 likewise, studies have shown compliance with routine hand-cleansing procedures to be a variable at least as important in controlling rates of infection as is the antimicrobial effectiveness of the hand-cleansing formulations. compliance is undesirably poor among many categories of health care personnel that have been studied. 2 the advent of waterless alcohol handrubs provided a quick, easily practiced process for hand sanitation that was highly effective in eliminating transient, potentially pathogenic microorganisms from the hands of health care providers. 1, 3, 4 these products helped to increase compliance with hand sanitation guidelines, but results from surrogate testing showed that they could not, and should not, replace thorough handwashing as an infection control process. build-up of organic debris over time and repeated use progressively depreciated the antimicrobial effectiveness of the alcohol hand sanitizers. moreover, the alcoholonly products provide no appreciable antimicrobial persistence.according to hilburn et al, 4 in the united states, there are 2.0 million nosocomial infections each year. these account for 5% to 10% of hospitalized patients, result in 88,000 deaths (eighth leading cause), and cost the us economy over $4.5 billon annually. again, compliance with established handwashing policies was considered a key factor in breaking the chain of infection. often, compliance is low, in the range of only 20% to 50%. proper hand hygiene is a very important tool in reducing nosocomial infections; one that could realize potential annual savings in the range of $1.5 billion. 4 recent studies with alcohol-based hand sanitizers have shown that these products can reduce the incidence of nosocomial infections by 30.0% to 36.1%. 4 the centers for disease control and prevention (cdc) has published hand hygiene practices for health care personnel, recommending that alcohol-based hand sanitizers be used routinely, interspersed frequently with thorough handwashings throughout the workday. 3 therefore, hand hygiene as envisioned by the cdc could be accomplished by the routine use of a combination of waterless hand sanitizers and wateraided handwashes. compliance with cdc handwash guidelines may be enhanced by an alcohol-based product that could be used with or without waterbecause this one, single product would prove beneficial for those incidents in which the hands are soiled and a water-aided wash is needed, as well as for the more routine waterless hand hygiene episodes. therefore, the number of products required for hand sanitization would be reduced and, thus, some of the confusion surrounding the hand hygiene experience and compliance eliminated.for example, a new water-optional health care personnel handwash, 61% ethyl alcohol preserved with zinc pyrithione (61% alcohol-zpt), has been designed to fulfill this need. it was tested in vitro and then in vivo in both waterless and water-aided applications and has been found compliant with the fda criteria for this indication, as set forth in the tentative final monograph (tfm) for ''effectiveness testing of an antiseptic handwash or healthcare personnel handwash.'' 5 the in vivo testing was performed per the tfm in the waterless as well as the water-aided modes to ensure that the product was fda compliant regardless of application method.this fda test procedure assesses reductions in numbers of a bacterial contaminant (serratia marcescens) on the hands of human volunteer subjects immediately following use of a hand cleanser. persistent and in vivo efficacy of the water optional handwash (61% alcohol-zpt) in the water-aided mode, compared with 2% chlorhexidine gluconate and 0.5% triclosan. values noted by an asterisk are statistically different (p , 0.05) from the 61% alcohol-zpt determination for the same wash. the log 10 baseline value for each study group are as follows: 2% chg = 8.88; 0.5% triclosan = 9.03; 61% alcohol-zpt = 9.08. the water-aided product application times were 30 seconds for the chg and triclosan products, but only 15 seconds for the 61% alcohol-zpt product.residual antimicrobial effects are not evaluated in this tfm-based study design. even so, persistent effects (continued antimicrobial activity for an extended period-eg, 6 hours-following product use to prevent microbial recolonization) and residual effects (the progressive increase or cumulative antimicrobial activity with repeated use of a product over time) would be properties highly desirable in a health care handwash product. 6, 7 neither of these characteristics are inherent with alcohol-only hand gels. as stated above, zpt was incorporated as the preservative system for this product. this was done in accordance with the tfm authorization allowing for the addition of preservatives to alcohol-based products. 5 the fda's rationale is that alcohol-based products of skin antisepsis do not provide the antimicrobial persistence necessary to prevent microbial recolonization beyond 2 to 3 hours. a properly selected preservative added to alcoholbased products can extend the antimicrobial effects for hours longer. therefore, a second comparative study was designed, in which 4 products were tested-a novel, water-optional 61% alcohol-zpt (triseptin water-optional; healthpoint, ltd., fort worth, tx), a no-rinse 61% ethanol hand sanitizer without a preservative system (avagard d; 3m health care, st. paul, mn), a 0.5% triclosan water-aided handwash (cv medicated lotion soap; steris corporation, mentor, oh), a 2% chlorhexidine gluconate (chg) water-aided handwash (bactoshield; steris corporation)-and a 4% chg handwash was employed as a reference product (hibiclens; regent medical, norcross, ga). the thrust of this 5-day study was to characterize and compare the immediate, persistent, and residual antimicrobial effects of these products on the resident and transient microflora present on the hands of human volunteers. in addition, the skin-conditioning benefits of the 61% alcohol-zpt formulation were measured via an exaggerated handwash study 8, 9 ; the virucidal effectiveness while assessed was reported elsewhere previously. 10, 11 all data reported here were obtained by tests performed at contract laboratory facilities. the supporting institutional review board for each test facility approved the in vivo protocol(s).prior to product testing, a neutralization study was performed, following the guidelines set forth in the american society for testing materials (astm) method e 1054-02, standard test methods for evaluation of inactivators of antimicrobial agents. 12 because the postneutralization test population mean log 10 values were within 0.25 log 10 of the initial population mean log 10 values, the neutralization was considered successful. both in vitro and in vivo testing are mandated by the fda's tfm, 5 and these studies were conducted in vivo efficacy of the water optional handwash (61% alcohol-zpt) in the waterless application mode, compared with a 61% ethyl alcohol handrub. values noted by an asterisk are statistically different (p , 0.05) from the 61% alcohol-zpt determination for the same wash. the log 10 baseline value for each study group are as follows: 61% alcohol-zpt = 9.08; 61% alcohol without preservative = 9.06.for the 61% alcohol-zpt product. only the in vivo data are discussed here because they relate to criteria that are health care personnel handwash indication specific. in vitro data are on file and available. the in vitro tests included the minimum inhibitory test employing approximately 1100 organisms (bacteria and yeast) of various genera and species, many of which are known human pathogens. similarly, log 10 time kill studies were performed on species of bacteria and yeasts to verify the prompt, efficient microbial kill of the product. subjects recruited for these studies were male and female paid volunteers (33 total) between the ages of 17 and 70 years. seven days prior to the testing, subjects were instructed to avoid using medicated soaps, lotions, deodorants, and shampoos, as well as to avoid skin contact with solvents, detergents, acids, and bases or any other products known to affect the normal microbial populations of the skin. subjects were supplied with a personal hygiene kit and instructed to use the enclosed items exclusively for the duration of the studies. in both the waterless and water-aided tfm required in vivo studies, testing entailed 11 consecutive hand contaminations with a marker organism, serratia marcescens (atcc 14756). the first followed by sampling for baseline, and each of the remaining 10 by a hand-cleansing procedure using one of the test or comparator formulations, without water in one study group (18 subjects) or water-aided in the other (15 subjects).using aseptic techniques, a 5.0-ml aliquot of the microbial inoculum, containing not less that 10 8 organisms/ml, was evenly distributed over both hands, but not above the wrists, through gentle continuous massage for 45 seconds. 5 after a timed 2-minute air-dry, the subjects applied the assigned product with or without water (water temperature regulated at 40°c 6 2°c), as per product label use instructions. this contamination/product application procedure was performed a total of 10 times, allowing 5 to 15 minutes between cycles. glove-juice samples were taken following contamination/product application cycles 1, 3, 7, and 10. the estimated log 10 number of viable microorganisms recovered from each hand was designated the ''r-value,'' the adjusted average log 10 colony count measurement for each subject at the sampling time. a log 10 transformation was performed on the collected data to prepare them for statistical analysis. comparator products for these studies included marketed health care handwash products containing 2.0% chlorhexidine gluconate (chg; bactoshield) or 0.5% triclosan (steris corporation) for the water-aided application and 61% ethyl alcohol without preservative (avagard d; 3m health care) for the waterless application. the water-aided product application times were 30 seconds for the chg and triclosan comparator products but only 15 seconds for the test formulation-61% alcohol-zpt.subjects recruited for these non-tfm, additional studies of antimicrobial persistence and residual effects were male and female paid volunteers (49 total) between the ages of 17 and 70 years. prior to product testing, a neutralization study was performed, following the guidelines set forth in the american society for testing materials (astm) method e 1054-02, standard test methods for evaluation of inactivators of antimicrobial agents. 12 because the postneutralization test population mean log 10 values were within 0.25 log 10 of the initial population mean log 10 values, the neutralization was considered successful. a 7-day pretest period preceding the baseline portion of the study, during which the personal hygiene kit was used, allowed for stabilization of the normal microbial populations residing on the hands. the following week, subjects' hands were sampled for microorganisms on days 1 and 5 to establish a mean baseline population count for each subject's hands. subjects clipped their fingernails to ,1mm free edge and removed all jewelry from hands and forearms. for each baseline determination, subjects rinsed their hands and the lower two thirds of their arms in tap water regulated at 40°c 6 2°c and cleaned their fingernails using a nail cleaner. under supervision of a technician, subjects then washed their hands and forearms with 5 ml of a liquid, nonmedicated, baseline soap, working up a lather. throughout this procedure, subjects maintained their hands in a position above their elbows. following a 30-second rinse in 40°c 6 2°c tap water, the glove-juice sampling procedure was performed by laboratory personnel as follows.powder-free, loose-fitting, sterile latex gloves were placed on subjects' hands, and laboratory personnel instilled 75.0 ml sterile stripping fluid without product neutralizers into each of the gloves. the wrists were then secured, and laboratory technicians massaged the hands through the gloves in a standardized manner for 60 seconds. a 5-ml aliquot of the glove juice was removed from each of the gloves, and each aliquot was diluted in 5 ml butterfield's phosphate buffer solution with product neutralizers (dilution 10 0 ). the 10 0 dilution was then serially diluted in butterfield's phosphate buffer solution with product neutralizers. duplicate spread and/or spiral plates were prepared from each of the glove-juice dilutions using tryptic soy agar with 0.07% lecithin (wt/vol) and 0.5% tween 80 (wt/vol) and were incubated at 30°c 6 2°c for approximately 72 hours. following incubation, the colonies on the plates were counted and the data recorded using the computerized q-count plate-counting system.the following week (test week), each subject applied a single, randomly assigned product 4 times each day for 5 consecutive days, with a minimum of 15 minutes between applications. the water-optional handwash product (61% alcohol-zpt) was tested in both a waterless and a water-aided configuration. hence, a total of 5 test configurations, 2 employing waterless products and 3 employing water-aided products, were evaluated. nine volunteer subjects were assigned randomly to the each of the 5 test configurations, and glove-juice sampling was performed immediately, 4 hours, and 8 hours following completion of the fourth product application on test days 1, 3, and 5. sampling times-immediate, 4 hours, or 8 hours-were assigned randomly to the 2 hands of each of the 9 subjects for each of the test configurations, thereby providing 6 hand samples at each of the 3 time points. four additional subjects were assigned randomly to use the water-aided 4% chg reference product, as an internal for the 2 test products used in waterless applications-the 61% alcohol-zpt product and the 61% ethyl alcohol hand sanitizer-quantities sufficient to wet all hand surfaces thoroughly were dispensed into subjects' hands. next, paying particular attention to interdigital spaces, fingernails, and cuticles, subjects applied the product uniformly until air-dry (a minimum of 5 minutes of air-drying prior to sampling on test days 1, 3, and 5). the 61% alcohol-zpt product was applied in this same way when tested as a water-aided product, except that the application time was 15 seconds, followed by a handrinse in tap water. for this, and all other handwash procedures, the temperature of the tap water was regulated at 40°c 6 2°c. for the remaining water-aided products-the 0.5% triclosan and 2% chg test products and the 4% chg reference product-5 mlaliquots were applied to subjects' wet hands. subjects then spread their product over all surfaces of the hands and fingers, washed their hands thoroughly for 30 seconds, and rinsed their hands for 30 seconds.the estimated log 10 numbers of viable microorganisms recovered from the baseline and postproduct-use glove-juice samples were designated the ''r-values,'' the adjusted average log 10 colony count measurement for each subject at baseline and at each sampling time postproduct use. each r-value was determined using the formula, r = log 10 [f3 c i 310 2d ] 3 2, in which f = the amount of sterile sampling solution instilled into a glove (in this study, f = 75 ml), c i = the arithmetic average colony count from the 2 plates for each hand at a particular dilution level, d = the dilution factor, and 2 = the neutralization dilution. a log 10 transformation was performed on the collected data to prepare them for statistical analysis.this was a controlled clinical trial enrolling a total of 58 female paid volunteers ranging in age from 17 to 70 years. it was designed to evaluate the irritation potential of the water-optional health care personnel handwash formulation applied in the waterless mode under exaggerated hand skin exposure conditions. 8, 9 this method was chosen because it may be considered ''worse case'' when compared with a water-aided application or to other types of skin-friendliness testing. during a 1-week conditioning phase prior to baseline, subjects used dove (unilever plc) soap for general body cleansing, including the hands and face, suave (unilever plc) shampoo and conditioner for hair care, and vinyl gloves when using household cleansers or other potentially harsh agents. at baseline, subjects' hands were qualified according to protocol eligibility criteria and underwent multidimensional assessments 9 that included clinical grading, self-assessment questionnaires, and noninvasive bioengineering measurements (tewl [dermalab; cortex technology], and skin hydration measured as a function of capacitance [corneometer cm 820; courage1khazaka electronic gmbh] and as a function of impedance [nova dpm 9003; nova technology corporation]). qualified subjects washed both hands with dove liquid soap. after completion of the wash, subjects participated in 5 cycles of product application. subjects returned to the clinic on days 2, 3, 4, and 5 for a controlled series of product applications, as were performed at baseline. prior to beginning each cycle of applications, subjects' hands were examined clinically. subjects were disqualified if they presented with an inappropriate skin condition or a score of 3 or greater for any of the clinically graded parameters. subjects disqualified because of clinical scores of 3 or greater participated in end point procedures described below. at day 3, subjects' hands were graded clinically, and noninvasive bioengineering measurements were performed approximately 2 hours after completion of the last repeated exposure cycle. the end point procedures were completed for all subjects 2 hours after the completion of the last repeated exposure cycle on day 5 or when a subject was disqualified, as indicated earlier. end point procedures included clinical grading, self-assessment questionnaires, and noninvasive bioengineering measurements.the critical indices specified by the fda tfm 5 for health care personnel handwash products are $2 log 10 reduction from baseline populations immediately following product application 1 and $3 log 10 reduction from baseline populations immediately following product application 10. a series of 2-sample student's t tests, comparing baseline populations of serratia marcescens to postproduct-use populations, showed that the 61% alcohol-zpt product, both in the waterless and the water-aided mode of application, produced significant population reductions (p , .05) from baseline at all sample points.water-aided applications. when used in a wateraided wash, the 61% alcohol-zpt product produced mean reductions in the serratia marcescens population of 3.36 log 10 following wash 1 and 3.23 log 10 following wash 10 (fig 1) . at wash 1, the 61% alcohol-zpt product was significantly more efficacious (p , .05) than either the 2.0% chg product or the 0.5% triclosan product, as measured by log 10 reduction parameters. by wash 10, both the 61% alcohol-zpt product and the chg-based handwash product were significantly (p , .05) better than the triclosan-based handwash. the higher reduction from baseline observed at wash 10 with the chg product may be related to the application times because the 61% alcohol-zpt product was applied for 15 seconds per wash, compared with the 30-second time for the 10 chg-based product applications.waterless applications. the 61% alcohol-zpt product in a waterless application produced mean reductions in the serratia marcescens population of 3.43 log 10 following application 1 and 3.10 log 10 following application 10 (fig 2) . at wash 10, the 61% alcohol-zpt product was significantly (p , .05) more efficacious than the 61% ethyl alcohol handrub without preservative (log 10 reduction = 1.22). hence, whether used with or without water, the 61% alcohol-zpt product satisfied the requirements specified by the fda: a $2 log 10 reduction in population following wash 1 and a $3 log 10 reduction in population following wash 10.waterless applications. use of the 61% alcohol-zpt product resulted in a reduction from the baseline population of more than 3.0 log 10 on test days 1, 3, and 5. the product also demonstrated significant (p , .05) persistent antimicrobial properties, preventing regrowth of microbial populations to baseline levels (fig 3) . determining the residual properties of the 61% alcohol-zpt product proved difficult because it demonstrated greater than a 3.0 log 10 reduction from baseline on all 3 sample days, a level of antimicrobial activity better than observed for the other product tested. the unpreserved 61% ethyl alcohol hand sanitizer demonstrated statistically significant (p , .05) log 10 microbial reductions from baseline but failed to achieve a 3 log 10 reduction on test day 5. additionally, microbial regrowth 8 hours postproduct-application showed antimicrobial persistence to be relatively poor, and no appreciable residual activity was apparent over the 5-day course of study (p . .05). by test day 5, the 61% alcohol-zpt product was significantly (p , .05) more efficacious than the unpreserved 61% ethyl alcohol product at every time point as measured by log 10 reduction parameters (see table 1 ).water-aided applications. none of the 3 test products, or the reference product, used in water-aided applications produced an average 3 log 10 reduction in hand flora on test day 5. nevertheless, when used as a water-aided handwash, the 61% alcohol-zpt product produced significant (p , .05) immediate reductions in normal hand flora on all 3 sampling days, showed a high degree of persistence through 8 hours of gloving, and demonstrated good residual properties (fig 4) . the 2% chg test product and 4% chg reference product, likewise, produced significant log 10 reductions in hand flora immediately following the water-aided washes and showed good persistence and residual properties. the 0.5% triclosan test product did not demonstrate any significant antimicrobial properties over the 5-day period of study (fig 4) . the 61% alcohol-zpt product proved to be significantly (p , .05) more efficacious than the triclosan product at every time point on test days 1, 3, and 5. summarized efficacy data for the persistence and residual effects of these products in the water-aided and waterless test modes are available at table 1 .fifty-eight female subjects fulfilling all inclusion and exclusion criteria were enrolled for study participation, and 21 subjects completed the study. twenty subjects voluntarily withdrew during the washout phase prior to testing, and 17 were disqualified for failing to meet clinical grading criteria at baseline. the 61% alcohol-zpt product was shown to be very well tolerated under exaggerated conditions of exposure. only mild, clinically insignificant changes were observed, which included small increases in dryness and hand skin erythema prior to washes performed on days 4 and 5 and following washes on day 5. results of the self-assessment questionnaires at day 5 end point revealed no significant perceived changes in hand skin moisture, skin condition, feeling of healthy skin, skin cracking, or redness. noninvasive bioengineering measurements confirmed that hand skin condition was not compromised during the exaggerated use of the cleanser (data not shown).the 61% alcohol-zpt product formulation exceeds all in vivo criteria established by the fda in the tfm for the waterless and water-aided applications and, hence, is a water-optional health care personnel handwash. comparable data were obtained as well for the required in vitro studies (data on file but not shown). the nature and characteristics of the zpt preservative system has been discussed elsewhere. 11 the increased efficacy observed with the 2.0% chg (3.81 log 10 reduction) versus the 61% ethyl alcohol product (3.23 log 10 reduction) at wash 10 in the wateraided mode (fig 1) is likely to be related to product application times (30 seconds for the 2.0% chg product vs 15 seconds for the 61% alcohol-zpt product) coupled with the nature of the health care personnel handwash in vivo test. this test requires the contamination of the hands with 5.0 ml of a solution containing not less that 10 8 organisms/ml of the indicator strain (serratia marcescens) at baseline determination and prior to each of the required 10 washes. therefore, .10 9 cfu of serratia marcescens are applied to the hands during the course of the test. differences in efficacy that are in the range of ;0.5 log 10 under the conditions of unequal wash times should be viewed cautiously. for these reasons, the authors are more likely to consider the data generated in the corresponding persistence and residual effects study (fig 4) as reflective of actual product performance because a total of 20 washes are used over a 5-day period for each product, thus minimizing to some degree the lack of parity associated with wash times.waterless applications. although 61% ethyl alcohol alone does provide antimicrobial action immediately postapplication (.2.0 log 10 reduction on all 3 test days), this product was unable to compete with the 61% alcohol-zpt product in terms of persistent effect at the 8-hour postapplication time point (see fig 3) . the unpreserved ethyl alcohol product did not achieve the immediacy of kill or the residual/persistent effects observed with the 61% alcohol-zpt product used in a waterless application. in the waterless mode of application, the 61% alcohol-zpt product exhibits significantly greater (p , .05) antimicrobial properties (see table 1 ).water-aided applications. the 2.0% chg, 4.0% chg, and the 61% alcohol-zpt products performed generally in an acceptable manner, with some noteworthy differences in efficacy among the products. the 61% alcohol-zpt product, in general, demonstrated better persistence (especially at the 8-hour time point) than did the other water-aided products. it is interesting to note that, for the 2% chg, multiple 30-second applications were required over 2 to 3 days to achieve marginal antimicrobial persistence at the 8-hour test point (see fig 4 data for test days 3 and 5). a surprising outcome of this study was the failure of the 0.5% triclosan product to produce any significant antimicrobial effects, despite 20 applications of 30 seconds each over the 5-day period.the data in table 1 compare log 10 reduction values from the immediate and 8-hour sample collection times and, therefore, may provide the best opportunity to assess overall antimicrobial persistence and residual effects. as noted previously, the 61% alcohol-zpt product when applied waterless produced log 10 reductions from baseline that average at least 3.5, thus it is difficult to assess the residual effects. the antimicrobial persistence, however, is unsurpassed by any other product or application technique waterless or wateraided. for the water-aided applications, only the 0.5% triclosan product failed to demonstrate persistence or residual effects. the difference among the other products was not statistically significant, despite the shorter water-aided wash time for the 61% alcohol-zpt product.overall, the results show that the 61% alcohol-zpt product was tolerated exceptionally well under exaggerated exposure conditions, as shown by the parallelism in results observed among the clinical assessment parameters, the subjective self-assessment responses, and the noninvasive bioengineering measurements. these results uniformly indicate that real skin-conditioning benefits are realized when the 61% alcohol-zpt product is used in a setting such as that exemplified by health care, in which hand sanitation is practiced repeatedly and often.the virucidal efficacy of this formulation has been documented previously. 11 the data confirmed the virucidal action of the 61% alcohol-zpt product against a wide variety of viral agents to include coronavirus (hcov, atcc vr-740, both hcov and sars-hcov belong to the virus family coronaviridae), the human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (hiv-1, from zepto metrix corp. of buffalo, ny), hepatitis a virus (hav, from crem, university of ottawa), herpes simplex type 1 (hsv-1, atcc vr-260), and human rotavirus (strain wa, atcc vr-2018). these agents represent both rna and dna viruses, some with envelopes and others without, which are known to be responsible for a significant amount of human morbidity and some mortality. furthermore, hav and the human rotavirus are known to be resistant to several of the antimicrobials commonly used for hand antisepsis. 10 for these in vitro studies, the viral agents were cultured using standards methods in cell lines appropriate for propagation to levels at or above the required titer of 10 6.00 infectious units/ml. the viruses were harvested, baseline numbers determined, and exposed for 3 minutes (30 seconds for the human coronavirus) to the test formulation diluted by virus inoculum to a 90% concentration. following exposure to the test product, the surviving population was determined for each virus, employing techniques appropriate for that virus. to be considered virucidal, the baseline populations must be reduced by not less than 3 log 10 beyond observed cytotoxicity. all testing was performed per american society for testing and materials (astm) method e 1052-96, a standard test method for efficacy of antimicrobial agents against viruses in suspension. 12 routine use of the 61% alcohol-zpt product would not only greatly reduce the transient and resident bacterial and yeast flora but also might decrease significantly the likelihood of transmitting viral agents of disease to others by contaminated hands. this improvement in hand hygiene could also yield significant economic savings because viruses are a leading cause of morbidity and mortality in humans, and even mild infections can be a significant burden on the health care system and the general economy. data obtained in the united states for over 2 decades incriminate viruses in 5% of all nosocomial infections. this number climbs to as high as 32% in the pediatric setting. more recent developments in the medical community suggest that the impact of viruses as agents of nosocomial disease may be greater now. viruses can survive on human hands for hours, and experiments with human volunteers have demonstrated the poten-tial for hands to spread viral agents, including those of the common cold and enteric diseases. as one might expect, caregivers and food handlers are most often implicated in this type of disease transmission. 4, 10 in summary, the 61% alcohol-zpt product formulation meets or exceeds all requirements of the astm method to be considered as a virucidal agent. properly formulated alcohol-based products can have potent virucidal action against even some of the most resistant viral agents. this important aspect of skin antisepsis should not be overlooked when selecting a surgical scrub or health care personnel handwash.the 61% alcohol-zpt water-optional product meets or exceeds requirements for the health care personnel handwash indication and is therefore fda and cdc compliant. it is formulated with surfactants and therefore is appropriate for use as either a water-aided or a waterless health care handwash. it may be used waterless for hands that are not visibly soiled or with water for hands that are contaminated with blood, other body fluids, or other types of organic material or to assist in the removal of bacterial spores such as those of clostridium difficile. the product provides antimicrobial persistence, and residual effects and repeated use contributes positively to overall skin conditioning. it is cidal for many viral agents of human disease that are readily transmitted via contact with contaminated hands. finally, it is nontoxic and not subject to inactivation by anions or changes in ph as has been observed with chg. 13, 14 a product with these attributes fulfills a previously unmet need and could favorably impact compliance with handwashing protocols.the world is facing a medical crisis amid the covid-19 pandemic and the role of adequate hygiene and hand sanitisers is inevitable in controlling the spread of infection in public places and healthcare institutions. there has been a great surge in demand for hand sanitisation products leading to shortages in their supply. a consequent increase of substandard products in the market has raised safety concerns. this article, therefore, presents a critical review of hand sanitation approaches and products available on the market in light of the scientific evidence available to date. this review also provides a range of hand sanitisation product formulations, and manufacturing instructions to allow for extemporaneous preparations at the community and hospital pharmacies during this urgent crisis. in addition, this emergent situation is expected to continue, hence hand sanitisers will be in demand for an extended time, and the availability and purchase of substandard products on the market create an ongoing safety concern. therefore, this article shall also provide various commercial organisations, interested in stepping forward the production and marketing of hand sanitisers, with a guide on the development of products of standardised ingredients and formulations.hand sanitisers amid covid-19: a critical review of alcohol-based products on the market and formulation approaches to respond to increasing demand.a new infectious disease, namely covid-19, was first identified in december 2019 in wuhan, china (csse, 2020) caused by a novel coronavirus (sars-cov-2) (zhu et al., 2020) . covid-19 has then rapidly spread around the world and was declared as a pandemic by the world health organization (who) . as of 14 th april 2020, around two million people have contracted the disease, and over 125 thousand deaths have been attributed to covid-19 globally (csse, 2020) . the outbreak has triggered the so-called "pandemic pantries", a term that well defines the spikes in stockpiling of emergency supplies all around the world. among these supplies, stocks of hand sanitisers have rapidly vanished from some markets, as soon as the frequent handwashing and sanitisation was recommended by the public health agencies across the world. according to a market research from nielsen, the sale of hand sanitisers skyrocketed by 300% and 470% in the last week of february and first week of march 2020, respectively, in comparison to the same time in the previous year (huddleston, 2020) . similarly, in italy -one of the most affected countries by covid-19 -sales of hand sanitisers in supermarkets augmented by 561% during the first three weeks of the pandemic (24 th february-15 th march 2020) compared to the previous year (ufficio studi coop, 2020) . there have been reports across the world that supermarkets and pharmacies, as well as hospitals and other healthcare facilities, have been running out of hand sanitisers.a search in google trends enables to understand the magnitude of the emergent interest of the general public in hand sanitisers. google trends analyse and compare the search volume of given keywords on google. figure 1a shows the trend of the search of the keyword "hand sanitizer" (american english spelling) within the united states. a fairly constant volume of google searches on this topic was shown until february 2020, when a massive spike of 100-fold increase in interest in "hand sanitizer" appeared. this finding correlated with the increased search of the word "covid-washing the hands with soap and water, rather than to use the abhr, whenever possible. this is because hand washing can virtually remove all types of pathogens, while the hand sanitiser can effectively kill 99.9% of germs (e.g. less effective with cryptosporidium, norovirus, and clostridium difficile). moreover, in case of extremely greasy or dirty hands, abhr effectiveness is reduced due to poor penetration of the product through the layer of dirt in soiled hands. in contrast, the detergents in a hand wash enable deeper cleaning and higher removal of germs. moreover, potentially harmful substances can only be washed by a soap and water rather than hand sanitisation using abhrs.however, handwashing facilities are not readily available at work or public places. moreover, in instances where hand sensitisation is needed more frequently, such as during frequent contact with individuals or products, the abhrs are the most effective and convenient infection preventive measure (cdc, 2019a; hadaway, 2020) . it is however important to emphasise that abhrs only work when used correctly. thus, considering that not all abhr formulations are the same, appropriate labelling is important in directing the correct dose/amount needed to achieve an adequate sanitisation (hadaway, 2020) . the choice of container, closure and dispenser is also vital in dispensing the correct amount of the sanitiser on each use.the cdc recommends a frequent sanitisation of hands in healthcare settings, due to the potential frequent contact of hands with pathogens, while being not so heavily soiled and greased. the abhrs are therefore the most effective measure of infection control during routine patient care. however, when hands are visibly dirty, such as before and after eating or after using restrooms, healthcare providers need to wash their hands properly with soap and water (cdc, 2019b; edmonds et al., 2012; gold and avva, 2020) .the abhrs are healthcare products for topical use which contain active disinfectants and various excipients. such products always contain a type of alcohol as the main antiseptic, and sometimes combined with other non-alcoholic antiseptic agents. the excipients include viscosity enhancers, emollients, buffers, preservatives, colourants and fragrances, depending on the type of the formulation (todd et al., 2010) . the concentration of ingredients in this article is reported either in weight (w/w) or volume (v/v), as stated in the original studies. in the cases where it was not clear, data is presented without an indication of w/w or v/v.disinfectant effectiveness in the abhrs depends on 1) type of alcohol; 2) concentration; 3) quantity applied on hands; 4) time of exposure (todd et al., 2010) . isopropanol, ethanol, n-propanol, or combinations of these alcohols are most commonly used in hand rubs (boyce and pittet, 2002) .unlike other antiseptics, these alcohols do not have the potential for acquired bacterial resistance (kampf and kramer, 2004) . none of these alcohols is effective against bacterial spores (weber et al., 2003) . when used at the same concentration, ethanol seems to have a lower bactericidal activity than propanols (suchomel and rotter, 2011) . however, ethanol has superior viricidal activity than propanols against non-enveloped viruses (g kampf, 2018) . also, skin tolerance is better with ethanol compared to n-propanol or isopropanol (cartner et al., 2017; houben et al., 2006) , thus ethanol is often the alcohol of choice in the abhr preparations (suchomel and rotter, 2011; tarka et al., 2019) .ethanol concentrations of 60% to 95% (v/v) are deemed safe and effective for disinfection by the united states food and drug administration (us fda), cdc and the who (boyce et al., 2009; cdc, 2019a; fda, 2020 fda, , 1994 , including for use against sars-cov-2. interestingly, edmonds et al. suggested that the antimicrobial activity of the abhrs is highly dependent on the choice of formulation (i.e., excipient) rather than on the concentration of alcohol. they also suggested that the liquid, gel and foam-based products can all be equally effective if the ethanol content used was within the 60-95% standard range (edmonds et al., 2012) . however, increasing ethanolic concentrations of hand rubs from 80% to 85% (v/v) can reduce the contact time necessary to achieve an efficient bactericidal activity (suchomel et al., 2012; eggerstedt, 2013; wilkinson et al., 2017) . despite this, the who, us fda and cdc still maintain their recommendations of 60-95% ethanol content inabhrs. an analysis of some currently marketed products (discussed later in section 5) reveals indeed that abhrs, sold in italian pharmacies as biocides, contain percentages of ethanol between 62% and 74% (w/w)/(70% to 80% v/v). this goes in line with the standard who, us fda and cdc guidelines (boyce et al., 2009; cdc, 2019a; fda, 2020 fda, , 1994 . it is worth highlighting that ethanol, unlike water, has a density < 1 g/cm 3 , which means that percentages of ethanol in water by weight (w/w) and by volume (v/v) can be significantly different and must be specified on the label. a useful comparison between percentages by weight and by volume of ethanol in abhrs is reported in a recently published document (bdc, 2020) . although this concept might seem trivial, there are cases of published works, where the concentration expression (either w/w or v/v) was not specified, as indicated by kampf (g kampf, 2018) , ultimately presenting ambiguous information. in research work, compounding and manufacturing, it is recommended to clearly specify the concentration units of alcohol used in abhrs.according to the us fda's tentative final monograph (tfm) for health care antiseptics, isopropanol should be used as an antiseptic alcohol at concentrations between 70-91.3% (v/v) (fda, 1994) . this range of concentration has also been re-endorsed by the us fda for the preparation of abhr during the covid-19 health emergency (fda, 2020).although biocidal agents other than alcohol have been incorporated in hand sanitisers (kampf and kramer, 2004; todd et al., 2010) , their efficacy is considered inferior to alcohol. also, their addition to alcohol-based sanitisers did not seem to have superior bactericidal efficacy (kampf et al., 2017) .moreover, unlike alcohol, certain biocidal agents may also cause antibiotic resistance, hence they are no longer preferred for use in abhrs (günter .there are some reports of novel formulations emerging on the market claiming to be effective against all viruses, including sars-cov-2 (dei pharmaceuticals, 2020); however, there is no evidence yet published to support the label claims. in a recent article, jansen has examined the evidence on disinfectants efficacy against sars-cov-2 (jansen, 2020) . it was noted that definitive claims on the effectivity of various disinfectants against sars-cov-2 cannot be made, simply because this is a new virus and the range of off-the-shelf abhrs has never been tested for sars-cov-2. like other respiratory viruses, the new coronavirus is known to spread mainly from person-to-person through airborne droplets (cdc, 2020) . moreover, the information about the virus survival on surfaces and the environment is still limited (jansen, 2020) . it has, however, been indicated that sars-cov-2 can also be transmitted through surfaces, as it can survive for a long period of time on various materials;for instance, the virus remains stable on plastic and stainless steel for 2-3 days (van doremalen et al., 2020) . this implies that anyone touching infected surfaces can potentially contact and spread the virus (jansen, 2020) . it is in this context that hand disinfection becomes highly crucial.sars-cov-2 is an enveloped virus hinting the presence of a lipid layer protecting the viral core.typically, enveloped viruses can be effectively inactivated by most antiseptic agents (jansen, 2020) .a study in 2017 reported that zika (zikv), ebola (ebov), severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus (sars-cov-1) and the middle east respiratory syndrome coronavirus (mers-cov) andother enveloped viruses were all efficiently killed by two alcohol-based formulations, one containing ethanol 80% (v/v) and the second containing isopropyl alcohol 75% (v/v), recommended by the who (siddharta et al., 2017) . these data confirm that abhrs can be successfully used as an effective infection preventive measure during viral outbreaks.a recent unpublished study reveals that both commercial alcohols and the who-recommended alcohol-based hand rubs can effectively inactivate sars-cov-2, the virus responsible to cause covid-19 (kratzel et al., 2020) . remarkably, both ethanol and 2-propanol, individually, could kill the virus within 30 seconds at a minimal final concentration of ≥ 30% (authors did not specify the concentration units). this provides a strong evidence to support the use of abhr amid the covid-19 outbreak. efficacy of alcohols in hand sanitisation is also dependent on various other factors, such as the quantity applied to the hands (the dose), the exposure time, and the application/rubbing technique.how long hands need to be rubbed together when using an abhr is an important question, but the recommended time by various public health organisations varies from as low as 10s to 60s (boyce 2019 ). it has been argued that rubbing time is significantly affected by various other factors such as the dose of the sanitiser, the hand size (application surface area), and the formulation itself.wilkinson et al. (wilkinson et al., 2017) reported that drying time was strongly associated with the dose and hand surface area. the evaporation rates of alcoholic ingredients may vary in gel and liquid-based sanitisers and may directly correlate to the time when hands start to feel dry after application. this can, therefore, directly influence healthcare professionals' perception of the sufficient rubbing time (kenters et al., 2020) .the sanitisation dose may be controlled by using specialised containers and closure systems, such as pump containers, that may dispense a pre-calibrated amount on each dispensing. this can guarantee that a minimum effective dose is always dispensed to assure efficacy. however, the dose is subject to sanitisation surface area and may be subject to users' perception on how much issufficient. an adequate training on hand hygiene and sanitisation amid infection control within health care facilities, is, therefore, a key to ensure that a correct dose and technique are always used.however, this is complicated by the range of formulations and products available on the market with varying viscosity and alcoholic evaporation rates. a standardised monographed formulation with tightly controlled specification can be a way forward.alcohol in hand rubs can cause skin dryness, particularly over frequent exposure. emollients, as well as other skin conditioners, have been shown to decrease the drying effect of alcohol on the skin (ahmed-lecheheb et al., 2012; harbarth et al., 2002; kramer et al., 2002) .glycerin is the most commonly used humectant in hand sanitisers and other cosmetic products. houben et al. have shown that incorporation of glycerin in hand rubs promotes hand hydration, to an extent that is directly proportional to its concentration in the formulation (houben et al., 2006) . in another study, abhrs containing glycerin were found to increase skin hydration, but also to decrease the surface ph and superficial sebum content on the skin, although not to an extent to compromise the skin barrier function (ahmed-lecheheb et al., 2012) . a very high concentration of glycerin can also have detrimental effects, as it can slow down the drying time and can increase the sticky sensation on the skin (especially if large or repeated doses are used) (greenaway et al., 2018; houben et al., 2006) . glycerol can lower the bactericidal activity of abhrs when used at a concentration of 1.45% (v/v) (suchomel et al., 2013) . reducing glycerol content to concentrations of 0.50% -0.73% has been proposed as the best compromise in maintaining antimicrobial activity, while still offering the needed skin protection (menegueti et al., 2019; suchomel et al., 2017) .emollients other than glycerol, can also be used to improve user acceptability and skin tolerance of the abhrs (suchomel et al., , 2013 . in a recent study, suchomel et al. have shown that the bactericidal efficacy of an isopropanol-based hand rub was decreased by glycerol, but not by a novel humectant, made of ethylhexylglycerin, dexpanthenol and a fatty alcohol. authors have suggested that other humectants should also be screened for their ability to maintain microbial efficacy .propylene glycol is the second most used humectant in cosmetic products and it is generally used for this purpose at concentrations of 2% to 5%. being less expensive than glycerol, it can be more desirable to be used in hand sanitisers (barel et al., 2009; flick, 1989) . aloe vera gel has also been used for long in various cosmetic products as a humectant, being able to retard water evaporation from formulations, yet to a lower extent than glycerin and propylene glycol. aloe vera gel can be used in combination with glycerol and propylene glycol to improve their water evaporation retardation effect. at high concentrations (i.e., ≥ 25%), aloe vera gel can also contribute to the firmness of formulations (meadows, n.d.) . aloe vera-based healthcare products, being considered natural, constitute nowadays a large and growing market (javed and atta-ur-rahman, 2014) . this is probably related to an increasing interest of consumers towards natural products. thus, the incorporation of aloe vera gel in hand rubs can be considered a good marketing strategy for abhrs.the who has recommended and described the preparation of two alcohol-based formulations for local production, when commercial products are not available (who, 2009) . such formulations are liquids of low viscosity. although effective, runny liquids are difficult to handle, as spillage often occurs during application. thus, liquid formulations can leave suboptimal doses of disinfectants on the hands, potentially leading to decrease in product efficacy (greenaway et al., 2018) . for the consumer market, gel formulations are more portable and convenient to dispense on-the-go due to their ease of use and low risk of spillage compared to liquid-based products. gel-based formulations also reduce the evaporation rate of alcohol and help alcohol to spread and penetrate through contaminating organisms (fu et al., 2020; howes, 2020) . gels can be obtained by incorporating viscosity enhancer excipients in the formulation. a huge variety of thickening agents for the pharmaceutical, cosmetic and food industry are available. although the performance of these substances is well characterised in aqueous media, little is known about their behaviour in hydroalcoholic solvents.in the next sections, rheological characteristics, preparation procedures and stability of the most commonly used viscosity enhancers in hand rubs will be discussed. we narrowed down the search by examining thickening agents that have been recommended by authentic sources as being suitable for the preparation of alcoholic gels. in particular, we have focused on viscosity enhancers suggested by the sifap (italian society of compounding pharmacists) in its recent newsletter (sifap, 2020) issued by the federfarma (italian federation of pharmacy owners) (federfarma, 2020) for the preparation of alcoholic gels amid covid-19. these viscosity enhancers include carbomer, hydroxyethyl cellulose (hec), hydroxypropyl cellulose (hpc), hydroxypropyl methylcellulose (hpmc) and sodium carboxymethyl cellulose (cmc).thickeners are polymers that, differently from small molecules, cannot be univocally identified by the chemical name or cas number, which does not take into consideration relevant features such as molecular weight, degree of substitution, ratio between substituents, etc. indeed, each of the aforementioned viscosity enhancers is commercially available in a variety of grades, exhibiting variable thickening behaviour, rheological properties, solubility and even regulatory classification (e.g. pharmaceutical, or cosmetic, or food grade). the actual grade and the percentage of the polymer used in commercially available abhrs are, however, not known or disclosed on the label.for these reasons, selecting the appropriate excipient for a particular application is important. to help with this, we have analysed and hereby report the viscosity and rheological behaviour of various commercially available hand sanitisers in italy. such measured parameters of marketed products were then used as a reference to explain how gels of similar characteristics can be manufactured using different viscosity enhancers.the thickening behaviour of 10 commercial hand sanitisers sold in the italian market was analysed.all the products were tested by measuring the shear stress on increasing shear rate (viscometry test) to study the effect of shear rate on viscosity (details relative to the experimental procedures are reported in method sm 1 and figure sf1 in supplementary information). we only tested hand sanitisers from a single pack taken from a single batch for each product. the general behaviour of all the products is reported in figure 2 and table 1 . as expected, most of the abhrs exhibited a shear-thinning behaviour, as typical of polymeric dispersions. the only exception was the product containing hec which resembled the newtonian behaviour and exhibited very low viscosity.noteworthy, the product containing hec also showed white precipitates settled on the bottom, which on shaking resulted in a cloudy system. all the other alcoholic gels containing carbomer had a characteristic plastic behaviour (refer to table 1 for the yield stress values) with a strong shear rate dependency (power law index < 0.5 in table 1 ). all the carbomer-thickened gels showed almost superimposable viscosity profiles except for "apoteke t'igienizzo" and "steriman gel", which were characterised by a lower consistency. finally, the only product containing hpmc showed the typical behaviour of a weak gel, characterised by pseudo-plasticity and a moderate shear rate dependency (power law index almost double compared to carbomer gel, but still much lower than 1). interestingly, the hpmc-based gel exhibited a viscosity similar to that of the carbomer-based gels at the higher shear rates.[figure 2 and table 1] overall, the unique and stronger shear rate dependency of carbomer-based products means that, compared to other gels, they are more solid-like on standing and become more liquid-like under agitation (shear-thinning). this dual behaviour is a desirable feature for hand rubs, as the carbomer gel will have an attractive robust consistency, a nice appearance and could still be dispensed in consistent doses -not being runny. then, during application, the viscosity would decrease drastically under the high shear of the hand rubbing action, which will help in well spreading of the product over the surface area.carbomers, also known as carboxypolymethylene, are a series of synthetic, high molecular weight and cross-linked poly-acrylic acid polymers, widely used in cosmetics and pharmaceutical industries for the formulation of semisolid and oral liquid products of various consistencies. these polymers are effective thickeners, suspending agents and stabilisers at a very low concentration (0.1-3% w/w).carbomers differ by the cross-linker and its density, and the solvent used during their polymerisation. to provide an indication of their molecular weight and specific components of the polymer (lubrizol, 2005) .all carbomers must be neutralised to ph 6.5-7.5 to achieve the maximum viscosity; the consistency of the dispersion starts to decrease at ph ≥9.0. for aqueous dispersions, a large number of neutralising agents such as sodium hydroxide, ammonium hydroxide, potassium hydroxide, l-arginine, aminomethyl propanol, tetrahydroxypropyl ethylenediamine, triethanolamine, tromethamine, peg-15 cocamine, diisopropanolamine and triisopropanolamine can be used. when carbomers are used for thickening of ethanol, isopropanol or hydroalcoholic mixtures (like in hand sanitisers), the neutraliser must be selected carefully to avoid the precipitation of the polymer.metallic alkalis, such as naoh and koh, are recommended to be used in hydroalcoholic mixtures of up to 20% ethanol, and triethanolamine in those containing up to 50-60% ethanol. considering the percentage of ethanol generally employed in the formulation of hand rubs (60-95%), the most suitable neutralisers are tetrahydroxypropyl ethylenediamine (neutrol ® te), aminomethyl propanol (amp ® ultra pc2000) and triisopropanolamine (up to 80-90% of ethanol) (lubrizol, 2002) .carbomers have thickening properties much higher than cellulose derivatives at a ph range of 5-9.a typical 0.5% (w/w) carbomer solution at ph 7.5 exhibits viscosities in a range of 4,000-11,000 mpa·s (carbopol® 971p), 29,400-39,400 mpa·s (carbopol® 974p) and 40,000-60,000 mpa·s (carbopol® 980); those are the grades commonly employed in topical products such as lotions, creams and gels ). an evaluation of the effect of ethanol on the consistency of the hydrogel prepared in hydroalcoholic media is not straightforward; comparison studies on hydrogels in pure water and in hydroalcoholic media are lacking. one report, that compared the flow behaviour of carbopol® ultrez™ 10 (0.1-0.5 w/w) in aqueous and hydroalcoholic media (15% w/v and 30% w/v ethanol) (fresno et al., 2002) , showed that the presence of ethanol decreases the consistency of the hydrogel. the decrease in consistency was more pronounced at a polymer concentration of 0.1% w/w than at 0.5% w/w, and at a low ph (ph = 4). osei-asare et al. also prepared a gel using 62% v/v of ethanol with 0.81% v/v carbopol® 940, but unfortunately, viscosity data were only partially reported (osei-asare et al., 2020).some manufacturers have also provided guidance on carbomer selection for hydroalcoholic gels.lubrizol suggested the use of ultrez™ due to their higher transparency and ease of preparation (lubrizol, 1998) ; while ashland proposed carbomer 980 at around 0.35% for a gel with 72% w/w of ethanol (ashland, 2018a) . considering this and our experience, we recommend 0.3-0.6% high viscosity carbomers (carbopol® ultrez™ 10, or carbomer 980) or 0.5-1% medium viscosity types (carbomer 974) along with aminomethyl propanol as a neutralising agent for the preparation of abhrs.hec is a non-ionic partially substituted poly ( refers to low, medium, high and very high viscosity, respectively. furthermore, the pharmaceuticalgrade of the product is indicated by the abbreviation pharm, whereas the cosmetic grade is indicated by the abbreviation cs (aqualon, 2000; ashland, 2018b) . hec is easily dissolved in cold or hot water, but unlike other cellulosic derivatives, it is insoluble in organic solvents. the low or medium molecular weight types are fully soluble in glycerol and have a good solubility in hydroalcoholic media containing up to 60% ethanol (ashland, 2018b (brown et al., 1998) . therefore, high molecular weight hec (1-2%) could be suitable for the preparation of hand rub gels containing 50-60% ethanol. hec gel formulations containing more than 60% alcohol are not recommended, due to the poor solubility of the polymer and the cloudy appearance that results, as shown in figure sf2 (supplementary information). since 60-95% ethanol is necessary for efficient hand disinfection, hec does not seem to be a suitable viscosity enhancer for abhrs.hpc is a non-ionic water-soluble ether derivative of cellulose with remarkable aqueous thickening and stabilising properties. hpc is manufactured by ashland and commercialised under the trade name of klucel™. it is made by reacting alkali cellulose with propylene oxide at elevated temperatures and pressures. at these conditions, an ether linkage can be formed between propylene oxide and one or more of the three reactive hydroxyl groups of each glucose monomer unit of the cellulose chain. the degree of substitution usually varies from 1 to 3, but can be >3 if the secondary hydroxyl group in the side chain reacts with propylene oxide (ashland, 2017) .hpc is a cellulose derivative soluble in the broadest range of solvents, such as water (up to 40 °c), alcohols, many polar organic solvents, polyethylene glycol and propylene glycol (klucel tm (ramachandran et al., 1999) .ashland (the manufacturer) suggested using the highest mw type of hpc (i.e. type h) at a concentration of 1.1% in a hydroalcoholic gel with 72% (w/w) ethanol (ashland, 2018a) . interestingly, the viscosity profile reported for the hpc hydroalcoholic gel is superimposable to the viscosity of "biotè scudo gel", a commercially available abhr thickened with hpmc ( figure 2 ). therefore, we recommend a high molecular weight hpc (~1-1.5%) for the preparation of abhr gels.hpmc, aka hypromellose in the european and united states pharmacopoeias, is a cellulose ether derived from cellulose, widely used in various industries such as pharmaceutical, cosmetic, food, paints, etc. hpmc has a cellulose backbone with methyl and hydroxypropyl substituent groups. (roberts et al., 2007) .interestingly, the rheology of 2% hpmc 2208 4m gels in 10-40% hydroalcoholic mixtures from roberts et al. (2007) is similar to a commercially available abhr, which is "biotè scudo gel", thickened with hpmc (table 1) . also, the viscosity profile of 1.5% hpmc 2208 10m gel containing 72% w/w of alcohol from ashland (ashland, 2018a) was similar to that of the commercially available product "biotè scudo gel" (figure 2 ). acknowledging that the commercial product (unknown polymer concentration) and the gels reported in the literature (known polymer concentration) have similar viscosity, the use of hpmc 10m ~1.5% and hpmc 4m ~2-2.5% (both types 2208 and 2910) for the preparation of abhrs is recommended.cmc is a water-soluble anionic derivative of cellulose that acts as a thickening agent, rheological modifier, stabiliser, protective colloid, and a film-forming agent. cmc is made by the reaction of cellulose with sodium monochloroacetate in the presence of sodium hydroxide under strictly controlled conditions (feddersen and thorp, 1993) . cmc is available from ashland under the tradenames aqualon™ cmc and blanose™ cmc, depending on the site of production; and by other manufacturers with trade names such as tylose cb and walocel c. as for the other cellulose derivatives, the physical properties of cmc can be varied by the ds and mw. cmc is typically offered in three different ds such as 0.7, 0.9 and 1.2 (referred to as cmc type 7, 9 and 12) and a broad range of molecular weights indicated by the letter l (low), m (medium) and h (high). the regulatory classification is given by the letters "f" for food; "cs" for cosmetic; and "ph" for pharmaceutical compliance, according to us, european (eu) and japanese (j) pharmacopoeia (ashland, 2012) .cmc is soluble in water at all temperatures, and forms clear colloidal dispersions at 1-6%, with viscosity between 10 and 10,000 mpa·s. it is practically insoluble in most organic solvents, including ethanol (95%). however, it can be dispersed providing clear systems in hydroalcoholic mixtures of up to 40% ethanol. at higher contents (up to 60% ethanol), cmc can be dispersed, but it provides opaque systems. low-viscosity grades work better with alcoholic gels than high-viscosity types, which show clouding and polymer precipitation at higher ethanol content. the manufacturer does not provide any information regarding the effect of ethanol on the viscosity of the dispersions (feddersen and thorp, 1993) . the only reference available is from brown et al. who compared the viscosity of 10% cmc (the type and mw is not specified) in pure water and hydroalcoholic mixtures (up to 40% ethanol). a remarkable increase in the viscosity was observed from pure water (g' 432 pa) to a mixture containing 30% ethanol (g'1,186 pa), followed by a drop (g' 671 pa) at 40% ethanol which may be attributed to the poor solubility of cmc in higher alcoholic media (brown et al., 1998) .according to the literature, low viscosity cmc (being more stable in ethanol) is more suitable for the preparation of gels with a maximum ethanol concentration of 50%. in our experience, it was found that cmc dispersions precipitate and become opaque at 60% (w/w) ethanolic concentrations ( figure   f3 , supplementary information). it is therefore not advisable to use cmc for abhrs containing higher ethanol concentrations recommended for optimum germicide efficacy. figure 3 summarises the different procedures that can be used for the manufacturing of abhr gels.[figure 3]in the direct addition method, all the components, except for the thickener, have to be preliminarily solubilised in the water/ethanol mixture. then, the thickener is added, preferentially sifted slowly, in the vortex of the vigorously agitated hydroalcoholic solution (with mechanical or magnetic stirring) (aqualon, 2000; klucel tm hydroxypropylcellulose. physical and chemical properties., 2017; lubrizol, 1998) . for carbomer thickeners, it is necessary to raise the ph to around 6.5-7 with the neutralising agent. the neutralising agent has to be added dropwise or gradually after the complete dispersion of the polymer, possibly monitoring the ph with a ph-meter (using electrodes suitable for measuring viscous or dirty samples) or a ph-indicator paper. gel preparation using this procedure is faster with the surface-treated grades of thickeners such as carbopol® ultrez types for carbomer or natrosol r-grades for hpc, due to the low lumpiness of these polymers when dispersed [for carbomer ultrez grades the direct method should be slightly modified -for more details readers are referred to (lubrizol, 1998) ]. also, all carbomer thickeners are faster to disperse than the others due to their phdependent viscosity. they remain in the liquid phase during product preparation until the ph is adjusted to neutral. this is an advantage as solvent diffusion and polymer hydration are much more rapid in liquid state than in an already formed gel system. on the other hand, the direct addition method can be slower and more difficult for hpmc and hpc gels (even for surface-treated grades), due to their high tendency to form lumps during dispersion. the direct addition method is a very effective and economical procedure, as long as an efficient stirring system is available for production.this procedure requires the thickeners to be pre-wetted with a water-miscible organic solvent. in our experience (this is the standard procedure used in pharmaceutical practice), the best results can be obtained using glycerol or propylene glycol as wetting agents at 1:1 to 1:4 polymer:wetting agent ratio. the wetting procedure is usually operated using mortar and pestle. when a homogenous wet slurry is obtained, the hydroalcoholic solution (containing all the other components previously dissolved) can be gradually added, always under vigorous stirring with the pestle. the addition of the neutralising agent for carbomer polymers follows the same procedure reported in the direct addition method. the reverse addition method is only suitable for the production of small batches when magnetic or mechanical stirring systems are not available. therefore, we recommend this procedure for small-scale extemporaneous compounding in community or hospital pharmacies.the preparation of gel containing high viscosity grades of hpmc or hpc could be sometimes difficult due to the tendency to form lumps. a common procedure to avoid such problem and to speed-up the preparation is represented by the "hot/cold" technique (dow, 2002) . however, such a procedure is unsuitable for alcoholic gels because of the potential loss of ethanol content during the preparation, due to evaporation. roberts at al. reported the preparation of 2% hpmc 2208 4m hydroalcoholic gels containing 40% ethanol using a modification of the standard "hot/cold" technique (roberts et al., 2007) . briefly, an aqueous gel is prepared with the "hot/cold" technique and then, while cooling, ethanol (and other volatile components, if any) is added under stirring. although, this procedure could represent an interesting alternative to the previously reported methods, there is not enough information to support its use in the preparation of hydroalcoholic gels containing ≥60% ethanol.another preparation method that can be used to prevent lumping, especially for hpmc and hpc, is a combination (hybrid) of the direct and reverse addition methods. briefly, a wet slurry is prepared similar to the reverse addition method and then it is gradually added under mechanical or magnetic stirring to the hydroalcoholic mixtures, as in the direct addition method (ashland, 2017; dow, 2002) .a market research was carried out in italy at the beginning of april 2020 amid the covid-19, to review the range of commercially available abhr products in local pharmacies, supermarkets and online retailers. table 2 provides a summary of these products including their composition, alcoholic content, type of thickeners and legal classification, extracted from the products' label. various products sold online, with essential information missing on the label, were not included in the table. [ comparing the thickening agents used in the formulation of hand rubs, it is evident that most of the products are made viscous by the use of carbomer and an amine-based neutralising agent (i.e.aminomethyl propanol or triethanolamine). the only exceptions were represented by two products thickened by either hpmc or hec; and a third product in which carbomer neutralised by sodium hydroxide was used. interestingly, these three hand gels were among the ones on which we performed the rheological analysis (table 1) , whereby they showed different rheological behaviour compared to most other analysed products. the product containing hec was practically liquid, with a white precipitate at the bottom, that could be explained by a decreased polymer solubility at high ethanolic concentration. indeed, the manufacturer of hec indicates that this polymer possesses good solubility in hydroalcoholic media containing up to 60% ethanol (ashland, 2018b) , hinting at a decrease in polymer solubility at higher ethanolic concentrations. as for the carbomer gel neutralised with sodium hydroxide, it was slightly opaque and less viscous compared to the majority of the carbomer products (table 1) . noteworthily, sodium hydroxide is not recommended as a suitable neutralising agent for carbomer-based hydroalcoholic gels by the manufacturer, due to possible polymer precipitation (lubrizol, 2002) , as stated earlier. therefore, it can be concluded that the standard combination of carbomer/amine-based neutralising agents seems to form a product with good gel quality.another interesting aspect that arises from the products' analysis in table 2 , is their regulatory status.these products are marketed in europe following two different regulatory pathways: the cosmetic this implies that the biocide and cosmetic hand rubs can have different amounts of ethanol in the products. all alcohol gels in table 2 commercialised as biocides report the ethanol concentration in the label, which is always in the range 60% to 95%, suggested as a safe and effective concentration for disinfection by the us fda and who (boyce et al., 2009; fda, 1994) . conversely, reporting the concentration of ethanol is not mandatory for cosmetic sanitisers. of the 13 alcoholic gels approved as cosmetics, the amount of ethanol is reported only in 5 products, where one contained only 50%alcohol. surprisingly, in three products water is listed as the first ingredient followed by ethanol, suggesting an ethanolic concentration of even less than 50% (by weight). such cosmetic products, although good for cleaning the skin, are not fit for use as disinfectants. this can be misleading for the general public, as they might not be aware of the product suitability amid the covid-19 pandemic.consumers aiming to buy an effective hand disinfectant might unintentionally pick up from the shelves a very similar hand gel product, which is however not a disinfectant (i.e. a cosmetic). it is crucial, in this context, that pharmacists and retailers promptly advise customers to choose the appropriate product for the right purpose, i.e. disinfection or simple cleaning. overall, during a pandemic, providing consumers with the correct information on hand sanitisers should be a priority of utmost importance. perhaps, also regulatory agencies could consider revisiting the current regulations to better safeguard consumers.building upon the information and outlook provided in the previous sections of this review, a guide on formulation selection for the development of hand sanitisers is presented in table 3 . here, functional ingredients are grouped in classes, and possible options within the same class are evaluated and compared in terms of time/ease of preparation, the equipment required (for the preparation), cost of material, antimicrobial efficacy, product appearance/acceptability, ease of use, and moisturising capacity/dermatological profile. cas number of materials is also indicated.[ in response to the health, habits and market patterns extreme changes brought about by the current covid-19 outbreak, we review here the current knowledge and trends on the formulation of hand rubs. the article also presents a detailed guide on ingredients' selection, and formulation design and manufacture of quality hand sanitisers. the main outcomes of the analysis presented in this review are listed below: evidences show that hand sanitisation is a main infection preventive measure during a pandemic, justifying the emphasis by the various healthcare organisations across the world, the huge increase in sales witnessed during the covid-19 outbreak, and the consequent shortage of hand sanitisers. the european commission has recently highlighted the tendency of many economic operators to consider the possibility to shift and/or increase the production of hand cleaners and disinfectants to respond to the current needs (european commission, 2020).businesses producing hand sanitisers and compounding pharmacists are now challenged to keep up with the exceptionally high demand for such products. most gel formulations contain carbomers and an amine-based neutralising agent to form the gel matrix. other gelling polymers could also be used, in theory, as alternatives; however, such polymers do not often provide hydroalcoholic gel products of the same ideal rheological behaviour and appearance, touch feel, ease of use and stability. carbomer remains, in our opinion, the gold standard gel former in alcohol-based hand sanitisers. substandard products can be available in certain markets. when the low standard is related to the selection of less appropriate excipients or formulation procedures, but the alcoholic concentration is maintained between the accepted standard of disinfection (i.e. 60-95% for ethanol), the risk for consumers is mainly a reduced perception of product quality and attractiveness, and reduced ease of use; while overall product efficacy is maintained. the poorly formulated products may also be subject to inappropriate use and sanitisation technique. much more worrying is the presence of hand cleaners on the market containing low ("substandard") and/or unknown concentrations of alcohol that are not commercialised as disinfectants. there is a tangible risk that consumers might, and are using, hand cleaners, which product appearance is very similar to hand disinfectants, while being unaware that such products cannot ensure disinfection and are not fit for use amid the covid-19 pandemic. to minimise this risk: 1) customer counselling by pharmacists and retailers regarding the selection of appropriate products for covid-19 infection control is highly necessary; 2) online purchase of hand sanitiser from unknown or unreliable e-commerce sites by the public is discouraged; 3) awareness campaigns to educate the public on discriminating between products fit for general hygiene/cleansing from those for disinfection fit the for covid-19 infection control should be promoted; and finally, 4) regulatory bodies should revisit current regulations on hand sanitisers to better safeguard consumers. the demand for the hand sanitisers amid the covid-19 pandemic is likely to remain high for long, until more efficient infection preventive measures become available, such as a sars-cov-2 vaccine. moreover, public awareness on the importance of hand sanitisation during this pandemic is likely to have long term effects on hygiene habits across the world. the public is likely to endure the routine use of hand sanitisers, even beyond the covid-19 era, as a new norm of self-hygiene. common.effective, yet not listed by as many of health agencies.**** -**** **** --* cannot counteract the drying effect of alcohol on skin. option discourage d.(cas 56-81-5) *** -*** *** *** -**** without **** **** **** **** *** *** * **** the two formulatio ns recommen ded by the who do not contain any colour or dye.perfumes and colours *** *** ** -**** *** * -fragrances and dyes are present in certain commercia l products. such ingredients maybe incorporate d, as long as they have no impact on antimicrobi al activity and do not cause toxicity and/or allergenicit y. **** optimal; ***good; **moderate; *scarce; -indicates information is not relevant or not available. 1 cost comparison are made by referring to sigma-aldrich database or to the catalogue of acef spa, an italian raw material distributor for pharmaceutical, cosmetic, galenic products and nutraceuticals. for each category of ingredients, the cost comparison has been made using the same data source within the various options of the same ingredient. the amount needed for each preparation has been taken into consideration for the cost evaluation. 2 for ethanol, the price difference depends on whether it is the denatured type or the standard one.a new infectious disease, namely covid-19, was first identified in december 2019 in wuhan, china (csse, 2020) caused by a novel coronavirus (sars-cov-2) (zhu et al., 2020) . covid-19 has then rapidly spread around the world and was declared as a pandemic by the world health organization (who). as of 14th april 2020, around two million people have contracted the disease, and over 125 thousand deaths have been attributed to covid-19 globally (csse, 2020) . the outbreak has triggered the so-called "pandemic pantries", a term that well defines the spikes in stockpiling of emergency supplies all around the world. among these supplies, stocks of hand sanitisers have rapidly vanished from some markets, as soon as the frequent handwashing and sanitisation was recommended by the public health agencies across the world. according to a market research from nielsen, the sale of hand sanitisers skyrocketed by 300% and 470% in the last week of february and first week of march 2020, respectively, in comparison to the same time in the previous year (huddleston, 2020) . similarly, in italy -one of the most affected countries by covid-19 -sales of hand sanitisers in supermarkets augmented by 561% during the first three weeks of the pandemic (24th february-15th march 2020) compared to the previous year (ufficio studi coop, 2020) . there have been reports across the world that supermarkets and pharmacies, as well as hospitals and other healthcare facilities, have been running out of hand sanitisers.a search in google trends enables to understand the magnitude of the emergent interest of the general public in hand sanitisers. google trends analyse and compare the search volume of given keywords on google. fig. 1a shows the trend of the search of the keyword "hand sanitizer" (american english spelling) within the united states. a fairly constant volume of google searches on this topic was shown until february 2020, when a massive spike of 100-fold increase in interest in "hand sanitizer" appeared. this finding correlated with the increased search of the word "covid-19", hinting the obvious relationship between the two terms. to put these numbers into context, comparison between the search on "hand sanitizer" to that of the words "pill", "drug" and "medicine" was done in fig. 1b . results show that before the spread of the new coronavirus, these words were constantly googled 25-50 times more frequently than "hand sanitizers", while during the peak of the pandemic (march 2020), "hand sanitizers" was searched approximately twice as much as those keywords. although, the astonishing peak of searches on "hand sanitizer" is moderately tapering down, it is expected that the interest in this topic will remain much higher than the pre-pandemic levels, because, until a vaccine against covid-19 will be made available, hand sanitisation will remain at the forefront of infection prevention measures. moreover, it is reasonable to speculate that the current awareness of the general public of the importance of hand disinfection will remain assimilated and will become an integral part of people's hygiene practices, even post-covid-19 era.to respond to the hand sanitiser's severe shortage, not only pharmaceutical companies, but chemical industries, breweries, and perfumeries have started, unconventionally, to produce hand sanitisers (bomgardner et al., 2020) . as academics and pharmacists working in pharmaceutical technology departments of schools of pharmacy, we have received a high number of requests related to hand sanitisers, spanning from other faculties and businesses requesting the production of hand sanitisers in our laboratories, to pharmacists asking for advice on the compounding of such products. indeed, hand sanitisers can also be prepared extemporaneously in pharmacies; however, pharmacists need an appropriate formulation and manufacturing directions to ensure a consistent product with adequate quality. consumer habits and patterns are rapidly reshaping under the covid-19 crisis (mckenzie, 2020) and the unprecedented demand of hand sanitisers is likely to remain as the "new normal" for an extended period of time. we, therefore, aim to provide in this article a technical perspective on the functionality and development of alcohol-based hand sanitiser formulations.the general hand hygiene is deemed the cornerstone of infection prevention (mehtar et al., 2018) , and is essential to minimise the colonisation and the transmission of infection across public and healthcare workers. hand hygiene includes: 1) handwashing, i.e. using simple soap and water; 2) antiseptic handwashing, i.e. using an antiseptic detergent and water; and 3) antiseptic hand sanitisation, i.e., using antiseptic hand rubs, generally alcohol-based hand sanitisers (gold and avva, 2020) . in europe, the terms "hand antiseptic" and "alcohol-based hand rub (abhr)" are more commonly used than the term "hand sanitiser" (todd et al., 2010) .according to the who, an abhr is "an alcohol-containing preparation (liquid, gel or foam) designed for application to the hands to inactivate microorganisms and/or temporarily suppress their growth. such preparations may contain one or more types of alcohol, other active ingredients with excipients, and humectants" (gold and avva, 2020). non-alcoholic products are also available, but they are less preferred by the health organisations (kampf and kramer, 2004; todd et al., 2010) -including the centers for disease control and prevention (cdc) -for fighting covid-19 (howes, 2020) . this is due to their poorer efficacy and narrower spectrum compared to the alcohol-based sanitisation products (cdc, 2019a) . the most important factor in determining the efficacy of a hand sanitiser is indeed the alcoholic content. nevertheless, there have been worrying reports of alcohol-free hand rubs being constantly sold during the covid-19 outbreak (allen, marshall song, 2020) . consumers must become aware that such alcohol-free products are not recommended by the health organisations and should therefore be avoided.overall, the application of abhrs remains more versatile, convenient, quick and less irritating than hand washing with soap and water (edmonds et al., 2012) . for the general public, the cdc suggests washing the hands with soap and water, rather than to use the abhr, whenever possible. this is because hand washing can virtually remove all types of pathogens, while the hand sanitiser can effectively kill 99.9% of germs (e.g. less effective with cryptosporidium, norovirus, and clostridium difficile). moreover, in case of extremely greasy or dirty hands, abhr effectiveness is reduced due to poor penetration of the product through the layer of dirt in soiled hands. in contrast, the detergents in a hand wash enable deeper cleaning and higher removal of germs. moreover, potentially harmful substances can only be washed by a soap and water rather than hand sanitisation using abhrs. however, handwashing facilities are not readily available at work or public places. moreover, in instances where hand sensitisation is needed more frequently, such as during frequent contact with individuals or products, the abhrs are the most effective and convenient infection preventive measure (cdc, 2019a; hadaway, 2020) . it is however important to emphasise that abhrs only work when used correctly. thus, considering that not all abhr formulations are the same, appropriate labelling is important in directing the correct dose/amount needed to achieve an adequate sanitisation (hadaway, 2020) . the choice of container, closure and dispenser is also vital in dispensing the correct amount of the sanitiser on each use.the cdc recommends a frequent sanitisation of hands in healthcare settings, due to the potential frequent contact of hands with pathogens, while being not so heavily soiled and greased. the abhrs are therefore the most effective measure of infection control during routine patient care. however, when hands are visibly dirty, such as before and after eating or after using restrooms, healthcare providers need to wash their hands properly with soap and water (cdc, 2019b; edmonds et al., 2012; gold and avva, 2020) .the abhrs are healthcare products for topical use which contain active disinfectants and various excipients. such products always contain a type of alcohol as the main antiseptic, and sometimes combined shows the trend in the google search of the keyword "hand sanitizer" compared to that of "covid-19" over the past 12 months. 1b compares the google search for "hand sanitizer" to that of extremely popular medical keywords over the past 12 months. note that the reported frequencies are not the raw data of the search volume, but are the normalised data against the maximum search interest (i.e. 100%) for that plot.with other non-alcoholic antiseptic agents. the excipients include viscosity enhancers, emollients, buffers, preservatives, colourants and fragrances, depending on the type of the formulation (todd et al., 2010) . the concentration of ingredients in this article is reported either in weight (w/w) or volume (v/v), as stated in the original studies. in the cases where it was not clear, data is presented without an indication of w/w or v/v.disinfectant effectiveness in the abhrs depends on 1) type of alcohol; 2) concentration; 3) quantity applied on hands; 4) time of exposure (todd et al., 2010) . isopropanol, ethanol, n-propanol, or combinations of these alcohols are most commonly used in hand rubs (boyce and pittet, 2002) . unlike other antiseptics, these alcohols do not have the potential for acquired bacterial resistance (kampf and kramer, 2004) . none of these alcohols is effective against bacterial spores (weber et al., 2003) . when used at the same concentration, ethanol seems to have a lower bactericidal activity than propanols (suchomel and rotter, 2011) . however, ethanol has superior viricidal activity than propanols against non-enveloped viruses (kampf, 2018a) . also, skin tolerance is better with ethanol compared to n-propanol or isopropanol (cartner et al., 2017; houben et al., 2006) , thus ethanol is often the alcohol of choice in the abhr preparations (suchomel and rotter, 2011; tarka et al., 2019) .ethanol concentrations of 60% to 95% (v/v) are deemed safe and effective for disinfection by the united states food and drug administration (us fda), cdc and the who (boyce et al., 2009; cdc, 2019a; fda, 2020 fda, , 1994 , including for use against sars-cov-2. interestingly, edmonds et al. suggested that the antimicrobial activity of the abhrs is highly dependent on the choice of formulation (i.e., excipient) rather than on the concentration of alcohol. they also suggested that the liquid, gel and foam-based products can all be equally effective if the ethanol content used was within the 60-95% standard range (edmonds et al., 2012) . however, increasing ethanolic concentrations of hand rubs from 80% to 85% (v/v) can reduce the contact time necessary to achieve an efficient bactericidal activity (suchomel et al., 2012; eggerstedt, 2013; wilkinson et al., 2017) . despite this, the who, us fda and cdc still maintain their recommendations of 60-95% ethanol content in abhrs. an analysis of some currently marketed products (discussed later in section 5) reveals indeed that abhrs, sold in italian pharmacies as biocides, contain percentages of ethanol between 62% and 74% (w/w)/(70% to 80% v/v). this goes in line with the standard who, us fda and cdc guidelines (boyce et al., 2009; cdc, 2019a; fda, 2020 fda, , 1994 . it is worth highlighting that ethanol, unlike water, has a density < 1 g/cm 3 , which means that percentages of ethanol in water by weight (w/w) and by volume (v/v) can be significantly different and must be specified on the label. a useful comparison between percentages by weight and by volume of ethanol in abhrs is reported in a recently published document (bdc, 2020) . although this concept might seem trivial, there are cases of published works, where the concentration expression (either w/w or v/ v) was not specified, as indicated by kampf (kampf, 2018) , ultimately presenting ambiguous information. in research work, compounding and manufacturing, it is recommended to clearly specify the concentration units of alcohol used in abhrs.according to the us fda's tentative final monograph (tfm) for health care antiseptics, isopropanol should be used as an antiseptic alcohol at concentrations between 70 and 91.3% (v/v) (fda, 1994) . this range of concentration has also been re-endorsed by the us fda for the preparation of abhr during the covid-19 health emergency (fda, 2020) .although biocidal agents other than alcohol have been incorporated in hand sanitisers (kampf and kramer, 2004; todd et al., 2010) , their efficacy is considered inferior to alcohol. also, their addition to alcoholbased sanitisers did not seem to have superior bactericidal efficacy (kampf et al., 2017) . moreover, unlike alcohol, certain biocidal agents may also cause antibiotic resistance, hence they are no longer preferred for use in abhrs (kampf, 2018b) .there are some reports of novel formulations emerging on the market claiming to be effective against all viruses, including sars-cov-2 (dei pharmaceuticals, 2020); however, there is no evidence yet published to support the label claims. in a recent article, jansen has examined the evidence on disinfectants efficacy against sars-cov-2 (jansen, 2020) . it was noted that definitive claims on the effectivity of various disinfectants against sars-cov-2 cannot be made, simply because this is a new virus and the range of off-the-shelf abhrs has never been tested for sars-cov-2. like other respiratory viruses, the new coronavirus is known to spread mainly from person-to-person through airborne droplets (cdc, 2020) . moreover, the information about the virus survival on surfaces and the environment is still limited (jansen, 2020) . it has, however, been indicated that sars-cov-2 can also be transmitted through surfaces, as it can survive for a long period of time on various materials; for instance, the virus remains stable on plastic and stainless steel for 2-3 days (van doremalen et al., 2020) . this implies that anyone touching infected surfaces can potentially contact and spread the virus (jansen, 2020) . it is in this context that hand disinfection becomes highly crucial.sars-cov-2 is an enveloped virus hinting the presence of a lipid layer protecting the viral core. typically, enveloped viruses can be effectively inactivated by most antiseptic agents (jansen, 2020) . a study in 2017 reported that zika (zikv), ebola (ebov), severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus (sars-cov-1) and the middle east respiratory syndrome coronavirus (mers-cov) and other enveloped viruses were all efficiently killed by two alcohol-based formulations, one containing ethanol 80% (v/v) and the second containing isopropyl alcohol 75% (v/v), recommended by the who (siddharta et al., 2017) . these data confirm that abhrs can be successfully used as an effective infection preventive measure during viral outbreaks.a recent unpublished study reveals that both commercial alcohols and the who-recommended alcohol-based hand rubs can effectively inactivate sars-cov-2, the virus responsible to cause covid-19 (kratzel et al., 2020) . remarkably, both ethanol and 2-propanol, individually, could kill the virus within 30 s at a minimal final concentration of ≥ 30% (authors did not specify the concentration units). this provides a strong evidence to support the use of abhr amid the covid-19 outbreak. efficacy of alcohols in hand sanitisation is also dependent on various other factors, such as the quantity applied to the hands (the dose), the exposure time, and the application/rubbing technique.how long hands need to be rubbed together when using an abhr is an important question, but the recommended time by various public health organisations varies from as low as 10s to 60s (boyce et al., 2009) . it has been argued that rubbing time is significantly affected by various other factors such as the dose of the sanitiser, the hand size (application surface area), and the formulation itself. wilkinson et al. (2017) reported that drying time was strongly associated with the dose and hand surface area. the evaporation rates of alcoholic ingredients may vary in gel and liquid-based sanitisers and may directly correlate to the time when hands start to feel dry after application. this can, therefore, directly influence healthcare professionals' perception of the sufficient rubbing time (kenters et al., 2020) .the sanitisation dose may be controlled by using specialised containers and closure systems, such as pump containers, that may dispense a pre-calibrated amount on each dispensing. this can guarantee that a minimum effective dose is always dispensed to assure efficacy. however, the dose is subject to sanitisation surface area and may be subject to users' perception on how much is sufficient. an adequate training on hand hygiene and sanitisation amid infection control within health care facilities, is, therefore, a key to ensure that a correct dose and technique are always used. however, this is complicated by the range of formulations and products available on the market with varying viscosity and alcoholic evaporation rates. a standardised monographed formulation with tightly controlled specification can be a way forward.alcohol in hand rubs can cause skin dryness, particularly over frequent exposure. emollients, as well as other skin conditioners, have been shown to decrease the drying effect of alcohol on the skin (ahmed- lecheheb et al., 2012; harbarth et al., 2002; kramer et al., 2002) .glycerin is the most commonly used humectant in hand sanitisers and other cosmetic products. houben et al. have shown that incorporation of glycerin in hand rubs promotes hand hydration, to an extent that is directly proportional to its concentration in the formulation (houben et al., 2006) . in another study, abhrs containing glycerin were found to increase skin hydration, but also to decrease the surface ph and superficial sebum content on the skin, although not to an extent to compromise the skin barrier function (ahmed-lecheheb et al., 2012) . a very high concentration of glycerin can also have detrimental effects, as it can slow down the drying time and can increase the sticky sensation on the skin (especially if large or repeated doses are used) (greenaway et al., 2018; houben et al., 2006) . glycerol can lower the bactericidal activity of abhrs when used at a concentration of 1.45% (v/v) (suchomel et al., 2013) . reducing glycerol content to concentrations of 0.50%−0.73% has been proposed as the best compromise in maintaining antimicrobial activity, while still offering the needed skin protection (menegueti et al., 2019; suchomel et al., 2017) .emollients other than glycerol, can also be used to improve user acceptability and skin tolerance of the abhrs (suchomel et al., , 2013 . in a recent study, suchomel et al. have shown that the bactericidal efficacy of an isopropanol-based hand rub was decreased by glycerol, but not by a novel humectant, made of ethylhexylglycerin, dexpanthenol and a fatty alcohol. authors have suggested that other humectants should also be screened for their ability to maintain microbial efficacy .propylene glycol is the second most used humectant in cosmetic products and it is generally used for this purpose at concentrations of 2% to 5%. being less expensive than glycerol, it can be more desirable to be used in hand sanitisers (barel et al., 2009; flick, 1989) . aloe vera gel has also been used for long in various cosmetic products as a humectant, being able to retard water evaporation from formulations, yet to a lower extent than glycerin and propylene glycol. aloe vera gel can be used in combination with glycerol and propylene glycol to improve their water evaporation retardation effect. at high concentrations (i.e., ≥25%), aloe vera gel can also contribute to the firmness of formulations (meadows, n.d.) . aloe vera-based healthcare products, being considered natural, constitute nowadays a large and growing market (javed and atta-ur-rahman, 2014) . this is probably related to an increasing interest of consumers towards natural products. thus, the incorporation of aloe vera gel in hand rubs can be considered a good marketing strategy for abhrs.the who has recommended and described the preparation of two alcohol-based formulations for local production, when commercial products are not available (who, 2009) . such formulations are liquids of low viscosity. although effective, runny liquids are difficult to handle, as spillage often occurs during application. thus, liquid formulations can leave suboptimal doses of disinfectants on the hands, potentially leading to decrease in product efficacy (greenaway et al., 2018) . for the consumer market, gel formulations are more portable and convenient to dispense on-the-go due to their ease of use and low risk of spillage compared to liquid-based products. gel-based formulations also reduce the evaporation rate of alcohol and help alcohol to spread and penetrate through contaminating organisms (fu et al., 2020; howes, 2020) . gels can be obtained by incorporating viscosity enhancer excipients in the formulation. a huge variety of thickening agents for the pharmaceutical, cosmetic and food industry are available. although the performance of these substances is well characterised in aqueous media, little is known about their behaviour in hydroalcoholic solvents.in the next sections, rheological characteristics, preparation procedures and stability of the most commonly used viscosity enhancers in hand rubs will be discussed. we narrowed down the search by examining thickening agents that have been recommended by authentic sources as being suitable for the preparation of alcoholic gels. in particular, we have focused on viscosity enhancers suggested by the sifap (italian society of compounding pharmacists) in its recent newsletter (sifap, 2020) issued by the federfarma (italian federation of pharmacy owners) (federfarma, 2020) for the preparation of alcoholic gels amid covid-19. these viscosity enhancers include carbomer, hydroxyethyl cellulose (hec), hydroxypropyl cellulose (hpc), hydroxypropyl methylcellulose (hpmc) and sodium carboxymethyl cellulose (cmc).thickeners are polymers that, differently from small molecules, cannot be univocally identified by the chemical name or cas number, which does not take into consideration relevant features such as molecular weight, degree of substitution, ratio between substituents, etc. indeed, each of the aforementioned viscosity enhancers is commercially available in a variety of grades, exhibiting variable thickening behaviour, rheological properties, solubility and even regulatory classification (e.g. pharmaceutical, or cosmetic, or food grade). the actual grade and the percentage of the polymer used in commercially available abhrs are, however, not known or disclosed on the label. for these reasons, selecting the appropriate excipient for a particular application is important. to help with this, we have analysed and hereby report the viscosity and rheological behaviour of various commercially available hand sanitisers in italy. such measured parameters of marketed products were then used as a reference to explain how gels of similar characteristics can be manufactured using different viscosity enhancers.the thickening behaviour of 10 commercial hand sanitisers sold in the italian market was analysed. all the products were tested by measuring the shear stress on increasing shear rate (viscometry test) to study the effect of shear rate on viscosity (details relative to the experimental procedures are reported in method sm 1 and fig. sf1 in supplementary information). we only tested hand sanitisers from a single pack taken from a single batch for each product. the general behaviour of all the products is reported in fig. 2 and table 1 . as expected, most of the abhrs exhibited a shear-thinning behaviour, as typical of polymeric dispersions. the only exception was the product containing hec which resembled the newtonian behaviour and exhibited very low viscosity. noteworthy, the product containing hec slightly opaque * the % of ethanol amount is %w/w for the products authorized as biocide, while the specific unit of measurement is unknown (not reported) for the cosmetic ones. **the rpm values refer to the brookfield spindle lv4 (64) and were calculated from the shear rate values using the conversion factor provided by brookfield (brookfield engineering laboratory, more solutions to sticky problems: a guide to getting more from your brookfield viscosimeter and rheometer; 2014).a. berardi, et al. international journal of pharmaceutics 584 (2020) 119431 also showed white precipitates settled on the bottom, which on shaking resulted in a cloudy system. all the other alcoholic gels containing carbomer had a characteristic plastic behaviour (refer to table 1 for the yield stress values) with a strong shear rate dependency (power law index < 0.5 in table 1 ). all the carbomer-thickened gels showed almost superimposable viscosity profiles except for "apoteke t'igienizzo" and "steriman gel", which were characterised by a lower consistency. finally, the only product containing hpmc showed the typical behaviour of a weak gel, characterised by pseudo-plasticity and a moderate shear rate dependency (power law index almost double compared to carbomer gel, but still much lower than 1). interestingly, the hpmcbased gel exhibited a viscosity similar to that of the carbomer-based gels at the higher shear rates. overall, the unique and stronger shear rate dependency of carbomer-based products means that, compared to other gels, they are more solid-like on standing and become more liquid-like under agitation (shear-thinning). this dual behaviour is a desirable feature for hand rubs, as the carbomer gel will have an attractive robust consistency, a nice appearance and could still be dispensed in consistent doses -not being runny. then, during application, the viscosity would decrease drastically under the high shear of the hand rubbing action, which will help in well spreading of the product over the surface area.carbomers, also known as carboxypolymethylene, are a series of synthetic, high molecular weight and cross-linked poly-acrylic acid polymers, widely used in cosmetics and pharmaceutical industries for the formulation of semisolid and oral liquid products of various consistencies. these polymers are effective thickeners, suspending agents and stabilisers at a very low concentration (0.1-3% w/w). carbomers differ by the cross-linker and its density, and the solvent used during their polymerisation. based on the cross-linker type, carbomers can be grouped into carbomer homopolymers (acrylic acid crosslinked with allyl sucrose or allyl pentaerythritol), carbomer copolymers (acrylic acid and c10-c30 alkyl acrylate crosslinked with allyl pentaerythritol), and carbomer interpolymers (carbomer homopolymer or copolymer that contains a block copolymer of polyethylene glycol and a long chain alkyl acid ester). for each category, the cross-linking density can be low, medium, or high, providing polymers with a varying ability to increase the viscosity of aqueous systems. the "traditional" carbomers are still synthesised in benzene, a toxic solvent that cannot be used for pharmaceutical applications. the pharmaceutical-grade carbomers are synthesised in either ethyl acetate or a mixture of ethyl acetate and cyclohexane. for an unambiguous designation of these copolymers, numeric codes such as 910, 934, 940, 941 are used as the suffix within the carbomer nomenclature to provide an indication of their molecular weight and specific components of the polymer (lubrizol, 2005) .all carbomers must be neutralised to ph 6.5-7.5 to achieve the maximum viscosity; the consistency of the dispersion starts to decrease at ph ≥ 9.0. for aqueous dispersions, a large number of neutralising agents such as sodium hydroxide, ammonium hydroxide, potassium hydroxide, l-arginine, aminomethyl propanol, tetrahydroxypropyl ethylenediamine, triethanolamine, tromethamine, peg-15 cocamine, diisopropanolamine and triisopropanolamine can be used. when carbomers are used for thickening of ethanol, isopropanol or hydroalcoholic mixtures (like in hand sanitisers), the neutraliser must be selected carefully to avoid the precipitation of the polymer. metallic alkalis, such as naoh and koh, are recommended to be used in hydroalcoholic mixtures of up to 20% ethanol, and triethanolamine in those containing up to 50-60% ethanol. considering the percentage of ethanol generally employed in the formulation of hand rubs (60-95%), the most suitable neutralisers are tetrahydroxypropyl ethylenediamine (neutrol® te), aminomethyl propanol (amp® ultra pc2000) and triisopropanolamine (up to 80-90% of ethanol) (lubrizol, 2002) .carbomers have thickening properties much higher than cellulose derivatives at a ph range of 5-9. a typical 0.5% (w/w) carbomer solution at ph 7.5 exhibits viscosities in a range of 4000-11,000 mpa·s (carbopol® 971p), 29,400-39,400 mpa·s (carbopol® 974p) and 40,000-60,000 mpa·s (carbopol® 980); those are the grades commonly employed in topical products such as lotions, creams and gels ). an evaluation of the effect of ethanol on the consistency of the hydrogel prepared in hydroalcoholic media is not straightforward; comparison studies on hydrogels in pure water and in hydroalcoholic media are lacking. one report, that compared the flow behaviour of carbopol® ultrez™ 10 (0.1-0.5 w/w) in aqueous and hydroalcoholic media (15% w/v and 30% w/v ethanol) (fresno et al., 2002) , showed that the presence of ethanol decreases the consistency of the hydrogel. the decrease in consistency was more pronounced at a polymer concentration of 0.1% w/w than at 0.5% w/w, and at a low ph (ph = 4). osei-asare et al. also prepared a gel using 62% v/v of ethanol with 0.81% v/v carbopol® 940, but unfortunately, viscosity data were only partially reported (osei-asare et al., 2020) .some manufacturers have also provided guidance on carbomer selection for hydroalcoholic gels. lubrizol suggested the use of ultrez™ due to their higher transparency and ease of preparation (lubrizol, 1998) ; while ashland proposed carbomer 980 at around 0.35% for a gel with 72% w/w of ethanol (ashland, 2018a) . considering this and our experience, we recommend 0.3-0.6% high viscosity carbomers (carbopol® ultrez™ 10, or carbomer 980) or 0.5-1% medium viscosity types (carbomer 974) along with aminomethyl propanol as a neutralising agent for the preparation of abhrs.hec is a non-ionic partially substituted poly(hydroxyethyl) ether of cellulose, available under the trade name of natrosol™ (ashland) or cellosize (dow). it is prepared by the reaction of ethylene oxide with cellulose in the presence of sodium hydroxide under controlled conditions. each glucose unit of the cellulose backbone contains three hydroxyl groups capable of reaction. if all three hydroxyl groups of each glucose residue react, the theoretical degree of substitution (ds) would be 3, although this is not practically achievable. the introduced hydroxyethyl groups can, indeed, react again with the free ethylene oxide at basic conditions, giving a side chain containing a different number of hydroxyethyl groups. to account for this, the total molar substitution (ms) describes the average number of ethylene oxide molecules attached to each glucose residue. hec with ds and ms of 1.5 and 2.5 respectively, is known as natrosol™ 250. natrosol™ 250 is available in a range of molecular weight grades (l, m, h, hh) differing in their aqueous viscosity, where the l, m, h, hh refers to low, medium, high and very high viscosity, respectively. furthermore, the pharmaceuticalgrade of the product is indicated by the abbreviation pharm, whereas the cosmetic grade is indicated by the abbreviation cs (aqualon, 2000; ashland, 2018b) . hec is easily dissolved in cold or hot water, but unlike other cellulosic derivatives, it is insoluble in organic solvents. the low or medium molecular weight types are fully soluble in glycerol and have a good solubility in hydroalcoholic media containing up to 60% ethanol (ashland, 2018b) . specifically, the manufacturer indicates that hec is "soluble" in a 70:30 water/ethanol mixture and partially soluble in a 40:60 water/ethanol mixture, both at 25°c and 60°c (ashland, 2018b) .natrosol 250 has been used as a thickener, rheological modifier, colloidal protective, stabiliser and suspending agent. the viscosity of aqueous dispersions increases with increasing the concentration and molecular weight (mw) of hec used. for instance, at a concentration of 2% w/w, the viscosity increases from around 20 mpa·s for l-type polymer up to around 100,000 mpa·s for hh-type. the manufacturer does not provide further information regarding the viscosity of hec dispersions in hydroalcoholic mixtures (aqualon, 2000) . brown et al. measured and compared the elastic modulus g' of 3% hec (the type was not specified) dispersions in water and in hydroalcoholic mixtures containing up to 60% ethanol. the measured g' was 354 pa in water. the consistency of the dispersion reached a maximum at 30% ethanol a. berardi, et al. international journal of pharmaceutics 584 (2020) 119431 (470 pa), then decreased again at 40% or higher ethanolic concentrations. the viscosity dropped to 229 pa in 60% ethanol due to poor hydration of the polymer in less aqueous media (brown et al., 1998) . therefore, high molecular weight hec (1-2%) could be suitable for the preparation of hand rub gels containing 50-60% ethanol. hec gel formulations containing > 60% alcohol are not recommended, due to the poor solubility of the polymer and the cloudy appearance that results, as shown in fig. sf2 (supplementary information) . since 60-95% ethanol is necessary for efficient hand disinfection, hec does not seem to be a suitable viscosity enhancer for abhrs.hpc is a non-ionic water-soluble ether derivative of cellulose with remarkable aqueous thickening and stabilising properties. hpc is manufactured by ashland and commercialised under the trade name of klucel™. it is made by reacting alkali cellulose with propylene oxide at elevated temperatures and pressures. at these conditions, an ether linkage can be formed between propylene oxide and one or more of the three reactive hydroxyl groups of each glucose monomer unit of the cellulose chain. the degree of substitution usually varies from 1 to 3, but can be > 3 if the secondary hydroxyl group in the side chain reacts with propylene oxide (ashland, 2017) .hpc is a cellulose derivative soluble in the broadest range of solvents, such as water (up to 40°c), alcohols, many polar organic solvents, polyethylene glycol and propylene glycol (klucel™hydroxypropylcellulose. physical and chemical properties, 2017). high purity hpc (0.2% ash maximum) is produced for food (f), cosmetics (cs) or pharmaceutical applications (f pharm). seven further grades of hpc are available on the base of viscosity/ mw and are designated as el, e, l, j, g, m, and h in the order of viscosity (klucel™hydroxypropylcellulose. physical and chemical properties, 2017).hpc has been used as a thickening agent providing aqueous systems with a broad viscosity, ranging from < 10 mpa·s to > 10,000 mpa·s, depending on the type used (at 2% wt). in pure water, viscosity increases exponentially to the increase in concentration. particularly, a maximum viscosity > 10,000 mpa·s can be reached in the range of 0.5-5%(w/w) for the high mw grades (i.e. h, m and g). a maximum viscosity of around 1,000 mpa·s can be reached using the intermediate mw grades (i.e. j, l) at 8-10%(w/w); while a maximum viscosity between 100 mpa.s and 1,000 mpa.s can be obtained using the low mw grades (i.e. e and el). limited information is available regarding the effect of ethanol on the viscosity of hpc systems. it is possible to prepare a clear hydrogel using 100% ethanol as a dispersion medium for high, medium and low mw hpc grades. however, gels prepared with 100% ethanol have a slightly lower viscosity than the systems prepared in 100% water. the percentage decrease in viscosity in pure ethanol is more marked for high and intermediate mw hpc, with respect to the low mw hpc. moreover, the viscosity of gels of hpc in hydroalcoholic media is much higher than gels prepared with pure solvents (even water), at least for the intermediate mw polymers. for instance, 2% hpc gels in a hydroalcoholic mixture (30:70 ethanol/water) had a viscosity of 500 mpa·s, which is higher than those in pure water or ethanol (270 mpa·s and 210 mpa·s, respectively) (klucel™hydroxypropylcellulose. physical and chemical properties, 2017). the same trend was reported by ramachadran et al. for the viscosity of 3% (w/w) hpc type g in 50:50 hydroalcoholic gels compared to the same gels in pure water and pure ethanol (ramachandran et al., 1999) .ashland (the manufacturer) suggested using the highest mw type of hpc (i.e. type h) at a concentration of 1.1% in a hydroalcoholic gel with 72% (w/w) ethanol (ashland, 2018a) . interestingly, the viscosity profile reported for the hpc hydroalcoholic gel is superimposable to the viscosity of "biotè scudo gel", a commercially available abhr thickened with hpmc (fig. 2) . therefore, we recommend a high molecular weight hpc (~1-1.5%) for the preparation of abhr gels.hpmc, aka hypromellose in the european and united states pharmacopoeias, is a cellulose ether derived from cellulose, widely used in various industries such as pharmaceutical, cosmetic, food, paints, etc. hpmc has a cellulose backbone with methyl and hydroxypropyl substituent groups. commercially available hpmc (e.g. methocel, metolose, pharmacoat, vivacoat, vivapharm, benacel) are characterised by differences in terms of abundance of methyl and hydroxypropyl groups and their molecular weights. an initial 4-digit number defines the abundancy of the substituent groups, specifically 2910 (or type e according to colorcon) indicates a methoxy substitution of 28-30% and a hydroxypropyl substitution of 7-12%; 2208 (or type k according to colorcon) indicates a methoxy substitution of 19-24% and a hydroxypropyl substitution of 7-12%; while 2906 (or type f according to colorcon) indicates a methoxy substitution of 27-30% and a hydroxypropyl substitution of 4-7%. the numeric code in the nomenclature is followed by the viscosity (mpa·s) of a 2% aqueous solution. for instance, hypromellose 2208 4 m is a hpmc having methoxy and hydroxypropyl contents of 19-24% and 7-12% respectively, exhibiting a viscosity of 4 mpa·s at 2% in water (dow, 2002; li et al., 2005) .hpmc is commonly used as a thickener in aqueous solutions and is extensively researched in the literature. it is also used in a large variety of binary solvent systems as per manufacturer (dow, 2002) , however, it is not much used in non-aqueous solvents. brown et al. reported the values of storage moduli of 5% hmpc hydroalcoholic mixtures up to 80% ethanolic medium. like hec and hpc, the viscosity behaviour followed a bell-shaped curve, with a maximum viscosity at~50% ethanol. the viscosity of the mixture decreased to a level equal to that of pure water when the ethanol approached 80% (brown et al., 1998) . robert et al. studied the effect of ethanol, up to a concentration of 40% for gels containing 2% hpmc 2208 4 m, and found a similar observation to that of brown et al. (roberts et al., 2007) .interestingly, the rheology of 2% hpmc 2208 4 m gels in 10-40% hydroalcoholic mixtures from roberts et al. (2007) is similar to a commercially available abhr, which is "biotè scudo gel", thickened with hpmc (table 1) . also, the viscosity profile of 1.5% hpmc 2208 10 m gel containing 72% w/w of alcohol from ashland (ashland, 2018a) was similar to that of the commercially available product "biotè scudo gel" (fig. 2) . acknowledging that the commercial product (unknown polymer concentration) and the gels reported in the literature (known polymer concentration) have similar viscosity, the use of hpmc 10 m~1.5% and hpmc 4 m~2-2.5% (both types 2208 and 2910) for the preparation of abhrs is recommended.cmc is a water-soluble anionic derivative of cellulose that acts as a thickening agent, rheological modifier, stabiliser, protective colloid, and a film-forming agent. cmc is made by the reaction of cellulose with sodium monochloroacetate in the presence of sodium hydroxide under strictly controlled conditions (feddersen and thorp, 1993) . cmc is available from ashland under the tradenames aqualon™ cmc and blanose™ cmc, depending on the site of production; and by other manufacturers with trade names such as tylose cb and walocel c. as for the other cellulose derivatives, the physical properties of cmc can be varied by the ds and mw. cmc is typically offered in three different ds such as 0.7, 0.9 and 1.2 (referred to as cmc type 7, 9 and 12) and a broad range of molecular weights indicated by the letter l (low), m (medium) and h (high). the regulatory classification is given by the letters "f" for food; "cs" for cosmetic; and "ph" for pharmaceutical compliance, according to us, european (eu) and japanese (j) pharmacopoeia (ashland, 2012) .cmc is soluble in water at all temperatures, and forms clear colloidal dispersions at 1-6%, with viscosity between 10 and 10,000 mpa·s. it is practically insoluble in most organic solvents, including ethanol (95%). however, it can be dispersed providing clear systems in hydroalcoholic mixtures of up to 40% ethanol. at higher a. berardi, et al. international journal of pharmaceutics 584 (2020) 119431 contents (up to 60% ethanol), cmc can be dispersed, but it provides opaque systems. low-viscosity grades work better with alcoholic gels than high-viscosity types, which show clouding and polymer precipitation at higher ethanol content. the manufacturer does not provide any information regarding the effect of ethanol on the viscosity of the dispersions (feddersen and thorp, 1993) . the only reference available is from brown et al. who compared the viscosity of 10% cmc (the type and mw is not specified) in pure water and hydroalcoholic mixtures (up to 40% ethanol). a remarkable increase in the viscosity was observed from pure water (g' 432 pa) to a mixture containing 30% ethanol (g'1186 pa), followed by a drop (g' 671 pa) at 40% ethanol which may be attributed to the poor solubility of cmc in higher alcoholic media (brown et al., 1998) . according to the literature, low viscosity cmc (being more stable in ethanol) is more suitable for the preparation of gels with a maximum ethanol concentration of 50%. in our experience, it was found that cmc dispersions precipitate and become opaque at 60% (w/w) ethanolic concentrations (fig. f3 , supplementary information). it is therefore not advisable to use cmc for abhrs containing higher ethanol concentrations recommended for optimum germicide efficacy. fig. 3 summarises the different procedures that can be used for the manufacturing of abhr gels.in the direct addition method, all the components, except for the thickener, have to be preliminarily solubilised in the water/ethanol mixture. then, the thickener is added, preferentially sifted slowly, in the vortex of the vigorously agitated hydroalcoholic solution (with mechanical or magnetic stirring) (aqualon, 2000; klucel™hydroxypropylcellulose. physical and chemical properties, 2017; lubrizol, 1998) . for carbomer thickeners, it is necessary to raise the ph to around 6.5-7 with the neutralising agent. the neutralising agent has to be added dropwise or gradually after the complete dispersion of the polymer, possibly monitoring the ph with a ph-meter (using electrodes suitable for measuring viscous or dirty samples) or a ph-indicator paper. gel preparation using this procedure is faster with the surface-treated grades of thickeners such as car-bopol® ultrez types for carbomer or natrosol r-grades for hpc, due to the low lumpiness of these polymers when dispersed [for carbomer ultrez grades the direct method should be slightly modified -for more details readers are referred to (lubrizol, 1998) ]. also, all carbomer thickeners are faster to disperse than the others due to their ph-dependent viscosity. they remain in the liquid phase during product preparation until the ph is adjusted to neutral. this is an advantage as solvent diffusion and polymer hydration are much more rapid in liquid state than in an already formed gel system. on the other hand, the direct addition method can be slower and more difficult for hpmc and hpc gels (even for surface-treated grades), due to their high tendency to form lumps during dispersion. the direct addition method is a very effective and economical procedure, as long as an efficient stirring system is available for production.this procedure requires the thickeners to be pre-wetted with a water-miscible organic solvent. in our experience (this is the standard procedure used in pharmaceutical practice), the best results can be obtained using glycerol or propylene glycol as wetting agents at 1:1 to 1:4 polymer:wetting agent ratio. the wetting procedure is usually operated using mortar and pestle. when a homogenous wet slurry is obtained, the hydroalcoholic solution (containing all the other components previously dissolved) can be gradually added, always under vigorous stirring with the pestle. the addition of the neutralising agent for carbomer polymers follows the same procedure reported in the direct addition method. the reverse addition method is only suitable for the production of small batches when magnetic or mechanical stirring systems are not available. therefore, we recommend this procedure for small-scale extemporaneous compounding in community or hospital pharmacies.the preparation of gel containing high viscosity grades of hpmc or hpc could be sometimes difficult due to the tendency to form lumps. a   fig. 3 . schematic diagram summarising possible methods for the manufacturing of hand sanitiser gels.a. berardi, et al. international journal of pharmaceutics 584 (2020) 119431 common procedure to avoid such problem and to speed-up the preparation is represented by the "hot/cold" technique (dow, 2002) . however, such a procedure is unsuitable for alcoholic gels because of the potential loss of ethanol content during the preparation, due to evaporation. roberts at al. reported the preparation of 2% hpmc 2208 4 m hydroalcoholic gels containing 40% ethanol using a modification of the standard "hot/cold" technique (roberts et al., 2007) . briefly, an aqueous gel is prepared with the "hot/cold" technique and then, while cooling, ethanol (and other volatile components, if any) is added under stirring. although, this procedure could represent an interesting alternative to the previously reported methods, there is not enough information to support its use in the preparation of hydroalcoholic gels containing ≥ 60% ethanol. another preparation method that can be used to prevent lumping, especially for hpmc and hpc, is a combination (hybrid) of the direct and reverse addition methods. briefly, a wet slurry is prepared similar to the reverse addition method and then it is gradually added under mechanical or magnetic stirring to the hydroalcoholic mixtures, as in the direct addition method (ashland, 2017; dow, 2002) .a market research was carried out in italy at the beginning of april 2020 amid the covid-19, to review the range of commercially available abhr products in local pharmacies, supermarkets and online retailers. table 2 provides a summary of these products including their composition, alcoholic content, type of thickeners and legal classification, extracted from the products' label. various products sold online, with essential information missing on the label, were not included in the table. comparing the thickening agents used in the formulation of hand rubs, it is evident that most of the products are made viscous by the use of carbomer and an amine-based neutralising agent (i.e. aminomethyl propanol or triethanolamine). the only exceptions were represented by two products thickened by either hpmc or hec; and a third product in which carbomer neutralised by sodium hydroxide was used. interestingly, these three hand gels were among the ones on which we performed the rheological analysis (table 1) , whereby they showed different rheological behaviour compared to most other analysed products. the product containing hec was practically liquid, with a white precipitate at the bottom, that could be explained by a decreased polymer solubility at high ethanolic concentration. indeed, the manufacturer of hec indicates that this polymer possesses good solubility in hydroalcoholic media containing up to 60% ethanol (ashland, 2018b) , hinting at a decrease in polymer solubility at higher ethanolic concentrations. as for the carbomer gel neutralised with sodium hydroxide, it was slightly opaque and less viscous compared to the majority of the carbomer products (table 1) . noteworthily, sodium hydroxide is not recommended as a suitable neutralising agent for carbomer-based hydroalcoholic gels by the manufacturer, due to possible polymer precipitation (lubrizol, 2002) , as stated earlier. therefore, it can be concluded that the standard combination of carbomer/amine-based neutralising agents seems to form a product with good gel quality.another interesting aspect that arises from the products' analysis in table 2 , is their regulatory status. these products are marketed in europe following two different regulatory pathways: the cosmetic products regulation (regulation (eu) n°1223/2009, 2009) and the biocidal products regulation (regulation (eu) n°528/2012, 2012) . the label claims on the product determine the choice of the regulation market. if the product is used to cleanse or clean the skin, then it is subjected to the cosmetic products regulation. while if the use of the product aims at disinfecting the skin from potentially infectious organisms, or if the action of the product goes beyond the general use of personal hygiene, then the hand sanitiser should follow the biocidal products regulation. the marketing authorisation procedures and labelling requirements significantly differ between the two regulatory pathways. specifically, a biocide has to be authorised by a competent authority (national health authority or european commission) after the evaluation of a dossier containing all the information regarding the safety and effectiveness of the product. the product label must report the concentration of the "active ingredient" (including alcohol), the uses for which the product is authorised including all warnings, hazard and precautionary statements. on the other hand, evidence of safety is the key requirement for a cosmetic product. for the market authorisation, the company has to notify the product information file (pif) to the cosmetic products notification portal (cpnp), which makes the information electronically available to competent authorities or poison centres. the product label must contain the list of ingredients (in descending order of weight), particular precautions or warnings and the cosmetic activity unless it is clear from its presentation.this implies that the biocide and cosmetic hand rubs can have different amounts of ethanol in the products. all alcohol gels in table 2 commercialised as biocides report the ethanol concentration in the label, which is always in the range 60% to 95%, suggested as a safe and effective concentration for disinfection by the us fda and who (boyce et al., 2009; fda, 1994) . conversely, reporting the concentration of ethanol is not mandatory for cosmetic sanitisers. of the 13 alcoholic gels approved as cosmetics, the amount of ethanol is reported only in 5 products, where one contained only 50% alcohol. surprisingly, in three products water is listed as the first ingredient followed by ethanol, suggesting an ethanolic concentration of even < 50% (by weight). such cosmetic products, although good for cleaning the skin, are not fit for use as disinfectants. this can be misleading for the general public, as they might not be aware of the product suitability amid the covid-19 pandemic. consumers aiming to buy an effective hand disinfectant might unintentionally pick up from the shelves a very similar hand gel product, which is however not a disinfectant (i.e. a cosmetic). it is crucial, in this context, that pharmacists and retailers promptly advise customers to choose the appropriate product for the right purpose, i.e. disinfection or simple cleaning. overall, during a pandemic, providing consumers with the correct information on hand sanitisers should be a priority of utmost importance. perhaps, also regulatory agencies could consider revisiting the current regulations to better safeguard consumers.building upon the information and outlook provided in the previous sections of this review, a guide on formulation selection for the development of hand sanitisers is presented in table 3 . here, functional ingredients are grouped in classes, and possible options within the same class are evaluated and compared in terms of time/ease of preparation, the equipment required (for the preparation), cost of material, antimicrobial efficacy, product appearance/acceptability, ease of use, and moisturising capacity/dermatological profile. cas number of materials is also indicated.in response to the health, habits and market patterns extreme changes brought about by the current covid-19 outbreak, we review here the current knowledge and trends on the formulation of hand rubs. the article also presents a detailed guide on ingredients' selection, and formulation design and manufacture of quality hand sanitisers. the main outcomes of the analysis presented in this review are listed below:• evidences show that hand sanitisation is a main infection preventive measure during a pandemic, justifying the emphasis by the various healthcare organisations across the world, the huge increase in sales witnessed during the covid-19 outbreak, and the consequent shortage of hand sanitisers. the european commission has recently highlighted the tendency of many economic operators to consider a. berardi, et al. international journal of pharmaceutics 584 (2020) 119431 * the % of ethanol amount is %w/w for the products authorized as biocide/pmc, while the specific unit of measurement is unknown (not reported) for the cosmetic ones. ** in italy, alcohol gels fall in the category of "products containing an active ingredient not yet approved and under revision, in accordance with regulation 528/2012 / (eu)". thus, they can be placed in the italian market pursuant to presidential decree 392/98, as "presidi medico-chirurgici" (pmc), and it is compulsory to report the pcm regulatory status in the label.a. berardi, et al. international journal of pharmaceutics 584 (2020) 119431 table 3a guide to selecting ingredients for the development of hand sanitisers. none of the commercial products tested were prepared with cmc. it is an unsuitable thickener in a media containing > 50% of ethanol. considered cheap.(continued on next page) a. berardi, et al. international journal of pharmaceutics 584 (2020) 119431 the possibility to shift and/or increase the production of hand cleaners and disinfectants to respond to the current needs (european commission, 2020). businesses producing hand sanitisers and compounding pharmacists are now challenged to keep up with the exceptionally high demand for such products.• most gel formulations contain carbomers and an amine-based neutralising agent to form the gel matrix. other gelling polymers could also be used, in theory, as alternatives; however, such polymers do not often provide hydroalcoholic gel products of the same ideal rheological behaviour and appearance, touch feel, ease of use and stability. carbomer remains, in our opinion, the gold standard gel former in alcohol-based hand sanitisers.• substandard products can be available in certain markets. when the low standard is related to the selection of less appropriate excipients or formulation procedures, but the alcoholic concentration is maintained between the accepted standard of disinfection (i.e. 60-95% for ethanol), the risk for consumers is mainly a reduced perception of product quality and attractiveness, and reduced ease of use; while overall product efficacy is maintained. the poorly formulated products may also be subject to inappropriate use and sanitisation technique.• much more worrying is the presence of hand cleaners on the market containing low ("substandard") and/or unknown concentrations of alcohol that are not commercialised as disinfectants. there is a tangible risk that consumers might, and are using, hand cleaners, which product appearance is very similar to hand disinfectants, while being unaware that such products cannot ensure disinfection and are not fit for use amid the covid-19 pandemic. to minimise this risk: 1) customer counselling by pharmacists and retailers regarding the selection of appropriate products for covid-19 infection control is highly necessary; 2) online purchase of hand sanitiser from unknown or unreliable e-commerce sites by the public is discouraged; 3) awareness campaigns to educate the public on discriminating between products fit for general hygiene/cleansing from those for disinfection fit the for covid-19 infection control should be promoted; and finally, 4) regulatory bodies should revisit current regulations on hand sanitisers to better safeguard consumers.• the demand for the hand sanitisers amid the covid-19 pandemic is likely to remain high for long, until more efficient infection preventive measures become available, such as a sars-cov-2 vaccine. moreover, public awareness on the importance of hand sanitisation during this pandemic is likely to have long term effects on hygiene habits across the world. the public is likely to endure the routine use of hand sanitisers, even beyond the covid-19 era, as a new norm of self-hygiene. **** optimal; ***good; **moderate; *scarce; -indicates information is not relevant or not available.1 cost comparison are made by referring to sigma-aldrich database or to the catalogue of acef spa, an italian raw material distributor for pharmaceutical, cosmetic, galenic products and nutraceuticals. for each category of ingredients, the cost comparison has been made using the same data source within the various options of the same ingredient. the amount needed for each preparation has been taken into consideration for the cost evaluation.viral infections remain a critical issue since the year 1000 when the poxvirus spread through a wide region of china (1) . the large death report in poxvirus infection is often linked to the black death bubonic plague, which kills 75-200 million people in the european continent during the period 1347-1351 (2) . in the year 1901 yellow fever caused by flavivirus, a filterable agent reported as the first human infected virus responsible for the death of more than 50 million people (3) . further, in the year 1918-1920 pandemic, spanish flu (h1n1) is considered to be the greatest medical holocaust in that period affecting millions of people across the worlswide (4) . in the ascent of the timeline different viral infections show their significant impact and responsible for millions of deaths in different countries. a recent unprecedented outbreak of coronaviruses in wuhan city of china is declared as a global emergency by who. a statistical report suggests that, out of 195 countries, coronaviruses have been spread to 178 countries with the total case of 22,68,011 coronavirus infections, and a death record of 1,55,185 have been reported (till april 18 th 2020) (5) . in a comprehensive outlook, vaccination and antiviral drug therapy are given the foremost priority fight against viral infections. in the last few decades, a large vaccination programmed has been launched to fight against viral infections like polio, smallpox, and hepatitis, etc. a vaccine is assessed by its efficacy and its effectiveness. in the case of the influenza vaccine, effectiveness is lower than the efficacy. this is because influenza often misleads with other influenza-like illnesses and secondly wide diversification in the viral genome. the effectiveness of the viral vaccine is the major concern as a metanalysis report found that effectiveness against flu shows a maximum of 67% in 2012 and thereafter it reduces as mentioned in figure 1 (6) . havrix a viral vaccine licensed from usfda in 1995 for the treatment of hepatitis a. the literature survey reports that 3-20% of acute hepatitis a is observed in previously vaccinated patients. interestingly most of the relapse cases against hepatitis a vaccine have reported within a short duration of time (less than 3 weeks) (7) .the other major challenging factor for the development of a vaccine against rna virus is its ultrafast mutation rate and critical adverse effects associated with it. for instance, initial trails of the flu vaccine in 2009 show mild adverse effects like tenderness in muscles, pain at the injection site, headache, malaise, and muscle pain (8) . who recommended this vaccine for the different flu-like syndrome as there are no significant differences in their adverse effects. when vaccination covered to a large population, then severe side effects like anaphylaxis and febrile convulsions were noticed.looking into the severity of adverse effects, glaxosmithkline recalls its vaccine from the market (9) .in the later part of 2009, a peripheral nervous system associated side effects i.e., guillain barr's syndrome was observed (10) . chris shaw, a neuroscientist at the university of british colombia expressed the concern that adverse effects may not necessary to appears immediately rather it may take a timeline of 5-10 years as observed in gulf war syndrome on exposure to the anthrax vaccine (11) . henceforth, it is a very critical challenging aspect to access the effectiveness of the viral vaccine, especially against rna viruses. the second priority is given to antiviral treatment to curb viral infections. there is a lot of antiviral therapeutics available in the global market to fight against viral infections. the recent outbreak of influenza in the year 2008, the two most popular neuraminidase inhibitors oseltamivir and zanamivir have been prescribed to control seasonal influenza worldwide. however, the treatment is most effective when prescribed as early as possible after the symptoms developed. the effectiveness of the drug markedly reduces after 48 h of administration. looking into the antiviral potential, adverse effects such as gastrointestinal associated problems, respiratory problems musculoskeletal symptoms were compromised. after more than eight years of global dominance, the cases of drug resistance have been reported in various scientific documents. in the initial phase of the clinical trial in 2008, drug resistance and population surveillance were very low and further shows highest percentage resistance of 1.9% in the year 2013-2014 influenza season, as compared to the 2012-2013 and 2014-2015 seasons where drug resistance estimated as 0.6 and 0.5%, respectively (12) . in comparison to the other microbial infections (bacterial and fungal), developing an antiviral therapy is always remain a tough assignment to the scientific community. the primary reasons are the highly complex structural ambiguity and unable to identify the viral targets that make the process more complicated to design a selective and effective antiviral therapy (13) . currently, the unavailability of effective antiviral drug therapy in the global market worsens the situation to a greater extent. lacking in the concrete information regarding the mode transmission, contact precautions should be an ideal approach to reduce the risk of transmission of newly emerging covid-19 infection. as per who guidelines, infection prevention and control (ipc) is a practical, evidence-based approach to prevent patients and health workers from being harmed by avoidable infections. statistics revealed that maintaining effective ipc resulted in a >30% reduction in healthcare-associated infections (hais) (14) . hence, considering the global emergency of covid-19 infections, preventive care is the only option left to restrict its spreadability. infections associated with coronavirus may spread by contact, droplet, and airborne transmission. these transmissions will be minimized by taking an appropriate preventive major. the foundation of preventive major against viral infection is initiated with the routine practice of using an effective soap/hand sanitizer/rub, personal protective equipment (suitable mask, eye/face protector, and gowns). for instance, the use of antiseptic hand soaps provides a greater reduction in the number of microbes over a short period as compared with regular soaps (15) . in addition, alcohol base sanitizer restricts the viral growth by precipitating the surface proteins that break the chain of transmission of coronavirus. moreover, the strength of alcohol is the key factor that determines the biocidal potentiality of the sanitizers/rub. historical evidence confined the case of coronavirus existence since 1960s in the patient with common cold-like symptoms (16) . tyrrell and bynoe found a virus obtained in a culture media containing an infected human embryonic tracheal organ and named as b814. at for an epidemic/pandemic infections across the worldwide by the research community as mentioned in figure 2 (17, 18) . covid-19 is an enveloped, positive-sense, single-stranded rna virus with the largest genomic configuration of 26-32 kb amongst all rna viruses (19) . coronavirus is a zoonotic virus in which the bat tends to be the most suitable primary host to transmit viral infections. the scientific report predicted that disturbing the natural habitat appears to be stressed in the animal and makes them shed even more viruses in their biofluid like saliva, urine, and feces. these biofluids and feces in our surrounding makes covid-19 suitable for spreading the infection through the surface (20). to curb this pandemic infection of covid-19, preventive care will play a significant role. the current review emphasizes the various critical aspects associated with the selection of different preventive gadgets such as surface disinfectant, hand hygiene, personal protective equipment that constrain the global spreadability of covid-19 infections.the major preventive gadgets include an effective surface disinfectant, hand hygiene, personal protective equipment (suitable mask, eye and face protector). coronavirus infection is a surface to surface, airborne, contagious disease characterized by fever, shortness of breath and coughing.surfaces of both animate and inanimate may play a prominent role in the spreading of covid-19 infection.inanimate surfaces are the most prone site for the transmission of covid-19 infection from one to another. depending upon the nature of the surface, ph, temperature and relative humidity of the surrounding, virus persistence time varies from 1-9 d (21). the persistence time in different inanimate subjects is mentioned in figure 3 . the highly risk exposed surface areas need to be mopped frequently with a suitable disinfectant. the characteristic feature of an ideal disinfectant must have low contact time with significant antiviral activity. currently, the united states environmental protection agency (usepa) recommended some disinfectants against covid-19 as mentioned in table 1 (22).in general, quaternary ammonium compounds, hydrogen peroxide, alcohol (ethanol, isopropyl alcohol, phenol), aldehyde, hypochlorous acid, octanoic acid, citric acid conjugate with silver ions, sodium hypochlorite, sodium bicarbonate, etc. are the key ingredient responsible for the virucidal activity. alcohols, ethanol (78-95%) and iso-propanol (70-100%) have been used as an effective disinfectant as they show potent virucidal activity with a negligible toxic effect on human skin. all lipid enveloped virus gets inactivated within 2 min. the mechanism of action alcohol-based disinfectant is poorly understood however, surface protein precipitation may be one of the key mechanisms that are responsible for the virucidal activity. besides this, quaternary ammonium compounds (qacs) are most widely integrated into the surface disinfectant formulation. qacs consist of central nitrogen as a cationic portion surrounded by the negatively charged halogen anion portion. qacs are classified according to the nature of alkyl groups (r groups) which includes the number of nitrogen atoms, branching of the carbon chain, and the presence of aromatic groups.variations in the chain length, nuclear size, and basicity of the complex decide the antimicrobial potentiality. for instance, an increase in the chain length from c 12 -c 16 show the greatest antimicrobial activity. these agents are membrane activating groups as they directly interact with the cytoplasmic membrane of bacteria and yeast (23). the presence of long nonpolar tail makes them effective against a lipid-containing virus such as covid-19 (i.e., phospholipid layering). the long chain of hydrocarbon act as permeability enhancer that influences the surface-active properties whereas the cationic portion binds to negatively charged nucleic acids condensed inside the capsid leads to virucidal activity (24). other major class of disinfectant includes halogen compounds i.e., hypochlorous acid, hypochlorite ions. sodium hypochlorite solutions can be prepared by absorbing chlorine in sodium hydroxide solution to give a mixture of hypochlorous acid (hoc1) and sodium hypochlorite (naocl) and as mentioned below.hocl + naoh naocl + h table 2 .however important precautions must be taken into consideration while using frequent alcohol-based hand sanitizer. the oil secreted from the sebaceous gland of the skin surface is composed of free fatty acids, specifically lauric acid and sapienic acid, that possess the inherent antiviral activity (35) . preventing the exponential spreadability of covid-19 infection is completely relies on the use of an effective ppe which includes face masks/respirators, gloves, goggles/face shields, and gowns (40) .the however, the percentage retaining mechanical strength after subsequent washing is an interesting fact that needs to be evaluated (51) . due course of time, the health department of different countries and who provides various preventive health care memos in the public domain that could help to restrict the spreadability of covid-19 infection worldwide and are mentioned in figure 3 (52, 53) . droplets can also land on objects and surfaces around the person, such as tables, doorknobs, and handrails. people can become infected by touching these objects or surfaces, then touching their eyes, nose or mouth. this is why it is important to wash one's hands regularly with soap and water or clean with alcohol-based hand rub.the spread of covid-19 and resulting mortality in a region is influenced by many factors, including the general health of the people, the personal and environmental opportunities for the spread, and the type of treatment and welfare schemes available. for instance, people with good health (generally young people) are less affected by covid-19, while people with pre-existing health conditions (e.g., diabetes, kidney diseases, high blood pressure, cancer) are affected more; indeed, far greater percentages of deaths have been reported among elder people and those with pre-existing conditions when compared to younger people and those with good health. high population density (which influences the distance between people), low temperature (which facilitates the spread of the virus), and less water/disinfectants generally lead to more spread.numerous studies have examined the spread, impact, and control of covid-19. such studies have addressed a wide variety of aspects. these include: how population flow drives the distribution of covid-19 (e.g., jia et al. 2020) ; effects of travel restrictions on the spread of covid-19 outbreak (e.g., chinazzi et al. 2020) ; links between climate factors and covid-19 spread (e.g., bashir et al. 2000; wu et al. 2020) ; drug development against covid-19 (e.g., abd el-aziz and stockland 2020); and plight of migrants and refugees during covid-19 and calls for their inclusion in response to covid-19 (e.g., orcutt et al. 2020) ; and impact of lockdown on the environment, including surface water quality and air quality (e.g., yunus et al. 2019; mahato et al. 2020; muhammad et al. 2020) .in the context of covid-19 spread and control, water plays a particularly important role. this is because, according to who (and governments around the world), one of the most effective ways to reduce one's chances of being infected or spreading covid-19 is to regularly and thoroughly wash one's hands with soap and water or clean them with an alcohol-based hand rub. washing one's hands with soap and water or using an alcohol-based hand rub kill viruses that may be on one's hands. therefore, the availability and accessibility of water can significantly influence the extent of spread of covid-19 in a region. in this regard, developing and under-developed regions have a particular disadvantage, since the accessibility to water in such regions, even for the most basic needs (e.g., drinking, sanitation), is generally limited (e.g., sivakumar 2011a). it is also important to note that these are also the regions generally with high population and population density. therefore, mitigating or controlling the spread of covid-19 is highly challenging in these regions, as it necessitates identifying, accessing, and supplying significant quantity of additional water resources all around (not to mention the social-distancing).despite this, i believe, the issues associated with water demand and supply to tackle covid-19 has not gained serious attention until now. a key reason for this may be the so-called ''lockdown'' or ''stay-at-home'' restriction that has been and continues to be imposed in many countries (at national level or local levels), including in some of the most populous countries, such as china, india, and the united states. the lockdown has forced almost the entire population in many countries to stay at home. this has greatly reduced the need for washing or cleaning one's hands and, hence, reduced the need for additional water use. this situation will certainly change, however, once the lockdown is partially relaxed or completely removed. once people start going out of their homes to their workplaces and other public places, as was before, they will realize the need to wash their hands more often and, thus, will need more water. this will be not only in their workplaces and other public places but also at their own homes, since they will have to wash their hands after returning to their homes from outside, to make sure they are not spreading the virus at home. it is important, therefore, to ask whether there are enough water facilities in workplaces and other public places (and also at their homes) for everyone for the foreseeable future. this question assumes particular significance, since covid-19 will likely last for years (not just months), according to many health professionals, epidemiologists, and others in fields related to infectious diseases and their effects. indeed, there are concerns that covid-19 may never go away and that we will have to get used to living a ''new normal'' way of life, i.e. ''living with this means that our demands for water will significantly increase in the future, especially in the domestic, industrial, and recreational sectors. for instance, considering a country like india, with a population of over 1.3 billion, even a small amount of additional water requirement for washing one's hands will increase the water demand by at least a few billions of liters. with the already significant demand for water for the agricultural sector, which currently uses more than 70% of water globally (and even more than 90% in some regions), there will be enormous pressure on our water resources. this raises several important questions: where can we find the additional water resources? how to bring the water to where it will be needed (both urban and rural areas, and throughout the countries)? what will be the additional water storage and treatment facilities required for water supply? how much will it cost? will water pricing need to be introduced (or increased) to cover the costs, where water pricing currently does not exist (or where there is already water pricing)? how will the society respond to water pricing, especially when it is introduced for the first time in a region, as in many developing and under-developing regions?in addition to the increase in the demands for water quantity it imposes, covid-19 also presents challenges from the perspective of water quality. for instance, use of more water (and also soap and disinfectants) to wash one's hands to control the spread of covid-19 will increase the quantity of wastewater, with perhaps even poorer quality, coming from homes, workplaces, and other public places. this will, in turn, increase the required capacities of sewer/ drainage structures and wastewater treatment facilities, before such wastewater can be discharged safely to appropriate places, including to nearby water courses. this means, there will be additional costs for such potentially new drainage and treatment facilities required. it is relevant to note, at this point, that in many developing and underdeveloped regions, it is common for the untreated wastewater (particularly from many industries, but also from homes) to be discharged into the nearby water courses. assuming that this trend will continue, at least for the foreseeable future, the additional quantity and poorer quality of wastewater will have serious effects on water quality in nearby water bodies, including rivers and lakes. it is indeed encouraging to note that the quality of water in rivers, lakes, and other water bodies around the world, especially in developing and under-developed regions, have significantly improved during the lockdown period [e.g., yunus et al. (2020) ]. this, however, is only temporary, and there is no doubt that the situation will become ''normal'' again once the lockdown is over! furthermore, there are serious concerns about the handling and disposal of products and materials used to control the spread of covid-19 and to treat the covid-19 patients (e.g., face masks, hand gloves, and personal protective equipment) after their use. this is because their collection, handling, and disposal are dangerous and require undertaking extreme precautions. it is also important to note that disposing the bodies of covid-19 patients after their death has been an enormously challenging and excruciating experience, as has been witnessed in many places around the world. handling and disposal of wastes related to covid-19 often require a large quantity of water, both during and after.the above observations suggest that covid-19 will have serious impacts on the water sector, in terms of both water quantity and water quality. this will bring new and enormous challenges to water planning, management, and governance. such challenges include aspects related to water sources, infrastructure for storage and distribution, sewer/drainage structures, wastewater treatment and disposal, and water pricing, among others. it is also appropriate to note, at this point, that there are already significant challenges in water planning and management, due to population growth and improving living standards. global climate change is anticipated to bring its own challenges to the water sector (e.g., sivakumar 2011b), in terms of both water quantity and water quality. there are also concerns about our ability to produce food and generate energy to meet the future demands, which depend, to a great extent, on water (for irrigation and hydroelectricity) (chen et al. 2016) .how will all these affect our future water planning and management activities, especially if covid-19 and its impact last for a long time? will totally new planning and management strategies be needed, and in what shape and form? what can the governments around the world do to address these? what can the water managers do? what can the people do? these are some of the basic questions policy makers, water managers, environmentalists, non-governmental organizations, and also common people should be starting to ask. needless to say, water researchers have a particularly important role in asking these questions and in finding solutions. there is no question that this will require interdisciplinary collaborations among water researchers from diverse fields, including earth sciences, engineering, economics, law, social sciences, and psychology. while there have already been some efforts towards such interdisciplinary collaborations to address water issues, there is still a long way to go, especially in view of any new globalscale disasters, such as the covid-19 pandemic.looking at the exponential developments we have recently made in diverse fields, especially in technology and medicine, not many people would have imagined that an infectious disease would almost literally ''lockdown'' the entire world and force us to ''stay at home.'' however, that is exactly what is happening now. what is even more, we cannot be sure that this kind of thing will never happen again. indeed, something may just be lurking around to cause havoc! whether infectious disease or other, water seems to offer solutions to almost all the problems on the earth. however, where to find solutions when the problem is water itself? we indeed need to have a long vision to look after and take care of our precious water. i hope we will steer our efforts in this direction much more than we have until now. if we do not have water to wash our hands, then we will be washing our hands of our problems!the era of corona-virus-disease-19 is an important historical period from various points of view, from the world health to the huge cascade of socio-economic implications. everyday habits have been turned upside down, and the way of life of people all over the globe, engaged in all activities, especially in the health sector, will be involved in this necessary change. dentists, being in close contact with the patient's droplets and aerosols generated, have to revise the operating protocols to protect the team and the patients from the risk of infectious diseases.unfortunately, the pandemic covid-19 will not stop immediately and everyone will have to face each other very long working and social recovery times of the population. in this time, a large part of the population will avoid dental treatment other than those imposed by pain or urgency, both due to money issues and, principally, for a psychological reason: it will not be easy to overcome the fear of infection. for many, the dental practice is a source of possible infections, considering that the first person at risk is the dentist himself. the scenario in dental practices is very complex and several problems can arise which are dangerous for the dental practice [1] [2] [3] [4] [5] [6] [7] [8] [9] .for an infection to emerge, it is necessary that an adequate number of specific microorganisms can infect a person or groups. the classic contamination paths clearly incorporate all the dental unit (team and patient): body fluids in direct contact with the wound site during operation, injuries of the skin and the mucosa with sharp objects, body fluids and contaminated material contact with eyes, aerosols arising during the operation with air produced by turbine and ultrasonic devices, contamination via droplet, and surgical smoke formed during electro-cautery or laser applications [10, 11] .the first problem raised with respect to covid-19, is related to the easy spread of viral agents in the air during dental procedures [12] [13] [14] [15] . hence, aerosol is the most aggressive source of covid-19 as well as other viral infections, placing dentists and their collaborators at the first line of the exposure to risk scale within the context of healthy personnel [10, 16] .the second problem is related to the persistence of the biological agent in operating rooms. the aerosol produced by high rotation instruments and ultrasound could remain for several hours in the air and on the surfaces [17, 18] . although it can save the operator, if well protected, during the therapeutic acts, it means that the air will be contaminated, thus presenting a risk for operators after removing the ppe (personal protective equipment) and for the next patients.this covid-19 pandemic has shown that several people can be positive and spread the viral agents around without any symptoms or signs of biological agents. so, the dental team, a part performing the double triage [1] , should consider each patient as sars-cov-2 positive until proven otherwise and use protective equipment in order to preserve their own health and the health of all patients as attending the dental office.for these reasons, it is necessary to use rigid and precise operating protocols capable of classifying dental procedures based on risks for the team as well as for the patients.this study was born from the awareness of a necessary change in decision making processes. it involves a rereading of relevant literature in order to build protocols addressed to dentists, to assess and modulate the risks of contagion in the dental practice. moreover, it proposes, on the basis of information from literature, a classification of dental procedures based on the risk of contagion of infectious agents, showing what will change for the dentist and the oral medicine expert.an investigation was performed on the online databases pubmed and scopus using a combination of free words and mesh terms: "dentist" and "covid-19" or "sars-cov-2" or "coronavirus-19", and "oral health" and "covid-19" or "sars-cov-2" or "coronavirus-19". only studies fulfilling the following inclusion criteria were considered eligible for inclusion in this study: (i) performed on human subjects, (ii) written in the english language, and (iii) published in 2019-2020. the manuscript titles list was highlighted to exclude irrelevant publications and search errors. the final selection was performed by reading the full texts of the papers in order to approve each study's eligibility based on sars-cov-2 and other infective agents involved in dentistry. data selection and revision was performed by two independent reviewers (meb, university of foggia and gc, university of palermo). they singularly analysed the papers, and in agreement, included 142 papers in this narrative review. the authors, in consideration of the importance of the emerging topic, decided to include also guidelines, online documents, reviews, experts' opinions, renouncing the prisma-related design of regular systematic reviews ( figure 1 ). after a brief excursus on all possible infectious agents, the authors described, on the basis of the literature selected, all personal protective equipment (ppe) actually on the market and their indications. then, they compared (before vs after covid-19 era) the correct safety procedures for each dental practice selected, underlining the danger of underestimating, in general, dental cross infections, if focused only on the newest sars-cov-2. results are summarised in tables 1-8.different classes of bacteria, viruses, and fungi can cause human infections. three factors are important for the transmission of these infectious agents: an infectious agent, a receptive subject and a transmission mode. the pathogens involved in infections during health care mainly derive from staff, from patients (and possible careers), but also from inanimate environmental sources ( figure 2 ). these human sources can: 1) have active infections, 2) be asymptomatic or in an incubation period, or 3) be colonized transiently or chronically with pathogen microorganisms.the infection is the consequence of the contact between a contagious agent and a potential host. moreover, the same characteristics of the host can influence the onset and the severity of the infectious disease. however, several other factors can modify the virulence and behavior of infectious disease such as the number of infectious agents, the transmission way and the pathogenicity [19] . predictors of the disease evolution in a specific subject could be: immune status at exposition time, age, comorbidity, and virulence of the agent [20] .there are two main ways of infective transmission, namely vertical (from mother to fetus: transplacental, during vaginal birth or breast feeding) and horizontal (sexual and non-sexual). in a dental setting, infectious agents are transmitted in the horizontal, non-sexual route [21] .in the non-sexual horizontal transmission, direct or indirect contact (e.g., herpes simplex virus, respiratory syncytial virus, s. aureus), droplets (e.g., influenza virus, b. pertussis) or airways (e.g., m. tuberculosis) are possible routes. other viruses can be transmitted by the blood (e.g., hepatitis b and c viruses and hiv) via percutaneous or mucous membrane exposure [3, 4, 14, 22] . in synthesis, the three main routes of the transmission are [23] :contact transmission: contact transmission can be through direct contact and indirect contact.during direct contact transmission, pathogens are transmitted from an infected person to another subject without an intermediate object or person (for example, mucous membrane or breaks contact blood or other blood-containing body fluids infected, or contact hsv lesion without gloves) [3, 4, 14, 15, 18, 22, 24, 25] . during indirect contact transmission, pathogens are transmitted to the host through objects or human body carrying those pathogens [17, 18, 22, [26] [27] [28] [29] [30] . moreover, all the personal protective equipment (ppe), such as uniforms or isolation gowns, can be contaminated by infectious agents during the treatment of a patient colonized or infected.• droplet transmission: some infectious agents can reach the host through the direct and indirect contact routes or through droplets [3, 15, [31] [32] [33] . droplets can carry infectious pathogens travelling for short distances directly from the respiratory tract of the infectious subjects to host reaching susceptible mucosal surfaces [3, 15, [31] [32] [33] . respiratory droplets are produced during coughs, sneezes, or talks [34] or by airway health procedures. the nasal mucosa, conjunctivae, and mouth are good portals for respiratory viruses [35] . to date, the maximum distance that a droplet can reach is not known, even if pathogens transmitted by a droplet do not run across long distances [19] . the size of droplets has traditionally been defined as being >5 µm [19] . several types of droplets, including those with diameters of 30 µm or greater, can remain suspended in the air [36] . the sizes of the droplets can determine the maximum distance reached: largest droplets, between 60 and 100 microns, totally evaporate before spontaneously falling 2 m away [37] . for respiratory exhalation flows, the critical factor is the exhalation air velocity: these droplets are carried more than 6 m away by exhaled air at a velocity of 50 m/s (sneezing), more than 2 m away at a velocity of 10 m/s (coughing), and less than 1 m away at a velocity of 1 m/s (breathing) [37] .airborne transmission: this means of transmission consists of dissemination of airborne droplet or small particles containing infectious pathogens that remain infective over time and distance (e.g., spores of aspergillus spp., and m. tuberculosis) [31, 33, [38] [39] [40] [41] [42] .several infectious agents can involve dentist and his team [10] (table 1) . • sars-cov-2 determines covid-19 (coronavirus disease 2019), an infectious disease characterized by several important systemic problems such as coronavirus associated pneumonia. the principal symptoms are fever, cough, and breathing difficulties; the most patients have mild symptoms, some progress to severe pneumonia [43] . the diagnosis is performed with the identification of the virus in swabs of patient throat and nose. covid-19 can involve the respiratory tract determining a mild or highly acute respiratory syndrome due to the production of pro-inflammatory cytokines, such as interleukin (il)-1beta and il-6 [44] . one mechanism that can make the coronavirus lethal is the induction of interstitial pneumonia linked to an over-production of il-6 [44, 45] . based on this principle, several researchers have started to use an anti-arthritis drug, tocilizumab, for its anti-il-6 action [46] [47] [48] [49] .herpes simplex virus (hsv) can determine a primary infection with minor, ulcerative lymphadenopathy gingivostomatitis [50] and a recurrent infection with cold sores. herpetic whitlow, an hsv infection of the fingers is usually caused by direct contact of the same fingers with infected saliva or a herpetic lesion [51] [52] [53] . skin, mucosal lesions, and secretions such as saliva can determine the transmission [54, 55] . lesions are usually characterized by vesicles and sequent crusting. acyclovir can be used for the treatment of the diseases. it is sufficient to wear gloves in order to avoid the herpetic whitlow when the clinician treats patients with hsv lesions [10, 56] .• varicella zoster virus (vzv) can determine chickenpox (primary disease), usually in children, and shingles, which is very painful (secondary disease), for the reactivation of a virus residing in sensory ganglia during the latency period [57] [58] [59] . chickenpox disease is highly contagious and spreads via-airborne routes [60] [61] [62] . the virus can infect nonimmune dental team via inhalation of aerosols from a patient incubating the disease. masks and gloves can be not sufficient for complete protection of the healthcare workers [10] . [77] . it is present in saliva and could infect susceptible subjects via direct contact or aerosols [78] .human t-lymphotropic virus is involved in adult t cell leukaemia and spastic paraparesis. this virus can be transmitted through blood [79] [80] [81] [82] and, in a dental setting, it can infect via sharp instruments injuries [10] .hepatitis b virus (hbv) causes acute hepatitis and it is an important risk-agent for the health care staff [83, 84] . the possible ways of transmission are sexual intercourse, through blood, contaminated material injuries, and perinatal way [85] [86] [87] [88] . so, all operators of the dental team should be vaccinated [10, 89] .hepatitis c virus (hcv) causes "non-a" and "non-b" hepatitis and it is transmitted like hbv [85] [86] [87] 90] . the primary infection is often asymptomatic and the most of infected subjects become carriers of the virus with risk of development of chronic liver disease that could evolve in hepatocellular carcinoma [10] .human immunodeficiency virus (hiv) infects the immune system of susceptible subjects, t-helper cells particularly. it can be transmitted like hbv (sexual intercourse, blood borne and perinatal ways) [91, 92] . moreover, this infection have oral manifestations that can help in diagnosis: e.g., oral candidiasis, oral hairy leukoplakia, oral necrotising ulcerative gingivitis and oral kaposi's sarcoma [10, [93] [94] [95] [96] . • cytomegalovirus (cmv) is part of the herpes virus family and can cause diseases with several manifestations [97] .mumps virus is part of the paramyxoviridae group. this pathogen often affects the parotid glands, and the consequently characteristic symptom is swelling of these salivary glands [98] . moreover, this virus can cause inflammation of the ovaries, testis, pancreas or meninges with several complications. after the introduction of the vaccine against measles, mumps, and rubella (mmr), mumps incidence has decreased, even if several mumps cases have recently been reported [99] .• mycobacterium tuberculosis causes tuberculosis and is a bacterium transmitted by inhalation, ingestion and inoculation. the main symptoms are cervical lymphadenitis and lung infections. in order to prevent infection, the dental team should be adequately vaccinated and wear ppe [100] [101] [102] [103] [104] [105] .this bacterium is resistant to chemicals and, for this reason, sterilization and disinfection protocols must be rigorously performed [10] . • legionella spp. is a gram-negative bacterium that causes legionellosis and generally it resides in water tanks. legionellosis occurs with pneumonia, sometimes lethal in older people. since this pathogen lives in water, it can be easily transmitted during dental procedures through aerosols from incorrectly disinfected water circuits [106, 107] . in fact, water circuits that remain unused for long periods of time should be checked regularly to prevent legionella bacteria from residing [106, 107] . • treponema pallidum causes syphilis and dental team must wear gloves in order to adequate protect themselves [10, 108] .meningococcal spp. are gram-negative bacteria. they are located on the nasopharyngeal mucosa and their presence is generally asymptomatic. the bacterium is easily transmitted, especially during adolescence, when people get together. as already mentioned, colonization of the nasopharynx is common, and while the resulting disease is rare, at times, it can cause death or permanent disability [109, 110] .staphylococcus aureus is an important agent involved in nosocomial infections. this bacterium causes a wide range of diseases that can be mild or life-threatening (e.g., bacteraemia, pneumonia, and surgical site infection [111] ). in addition, s. aureus can easily have antimicrobial resistance. this bacterium principally resides on the epithelium of the anterior nares in human beings [112] .group a streptococcus (gas) is a gram-positive, beta-haemolytic bacterium. this pathogen is responsible for several diseases in human beings, such as acute pharyngitis, impetigo and cellulitis. it can also cause serious invasive diseases such as necrotizing fasciitis and toxic shock syndrome (tss) [113] [114] [115] . the bacterium mainly resides in human nose, throat and on skin and it is often transmitted without symptoms [116] [117] [118] . obviously, asymptomatic subjects are less contagious than the symptomatic carriers of this bacterium. gas is transmitted through respiratory droplets spread in the air, for example during coughing, sneezing and nasal secretions [117, 118] . in addition, this bacterium can spread through close interpersonal contact during a kiss, using the same dishes and sharing the same cigarette.streptococci mutans mainly colonize dental surfaces after tooth eruption and is associated to the development of caries [119] . this bacterium may be transmitted horizontally between children during the initial phases of the s. mutans colonization in nursery environments [120] . there is scientific evidence of vertical transmission of s. mutans from mother to child [121] . • some periodontal bacteria (e.g., a. actinomycetemcomitans, p. gingivalis) are considered person-to-person transmitted, but it is still unclear if transmission is governed only by domestic pathways, without definitive implications for the dental office. vertical transmission of a. actinomycetemcomitans is between 30% and 60%, while that of p. gingivalis is rarely observed. horizontal transmission ranges from 14% to 60% for a. actinomycetemcomitans and between 30% and 75% for p. gingivalis [122] . certainly, by understanding the spread mechanisms of these bacteria, it would also be possible to prevent a number of systemic diseases [123] .the dental team must adapt several precautions to avoid these infections; an adequate training and information of the personnel is mandatory in order to control infections in the dental office. the individual protection methods include a series of enforcement with the aim to reduce the risks of contamination, unfortunately without being able to eliminate them. the basic principle of infection control is to approach to each patient as if he was an infected patient (by one of the main microbes listed above) and to correctly carry out the protection methods [124] .adequate personal protective equipment (ppe) must be selected based on a risk assessment and the procedure to be performed. the precautions for infection control require wearing gloves, aprons, as well as eye and mouth protection (goggles and mask, such as medical masks and filtering face piece or fpp) for each procedure involving direct contact with the patient body fluids. whenever possible "single use" or "disposable" equipment should be used [10] (table 2) . if the necessary precautions are not taken, it is inevitable that operators can become infected through contact of the mucous membranes with blood, saliva, and aerosols from a potentially infective patient [10] . in healthcare setting, masks are used in order to:protect personnel from contact with patient infectious material; 2.protect patients from infectious agents carried by healthcare workers; 3.limit the potential spread of infectious respiratory aerosol between patients [19] .masks can be worn with goggles in order to protect mouth, nose and eyes, or with a face shield to provide more complete face protection. we must distinguish masks from particle respirators that are used to prevent inhalation of small particles which may contain infectious agents transmitted through the respiratory tract. the mouth, nose, and eyes are sensitive portals to the entry of infective pathogens, such as skin cuts.medical masks:• could be flat or pleated (some are like cups) and fixed to the head with straps or elastic bands;• does not offer complete protection against small particle aerosols (droplet nuclei) and should not be used during contact with patients with diseases caused by airborne pathogens; • they are not designed to isolate the face and therefore cannot prevent inhalation by the health personnel wearing them; • they must be replaced if wet or dirty.there are no standards that evaluate the efficiency of the medical mask filter. aorn (association of peri-operative registered nurses) recommends that medical (surgical) masks filter at least 0.3 µ particles or have a bacterial filtration efficiency of 90%-95% [126] .surgical masks (sm) are used to prevent that large particles (such as droplets, sprays or splashes), containing pathogens, could reach nose and mouth [127] . although their purpose is to protect patients from healthcare professionals (and healthcare team from patients) by minimizing exposure to saliva and respiratory secretions, they do not create a seal against the skin of the face and therefore are not indicated to protect people from airborne infectious diseases.masks are available in several shapes (modeled and unprinted), dimensions, filtration efficiency and attachment method (ribbons, elastic through the ear). masks are disposable and must be changed for each patient.instead, during the treatment of patients with respiratory infections, particulate respiratory masks must be worn.particulate respirators (with filtering percentage) in use in various countries include: [126] .ffp2 european respirators are comparable to n95, and they are indicated for prevention of infectious airborne diseases. however, ffp3 respirators offer the highest level of protection against infectious agents and are the only ffp class accepted by the health and safety executive (hse) as regards the protection in the healthcare environment in the united kingdom [126] .the powered air purifying respirator is also considered a standard part of ppe in certain situations, including aerosol generation procedures in high risk environments. in the event of a pandemic infection, any aerosol generation procedure on infected patients should only be carried out with an ffp3 respirator. non-urgent procedures should be postponed until the infection resolves.in the us, the national institute for occupational safety and health (niosh) defined the following particulate filter categories in 2011, in title 42 code of federal regulations, section 84 (table 3) . there are several models of ffp2 and ffp3 respirators, both with valves and without valves. however, this is not a filter but a valve that regulates the flow of air at the outlet and therefore makes it easier to exhale. therefore, these masks are designed to be able to filter very well the air that comes in the mouth, nose, and lungs of those who wear them. instead, these masks are not designed specifically to prevent the wearer from infecting someone else with their own breathing.in practice, if a mask has a valve, it can let out particles, even if it manages to block almost all the inlet ones. and therefore, a healthy person can use it effectively so as not to get infected. for a sick person or one who could be contagious, however, using it could infect others by letting germs pass from their breath outwards. it is important to say that there is no specific test that has been done to verify the possibility that the virus spreads from an infected person passing through a mask equipped with a valve [128] .surgical masks, on the other hand, are similar in both directions. they have been designed to prevent healthcare workers and surgeons in particular from infecting their own breath with patients, who may have open wounds on the operating table, but also work to protect the healthcare staff themselves against a potentially contagious person. their effectiveness, however, is much lower also because they do not prevent the breath from spreading and allow a lot of air to pass through and to the mouth and nose [128] .the choice of individual eye protection devices (such as goggles or face mask) varies according to the exposure circumstances, other ppe worn. and the need for personal vision [10] . in order to protect the eyes, eyeglasses and contact lenses are not considered suitable [129] . eye protection must be effective but at the same time comfortable and allow sufficient peripheral vision.there are different measures that improve the comfort of the glasses, for example anti-fog coating, different sizes, the possibility of wearing them on prescription glasses. although they provide adequate eye protection, glasses do not protect from splash or spray the other parts of the face.disposable or sterilizable face shields can be used in alternative to glasses. face shield protects the other areas of the face besides the eyes (glasses only protect the eyes). the face shields that extend from the chin to the forehead offer better protection of the face and eyes from spray and splashes [83] .the removal of a facemask, goggles, and mask can be safely performed after removing dirty gloves and after performing hand hygiene.gowns and coveralls are additional personal protective equipment in the health sector [83] . operator hygiene, including wearing appropriate clothing and ppe, has a dual purpose: on the one hand, to defend the operator himself in an environment where the infectious risk is high, and on the other hand to prevent the operator from becoming responsible transmission of infections.to increase the protective function of the uniform or to carry out those procedures in which high contamination is expected, additional disposable clothing can be worn [83] . these clothes can be ppe certified for biological risk and for this recognition must comply with the requirements of the technical standards, namely european standards are en 14126 and iso 16604 (dpi) and en 24920 (dm). the material constituent is mainly tnt (texture not texture), which is suitable for "disposable" use in this specific area. to offer greater protection of the part front of the body, the most exposed to risk, it is required that such lab coats have standard features within the heterogeneity of the models, for example: back closure, covered or heat-sealed seams, long sleeves with cuffs tight and high collar. obviously, for these devices, comfort and practicality are also required, so the operator must be able to move freely and perceive good perspiration [83] .different types of gowns and overalls are available with varying levels of protection. the level of protection depends on various factors including the type of tissue, the shape and size of microorganisms, the characteristics of the conveyor, and various external factors [130] .in high-risk environments, it is recommended to use waterproof and fluid-resistant gowns or overalls.during minor oral surgery, surgical gowns must be worn with tight cuffs that must be inserted under the gloves. fabric work uniforms must be washed daily on a hot 60 • c cycle. fabric uniforms are not considered ppe since the material they are made of is absorbent and therefore offer little protection against infectious pathogens.during all dental procedures, it is impossible to avoid contact of the hands with blood and saliva [10] . that is why all operators must wear protective gloves before performing any type of procedure on patients [10] . gloves must be changed with each patient and at every contact with contaminated surfaces to prevent cross-infection [10] . not only the dentist, but also other dental team members must wear gloves during dental procedures [10, 131] .gloves used in dental clinic can be distinguished basically in two categories: those for purely use clinical and those for instrumentation reordering procedures and of the operational area. when cleaning dental appliances and instruments, more durable gloves should be worn than normal non-sterile gloves to prevent injury [10] .regarding clinical gloves, a clear distinction must be made between them procedures that require invasive action on the patient, or however at clear biological risk, and the procedures that do not require them, or in any case present a negligible biological risk for the operator.the two types of gloves resulting from this distinction are found in the words "inspection gloves" and "surgical gloves" one commonly used nomenclature [83] .both disposable products, from a macroscopic point of view usually have some obvious differences:• surgical gloves in general always distinguish the right side from the left, they are long enough to be worn over the cuffs of the gowns and always packaged in sterile pairs, •the inspection glove is usually an ambidextrous device, shorter and thinner than the previous one and rarely sterile [132] .in general, clinical gloves are made of latex, nitrile or vinyl. latex and nitrile have proven to be more resistant than and therefore are generally preferred. gloves contain powder to make them easier to wear, but which can cause skin irritation [10] . powder-free gloves exist on the market and they should be used when such reactions occur [10] . some people may experience allergies and contact dermatitis due to latex [10] . latex-free gloves for allergy sufferers are also available [10] .also, the weather of use is an absolutely relevant parameter in terms of protection. the use of the glove, especially if in latex, involves development not perceived of microperforations which become particularly significant from a numerical point of view after 60 min and which induce an increase in biological risk [133] . the simultaneous use of two pairs of gloves considerably reduces the passage of blood through microperforations [134] . there are no significant reductions in manual skills and the sensitivity of the operator wearing the double glove [132] .it was confirmed that the formation of microperforations can be also induced by washing gloves with soap, chlorhexidine, or alcohol. moreover, particular attention should be paid also while waiting for the total drying of the alcoholic substances applied on the hands, which has also proven to be potentially harmful to the integrity of the device, before wearing gloves [132] .other personal protective equipment include the disposable cap (headgear) and shoe covers. a disposable cap device is recommended for clear hygienic reasons, such as containment operator contamination and prevention of dispersion of dandruff in the environment, and even more generic protective functions for the worker, such as: interlocking with subsequent tearing of hair and possibly scalp from a part of moving and/or rotating organs, the burning of the hair due to flames or incandescent bodies, and hair fouling due to various agents, including powders and drops of blood-salivary material [83] .dentist personal hygiene is an absolute necessity for infection prevention [23] . the image that the doctor presents of himself and his study is related to the trust that the patient will show towards the doctor and the treatment itself, in an era in which there is increasing information and awareness of the risk. specific notes of hygiene include:• hair, if a doctor hair can touch the patient or dental equipment, should be attached to the back of the head or a surgical cap should be worn [23] ; • facial hair should be covered with a mask or shield [23] ; • jewels should be removed from the hands, arms, or facial area during the patient treatment [23] ; • nails should be kept clean and short to prevent the perforation of the gloves and the accumulation of debris [23] ; • full forearm and hand washing are mandatory before and after treatment [23] .it is very important to maintain an excellent level of hand hygiene in protection techniques that affects all members of the dental team [10] . "hand hygiene" includes several procedures that remove or kill microorganism on the hands [83] :• during handwashing, water and soap should be used in order to generate lather that is distributed on all surface of the hands and after rinsed off; • hand antisepsis, to physically remove microorganisms by antimicrobial soap or to kill microorganisms with an alcohol-based hand rub; • surgical hand rub procedure that kills transient organisms and reduces resident flora for the duration of a surgical procedure with antimicrobial soap or an alcohol-based hand rub [135] .there are different types of soap:• plain soap, that have no antimicrobial properties and works physically removing dirt ad microorganism; • alcohol-based hand rub, used without water, kills microorganism but does not remove soil or organic material physically; antimicrobial soap kills microorganism and removes physically soil and organic material [135] .in 1975 and in 1985, the cdc published a guideline on how to wash the hands, stating that the hands should be washed with antimicrobial soaps before and after procedures performed on patients [10] .the use of gloves is not an alternative to hand washing [10] . hand washing is different if it is a routine procedure or a surgical procedure: in the first case, normal or antibacterial soaps are sufficient [89] .alcohol-containing agents are preferable [10] . cold water must be of choice when washing hands because the repeatedly use of hot water can cause dermatitis [10] .it is recommended to wash hands using liquid soap for a minimum duration of 60 s. it is very important to reduce the number of microorganisms before each surgical procedure; that is why applying antibacterial soaps and acts a detailed cleaning followed by liquids containing alcohol is recommended [10] . despite the fact that the antibacterial effects of alcohol containing cleansers arise quickly, such antiseptics including compounds of triclosan, quaternary ammonium, chlorhexidine, and octenidine must be included [10] .before surgical hand washing, rings, watches, and other accessories must be taken off and no nail polishes or other artificial must be present [11, 89] .the use of disposable paper towels is preferable for drying hands.after every procedure and after taking off the gloves, it is highly recommended to wash hands once again with regular soaps.if soap and water are not readily available, it can be used an alcohol-based hand sanitizer that contains at least 60% alcohol [10] .• must consider all sharp objects contaminated with the patient blood and saliva as potentially infectious; • do not hood the used needles in order to avoid an accidental injection [83] ; • put all used sharp objects in suitable puncture resistant bins [83] .it is necessary to clean all instruments with detergent and water before sterilization [10] . during washing, it is advisable to avoid splashes of water a wear gloves and face protection. the instruments that penetrate the tissues must be sterilized in an autoclave [83] . it is advisable to heat sterilize items that touch the mucosa or to at least disinfect them, for example, with the immersion in a 2% glutaraldehyde solution in a closed bid, naturally following the instructions of the producer [83] . anything that cannot be autoclaved must be disinfected. the handpieces should be able to drain the water for two minutes at the start of the day. not autoclavable handpieces can be disinfected using viricidal agent. after sterilization, all instruments must be kept safely in order to avoid recontamination for a maximum of 30 days, 60 days if closed in double bags [83] .sterilization completely kills all vital agents and spores too. the classic sterilization procedure expects the use autoclave, with cycles at 121 • c for 15-30 min, or at 134 • c for 3-4 min [23, 83] . it is necessary to thoroughly wash and dry all items before sterilizing them as dirt and water can interfere with sterilization [83] .steam sterilization cannot be used for all facilities and a possible alternative can be the use of chemical sterilization using ethylene oxide gas, formaldehyde gas, hydrogen peroxide gas, liquid peracetic acid, or ozone [83] . the disinfection processes do not destroy the bacterial load, rather reducing it to acceptable levels. commonly used disinfectants are described below (table 4 ). the action of cleaning and disinfection can be manual or automatized. for example, it is possible to use ultrasonic baths in order to clean complex, articulated, or notched stainless-steel instruments such as cutters. the washer-disinfectors provide a high temperature passage (generally 90 • c for one minute), which drastically reduces the microbial contamination of the items. the final rinse must be carried out with high quality water (table 5 ). it is necessary to have always a perfect protection of operative room with disinfected surfaces [10] . there are two ways to make a surface aseptic [23] :• clean and disinfect contaminated surfaces [23] and • prevent surfaces from being contaminated by using surface covers [23] .a combination of both can also be used [23] .the following chemicals are suitable for surface and equipment asepsis:• chlorine, e.g., sodium hypochlorite • phenolic compounds • water-based, water with ortho-phenylphenol, tertiary amylphenol, or o-benzyl-p-chlorophenol • alcohol-based ethyl or isopropyl alcohol with ortho-phenylphenol or tertiary amylphenol • iodophor-butoxy polypropoxy polyethoxy ethanol iodine complex [23] .in the literature there are still little information on 2019-ncov. similar genetic features between 2019-ncov and sars-cov indicate that covid-19 could be susceptible to disinfectants such as 0.1% sodium hypochlorite, 0.5% hydrogen peroxide, 62%-71% ethanol, and phenolic and quaternary ammonium compounds [4] . it is important to pay attention to the duration of use, dilution rate, and especially the expiration time following the preparation of the solution [4] . a recent paper pointed out that surface disinfection could be performed with 0.1% sodium hypochlorite or 62%-71% ethanol for one minute in order to eliminate sas-cov-2 [139] .after each treatment, work surfaces should be adequately cleaned and decontaminated with ethyl alcohol (70%). if blood or pus is visible on a surface, it is necessary to clean and disinfect that surface with sodium hypochlorite (0.5%). it is necessary to wear protective gloves and care taken to minimize direct skin, mucosal or eye contact with these disinfectants.in addition to disinfection with chemicals, a ultraviolet-c (uv-c) irradiation lamp can be used [140] . the uv light system for disinfection has several advantages, including: does not require room ventilation, does not leave residues after use and have a wide action spectrum in a very short time [140] . the uv-c lamp must be activated only when the room is empty, without staff and without patient. in the literature, there are no cases of damage to the materials present in the room; despite this, the acrylic material can be degraded if subjected to repeated exposure to uv-c light and for this reason it is recommended to cover it during disinfection with uv-c [141] . ultraviolet light has a wavelength between 10 and 400 nm, while ultraviolet-c (uv-c) light has a wavelength between 100 and 280 nm, and the greatest germicidal power is obtained with a wavelength of 265 nm [142] . the germicidal effect of uv-c light causes cell damage thus blocking cell replication [141] . in descending order of inactivation by uv-c light, there are bacteria, viruses, fungi, and spores [143] . uv-c rays can be generated by low pressure mercury lamps and pulsed xenon lamps which emit high intensity pulsed light with a higher germicidal action [141] . uv-c rays are equipped with high energy which decreases exponentially with the increase of distance from the light source: objects or surfaces closer to the uv-c source will have a greater exposure and therefore will have to be disinfected for less time than distant objects [142] .depending on the nature of the object affected by uv-c light, it can block the light rays or allow itself to be passed through allowing the irradiation of the objects placed behind it. for example, the organic material completely absorbs the uv-c light and blocks its diffusion. for this reason, the surfaces must be manually cleaned to remove the organic substances before decontamination with ultraviolet light [142] .the extent of inactivation of the microorganisms is directly proportional to the uv-c dose received and this, in turn, is the result of the intensity and duration of exposure [142] . therefore, according to the data in the literature, the use of uv-c rays for disinfection has proven effective in reducing the overall bacterial count and significantly more effective than just manual disinfection on surfaces [141] .in addition, to encourage the exchange of air, it is recommended to ventilate the rooms between one patient and another. if it is not possible to allow the exchange of natural air (at least 20-30 min), forced ventilation systems with high efficiency particulate air (hepa) filters must be used, paying attention to the periodic replacement of the filters.recommendations for environmental infection prevention and control in dental settings [136] :• establish a protocol for cleaning and disinfection of surfaces and environments of which health personnel must be informed; • cover with disposable films all the surfaces that are touched during the procedures (for example switches, it equipment) and change these protections between each patient; • surfaces that are not protected by a barrier should be cleaned and disinfected with a disinfectant after each patient; • use a medium level disinfectant (i.e., tuberculocidal indication) if a surface is visibly contaminated with blood; • for each disinfectant, follow the manufacturer's instructions (e.g., quantity, dilution, contact time, safe use, disposal) [136] (table 6 ). if proper maintenance is not carried out, microbial pathogens (e.g., pseudomonas or legionella spp.) can multiply in duwls. these organisms grow in the biofilm on the internal surfaces of the tubes, where they cannot be attacked with chemicals. to prevent the formation of this biofilm, the systems should be drained at the end of each day [144] .in dental unit water lines (duwl), water must flow and they must be washed regularly: it is recommended to rinse for two minutes at the beginning and end of each day and for 20-30 s between patients [144] . different agents for disinfection of duwl are available. all handpieces and ultrasonic meters must be equipped with backstop valves and must undergo periodic maintenance and inspection. the filters used in the duwl must be checked periodically or, if they are disposable, they must be changed daily.recommendations for dental unit water quality in dental settings:• use water compliant with environmental protection agency (epa) standards for drinking water (i.e., ≤ 500 cfu/ml of heterotrophic water bacteria),• follow the recommendations for water quality monitoring given by the manufacturer of the unit or waterline treatment product, • use sterile water or sterile saline for the irrigation during surgical procedures [136] .any waste containing human or animal tissue, blood or other body fluids, drugs, swabs, dressings or other infective material is defined as "clinical waste" and it must be separated from non-clinical waste [144] . used disposable syringes, needles, or other pointed instruments must be disposed of in a special rigid container, in order to avoid injury to operators and operators in charge of waste disposal. the waste must be kept in a dedicated area before it is collected, away from public access, and excessive accumulation of waste must be avoided [4, 144] .the whole dental team must be vaccinated against hepatitis b in order to increase personal protection [83] . individuals who have already been vaccinated should monitor their levels of immunity against hbv over time and make booster shots [145] . all dental health care professionals should also receive the following other vaccinations: flu, mumps (live-virus), measles (live-virus), rubella (live-virus), and varicella-zoster (live-virus) [10] . in addition, the rubella vaccine is strongly recommended especially for women who have pregnancy uncertainty [131] . the influenza vaccine is very useful for dental health professionals as they are at risk for respiratory droplets infections by working in close proximity to the patients [10] . when the covid-19 vaccine is ready, healthcare professionals should take it. as additional infection prevention and health care worker measures, rapid tests can be used in dental practices to diagnose covid-19 before each treatment. this is because, as mentioned above, a patient without symptoms is not necessarily a healthy patient.from all these data, it is evident that the dentist and his team need to use rigid and precise operating protocols in order to avoid infectious contagion [23] . several authors proposed some right procedures in the operative dentistry [2] [3] [4] 10, 23, 83, 139, [146] [147] [148] [149] .for this reason, we reassume them in a precise operative protocol organized for all the patients and characterized by some defined steps:prevention of infections must be a priority in any healthcare setting and therefore also in any dental clinic. to do this, staff training and information, adequate management of resources, and use of well-defined operating protocols is necessary.adequate management of the protection for operators (and therefore also for patients) begins with the roles of the secretariat. in order to better organize the workflow, the secretariat must provide a telephone triage. it would be advisable to phone each patient to make sure he is healthy on the day of the appointment. patients with acute symptoms of any infectious disease should be referred at the time of symptom resolution. the medical history of patients may not reveal asymptomatic infectious disease of which they are affected. this means the operator must adopt the same infection control rules for all patients, as if they were all infective. in addition, the secretariat must organize appointments in order to avoid crowding in the waiting room. it would be advisable for the patient to present himself alone, without companions (only minors, the elderly and patients with psycho-physical conditions can be accompanied). in some urgent and non-deferrable cases, it is necessary to treat the patient despite being in the acute phase of infection with any virus. examples of urgent treatments are: pulpitis, tooth fracture, and avulsion [2] . in these cases, the operator must implement the maximum individual protection measures.in the waiting room all material (e.g., magazines, newspapers, information posters) that can represent a source of contamination must be eliminated so that the room is easy to disinfect.patients are requested to go to the appointment without any superfluous objects. at the entrance of the dental structure, the patient must wear shoe covers, disinfect the hands with hydroalcoholic solution according to the following indications, affix any jacket on a special hanger and disinfect the hands again with hydroalcoholic solution. if there are several patients in the waiting room, they must be at least two meters away from each other. the correct hand disinfection procedure with hydroalcoholic solution is as follows:a) apply a squirt of sanitizer in the palm of hand, b)rub hands palm against each other, c)rub the back of each hands with the palm of the other hand, d)rub palms together with your finger interlaced, e)rub the back of fingers with the opposite palms, f) rotate thumbs in the other hand, g) do a circle on palm with finger clasped, h)once dry, hands are safe.the same procedure is performed for washing hands with soap and water.the operators must be adequately dressed in the correct ppe. healthcare professionals will need to remove any jewel before starting dressing procedures. all the necessary ppe must already be positioned clearly visible and intact, in a room that will be distinct from the one where the undressing phase will take place. in both areas, hydroalcoholic solution and/or items necessary for washing hands with soap and water should be available. in the dressing room there must be trays for the collection and subsequent disinfection of the non-disposable ppe and special containers for the collection of waste where to dispose of the disposable ppe. a dressing and undressing procedure is described below, imagining that the dentist has to operate under a high risk of infection. dressing and undressing procedures must be particularly considered.dressing procedure: a) eliminate jewels and personal items from the pockets of the uniform; b) long hair must be tied and inserted into a cap not mandatory for single use (no tufts of hair must come out of the cap); c) wear shoe covers; d) perform social hand washing or disinfection with antiseptic gel; e) wear the first pair of gloves of the right size; f) wear the water repellent gown by tying it on the back without double knots (first the upper part and then the lower part, the latter must be tied on the front) being careful not to leave parts of the uniform exposed; g) wear the mask (ffp2-ffp3) which must adhere well to both the nose and the mind; h) put on the disposable water-repellent cap and be tied under the chin, the excess ribbons must be inserted inside the gown; i)wear glasses/protective screen; j) wear a second pair of gloves for direct patient assistance. these gloves must cover the cuffs of the disposable gown.undressing procedure:a) remove the second pair of (dirty) gloves being careful not to contaminate the underlying gloves; b) gloves still worn with a hydroalcoholic solution are disinfected and a new pair of gloves is worn on them; c) the face shield is removed: if it is disposable it should be trashed, and if it is not disposable, it should be placed in a container with disinfectant; d) the second pair of gloves is removed without contaminating the underlying gloves; e) the gloves are rubbed with hydroalcoholic solution and a new pair of gloves is worn; f) disposable gown removal starting from the top, then the bottom, rolling it up to touch the inside, clean; g) throw disposable shirts and second pair of gloves; h) the gloves are rubbed with hydroalcoholic solution and a new pair of gloves is worn; i) remove the water-repellent cap; j) the gloves are rubbed with hydroalcoholic solution and a new pair of gloves is worn; k) remove mask taking it by the elastics with the head bent forward and down; l) both the first pair and the second pair of gloves are removed; m) hands are disinfected with hydroalcoholic solution.before entering the surgical room, the patient must be dressed in a disposable gown and headgear worn in order to avoid any contagion on clothing and hair. 7.before dental session patient should rinse and gargle with a specific mouthwash. chlorhexidine is commonly used for pre-procedural oral rinses in dental offices, but its capacity of 2019-ncov destruction has not yet been demonstrated [4] . instead, pre-procedural oral rinses with oxidizing such as 1% hydrogen peroxide or 0.2% povidone-iodine are recommended [4] . so, the pre-procedural use of mouthwash, especially in cases of inability to use a rubber dam, can significantly reduce the microbial load of oral cavity fluids [3] . in fact, even if oral rinses seem to "limit" the viral load, virus can spread through the complete respiratory tract and it is not scientifically possible to guarantee that this reduction is constant during the operative manoeuvre (e.g., cough, sneezing, runny nose). then the following pre-operative procedure is recommended to the patient: a) 1% hydrogen peroxide 15" gargle followed by 30" rinse, b) do not rinse with water at the end of the rinse and continue with chlorhexidine 0.20% 60" rinse with final gargle of 15" [146] . at the end of the procedure, the patient must be appropriately undressed, and have another oral rinse performed before washing hands and face thoroughly. 8.after every patient, carefully clean all surfaces, starting from the least contaminated to the most potentially infected, taking care not to overlook the handles of the doors and the various drawers, worktops and all the devices used during the treatment and which are not disposable or autoclavable. cover switches, mice, computer keyboards, and anything else that may be more difficult to clean with disposable film. the worktops must be free from anything that is not strictly necessary to perform the service. an accurate disinfection of the surfaces includes a preventive cleaning of the same in order to eliminate the soil which otherwise would not allow the disinfectant to inactivate the microorganisms [29] . in the same way, if you want to use disinfectant wipes, you must use one to cleanse and after another to disinfect. as regards spray disinfectants, the percentage of dilution and the time of application vary from product to product: you must follow the instructions provided by the company. moreover, alcohol-based disinfectants (75%), 0.5% hydrogen peroxide, 0.1% sodium hypochlorite are recommended to be left to act on the surfaces for 1 min. disinfect the circuits of the treatment center at each patient change. between patients, the tubing of high-volume aspirators and saliva ejectors should be regularly flushed with water and disinfectant such as 0.1% sodium hypochlorite. always air the rooms after each patient (at least 20-30 min) or use germicidal lamps. clean floors with bleach at least two times a day. 9.during every procedure minimize the use of an air/water syringe: dry the site with cotton rollers when possible; use suction at maximum power (it might be an idea to use autoclavable plastic suction cannulas that have a greater suction capacity than normal disposable pvc cannulas) or use two saliva ejectors; in the case of exposed carious dentine, try to remove it as manually as possible using excavators; be sure to first mount the rubber dam, disinfect the crown with pellets soaked in 75% alcohol and recommend with the second operator to position the aspirator as correctly as possible to avoid excessive spraying and/or splashing; do not use air-polishing; avoid intraoral x-rays as they stimulate salivation, coughing and/or vomiting; prefer exams like opt (orthopantomography) or cbct (cone beam computed tomography). in case of extractions, it is preferable to use resorbable sutures to seal the post-extraction site. in the case of patients who are definitely positive for any infectious agent or on which there are greater possibilities of positivity highlighted by the medical history, it is necessary to plan their treatment at the end of the day. do not touch patient card and pens with dirty gloves. it is good practice to cough or sneeze into the elbow. the operator must avoid touching his eyes, nose and mouth with dirty gloves or hands. 10. isolation with rubber dam [4] . isolating the oral cavity with the use of rubber dams greatly reduces (about 70%) the spread of respiratory droplets and aerosols containing saliva or blood coming from the patient and aimed to the operator area of action [4] . after positioning the dam, the operator must provide an efficient high-volume intraoral aspiration in order to prevent the spread of aerosol and spray as much as possible [148] . if rubber dams cannot be used for any reason, the operator should prefer to use manual tools such as hand scalers [4] . 11. anti-retraction handpiece [4] . during the covid-19 pandemic, operators should avoid using dental mechanical handpieces that do not have an anti-retraction function [4] . mechanical handpieces with the anti-retraction system have valves (anti-retraction) that are very important in order to prevent the spread and dispersion of droplets and aerosol [148, 149] . 12. all instruments which have been used for the treatment of a patient or which have only been touched by operators during a session and which cannot be sterilized according to standard protocols, must be disinfected (e.g., immersed in a container with phenol) [23] . this tools bagged in disinfection solution must remain in solution for about 10 min [23] . some materials, such as polysulphide, polyvinylsiloxane, impression compound, and zoe impressing materials, after being in the patient mouth, are rinsed with water and immersed in a 5.25% sodium hypochlorite solution for about 10 min [23] . the alginate or polyether impressions are also rinsed with water, sprayed with a 5.25% sodium hypochlorite solution and placed in a container for about 10 min [23] . wax, resin centric relation records, and zoe are rinsed with water and sprayed with a 5.25% sodium hypochlorite solution and placed in a plastic bag for about 10 min [23] . provisional restorations and complete dentures removed from the patient mouth are immersed in a 5.25% sodium hypochlorite solution for 10 min [23] . otherwise, removable partial prostheses with metal bases are treated with 2% glutaraldehyde solution and placed in a plastic bag for 10 min [23] .a novel and useful indication is that of classifying each common dental procedure according to the likelihood of a contagion by one or more infective agents (via saliva, blood, droplets or aerosol) for the team and for the patient (under the cure or the subsequent), nevertheless its type and intrinsic operative difficulty (table 7) .according to this paradigm, all dental procedures involving the use of the air-water syringe and/or rotating/ultrasound/piezo tools are able to produce high levels of aerosols and droplets and for this reason the dentist must consider them dangerous for himself, the dental team, and the subsequent patients. meanwhile, procedures, even if refined (e.g., soft tissues biopsy for oral cancer suspicion) but characterized by a low/absent production of aerosol and droplets, must be considered not particularly threatening.for all these considerations, the dental team must reconsider its operative protocols and modulate the ppe use according to level of risk of common dental procedures of generating droplets or aerosols. table 8 presents the use of different ppes for each common dental procedure in pre-covid vs post-covid era. it is definitively clear that the use of air-water syringe and/or rotating/ultrasound/piezo tools able to produce high levels of aerosols and droplets need the use of the safest ppe in order to reduce/eliminate viral or other infectious agent diffusion within the dental setting. table 8 . proposal of modulation of personal protective equipment (ppe) according to level of risk or common dental procedures both in pre-covid and post-covid era (bold style means the introduction of the new ppe due the transition from a risk category to a higher one). in the face of the covid-19 pandemic, new biosafety measures are necessary to reduce contagion. dentistry is a profession that works directly with the oral cavity and is therefore very exposed to this virus or other infectious agents. because of this, some measures need to be taken to minimize contagion. in fact, dentists can play an important role in stopping the transmission chain, assuming correct procedures in order to reduce the viral agent diffusion, or in promoting undesirable infectious disease diffusion, if operating in adherence to adequate safety protocols. dental-care professionals must be fully aware of 2019-ncov and other viral agent spreading modalities, how to identify patients with active infections and, most importantly, to prioritize self and patient protection. finally, the dental team must reconsider the overall infective risk level of every dental procedure and respect the new operative protocols that are or will be formulated by respective national official committees [150, 151] in order to reduce as much as possible the risk of the contagion for the health and safety of their community.author contributions: authors equally contributed to conceptualization, methodology, validation, investigation, writing-original draft preparation, writing-review and editing, supervision. all authors have read and agreed to the published version of the manuscript.funding: this research received no external funding.the authors declare no conflict of interest.during the past few decades, research on the epidemiology of infections has focused on hospitals, day care facilities, and schools, but little attention has been paid to the home. recent events, including widespread media coverage of foodborne outbreaks and increased marketing of a variety of antibacterial products for personal hygiene and hard surface disinfection, have resulted in a resurgence of interest and public concern about hygiene and cleanliness in the home. 1 hygiene refers to conditions or practices by which people maintain or promote health by keeping them and their surroundings clean. the question that persists is: how do house-hold cleanliness and personal hygiene affect the risk of infectious disease transmission? the purpose of this paper is to examine current health care literature regarding the microbiology of the home environment, to summarize evidence of transmission within the home, and to assess the effectiveness of cleaning and disinfecting practices and products in controlling transmission. it is our intention that this information will provide perspective regarding microbial risks in the home environment and a basis for developing more appropriate strategies for home hygiene based on what has been shown to effectively reduce infection risk rather than on fear or speculation.database, and columbia university's on-line catalogue were searched for research articles related to home hygiene during the years 1980-2000. key words included: home hygiene, domestic hygiene, food hygiene, and crosscontamination. open searches, using the same key words, also were conducted on internet search engines, including yahoo and excite. the search was restricted to developed countries, and only to articles in english or with english abstracts. excluded were articles pertaining to assisted living facilities, nursing homes, schools, and hospitals.studies have shown that areas in the home, particularly the kitchen, bathroom and possibly the laundry, can serve as reservoirs for microbial colonization. dirty dish rags, cloths and wet sponges have been shown to spread microbial contamination throughout the kitchen. [2] [3] [4] [5] [6] changes in laundering processes have also made transmission of disease via the washing machine a possibility. [2] [3] [4] 7 despite the fact that globalization of food distribution and international travel can transport microorganisms around the world in a matter of hours, in england, wales, and the netherlands 80% of salmonella and campylobacter infections are acquired in the home. [8] [9] further, social and demographic changes have increasingly led to the care of certain "at risk" groups within the home, not only neonates and the elderly, but other per-sons with compromised immune systems as well. in the united states, 20% of the population is estimated to fall into these categories. 10 in one of the early studies of the domestic kitchen, de wit et al. used an indicator organism, escherichia coli k12, to determine the extent of cross contamination from frozen chickens. cross-contamination occurred in a large proportion of those kitchens surveyed and in many cases the indicator organism persisted even after washing and rinsing of the kitchen surfaces. 11 scott et al. measured numbers and types of bacteria at various sites in more than 200 english homes. the highest counts were isolated from wet areas such as u-tubes, kitchen sink, draining board, cleaning cloths and mops, and dishcloths, and pseudomonads were isolated in over 90% of the homes. 2 in a subsequent study enterobacteriaceae were detected in 69% of the homes surveyed. 4 contaminated dishcloths and other cleaning utensils also may act both as reservoirs and disseminators of pathogenic organisms. 2, 6 although drying reduces the number of organisms on clean, laminate surfaces, large numbers of bacteria have been recovered from contaminated surfaces and both clean and soiled cloths as much as 24 to 48 hours after drying. 3 thus, drying alone is not sufficient to eliminate contaminating organisms. further, finger contact with contaminated surfaces and cloths resulted in the transfer of large numbers of organisms to the hands. 3 cloths used for cleaning and/or drying kitchen utensils may transfer contamination throughout the kitchen especially when the same cloth is used for multiple purposes. in some households, the same cloth is used to wash cooking and eating cutlery and then to wipe down the drain board and counters. 4 since plain soap does not necessarily kill microorganisms, soap and water cleaning of contaminated surfaces and hands may actually spread microbial contamination in the environment. 12 speirs et al. sampled 46 kitchens including the following key sites: worktop, chopping board, draining board, sinks, water tap handles, insides of rubber gloves, refrigerator shelf, and dish washing cloth. they isolated various enterobacteria including enterobacter cloacae, klebsiella pneumoniae and escherichia coli. in addition, bacillus subtilis, pseudomonas aeruginosa, staphylococcal and micrococcal species were isolated. the highest counts were found in the wet areas around the sink and the cloths used for wiping and/or drying kitchen surfaces and appliances. 4 in another study, the sink drain was the most contaminated site, harboring 5.9-6.2 log 10 (>99.999% reduction) of microorganisms. 13 enriquez et al. studied 140 cellulose sponges and 56 cotton dishcloths from households in four u.s. cities and isolated 23 and 13 different bacterial species, respectively. most commonly isolated were pseudomonads, but salmonella was also isolated in 15.4% of the sponges and 13.8% of the cloths. other commonly isolated gram-negative bacteria included species of enterobacter, serratia, and klebsiella. 5 salmonella can be transferred to sponges and towels and survive there, resulting in contamination of other areas of the kitchen. 6 specific risk factors for domestic outbreaks of foodborne pathogens include improper food storage, undercooking, and cross-contamination, which may be responsible for 30% of salmonella outbreaks in the home. 14 during food preparation salmonella can be spread throughout the workspace by such actions as whisking batter; bacteria have been found one meter away from each side of the site. powered cooking equipment like the electric blender can also lead to widespread distribution, up to a 3-4 meter radius around the site. in experiments with chickens contaminated with salmonella and campylobacter, a variety of sites in the kitchen, including cutting boards, sinks, handles, faucets, and work areas tested positive after the usual meal preparation procedures were used. 14, 15 in a case control study of food preparation, salmonella was isolated from dishcloths not only in case homes in which salmonella infection persisted but also in control homes. salmonella from dried foods that have contact with moist foods, such as fruit or meat, can transfer within 5 seconds to the wet foods. within a few hours potentially infective doses can be reached as the bacteria multiply under moist conditions. 14 temperature of the water used for "washing up" can also influence microbial survival. for dishes washed by hand, the dishwashing water temperature often is below 50°c at the start and will continue to drop during the dishwashing process. this temperature is not high enough to destroy most organisms. a few studies have demonstrated that when sterile cookware was washed in water inoculated with salmonella or campylobacter, transfer of the pathogen to the dishes occurred. 6, 14 bathroom like the kitchen, the bathroom can be a reservoir of large numbers of microorganisms, particularly in wet areas. in homes in which a family member had salmonellosis, four of six toilets tested positive for salmonella under the recess of the toilet bowl rim, an area difficult to reach with domestic toilet cleaners. in one toilet, salmonella was still present four weeks after the infection, despite the use of cleansers. after artificial contamination of the toilet, flushing led to contamination of the toilet seat and lid, and in one instance salmonella was isolated from an air sample taken after flushing. 16 there is limited evidence of antibiotic-resistant organisms being present in the home environment. in both the bathrooms and the kitchens of 25 randomly selected homes in north carolina, four of 58 enterococcal isolates were vancomycin-resistant and one of 17 escherichia coli isolates was ampicillin-resistant. klebsiella and enterobacter strains had the highest frequency of resistance to ampicillin, and pseudomonal strains were uniformly susceptible to 4 of the 10 tested antibiotics. rutala et al. concluded that in comparison to organisms causing clinical infections in hospitals, those isolated in homes are less likely to be antimicrobial resistant. 13while the kitchen and the bathroom are logical places for the introduction and transmission of pathogens, one area of the home that may seem less likely to allow the survival and dissemination of microorganisms is the washing machine. various common laundering practices allow bacteria at varying levels to remain in laundered items. standard detergent washing and rinsing practices do not always produce large reductions in microbial contamination. damp cloths that had been washed in detergent and then stored at room temperature over a 24-hour period showed an increase in contamination indicative of the survival and multiplication of microbes. drying was the most reliable method of decontamination when carried out at a temperature of 80°c for 2 hours. 17 in a study to evaluate the survival of bacteria and enteric viruses during washing and drying as performed in u.s. homes, sterile cotton swabs were inoculated with mycobacterium fortuitum, salmonella typhimurium, staphylococcus aureus, e. coli, rotavirus sa1, hepatitis a virus, and adenovirus type 40. the contaminated swabs were then added to sterile cotton underwear, t-shirts, and a pillowcase that contained an organic load typical of homes. all test organisms survived the wash process; wash and rinse cycles alone reduced enteric viruses by 87-98% and bacteria by >99%. during the drying cycle, viruses were more resistant to killing than bacteria. drying was most effective, in decreasing order, for s. typhimurium, s. aureus, and m. fortuitum. detectable levels of e. coli were not found after drying. together, washing and drying reduced all bacteria by at least 99.99%, adenovirus type 40 by 99.91%, hepatitis a virus by 99.8% and rotavirus by 98.6%. the test organisms contaminated other laundry in the machine, as well as the washing machine itself, which led to the contamination of subsequent loads of laundry. 18 using the petrocci and clarke (1969) method, 19 several powder and liquid laundry detergents that are now on the market were tested for activity against s. aureus and k. pneumoniae from wash water and fabric (table  1 ; personal communication, j. kain, procter and gamble, cincinnati, oh, august 2001) sanitizing powder detergents reduced s. aureus and k. pneumoniae in the laundry fabric by >99%. all other laundry detergents were less active. test products were all commercially available detergents with built in oxygen-based bleach systems. all products were purchased at local grocery stores in the cincinnati ohio area during 1998. no additional laundry additives, such as chlorine bleach, were tested either alone or in conjunction with detergents. 2 percent reduction (% reduction) refers to the calculated reduction in bacteria relative to a water + 0.5% polysorbate 80 baseline control. polysorbate 80 was added to the water as a non-toxic surfactant control to improve the relevancy of organism removal characteristics of the control relative to the high surfactancy test treatments. 3 a "sanitizing detergent with oxygen bleach" is one that meets us epa criteria for sanitization claims and a "non-sanitizing detergent with bleach" is a detergent that has a bleaching ingredient that may also have antimicrobial properties but not at the concentration and in the formulation matrix of this detergent and, therefore, does not meet us epa's criteria for sanitization claims. (unpublished data. d. j. kain, principal scientist, the procter and gamble company, cincinnati, oh, 9/01).although there are large numbers of microorganisms present in the home, it does not necessarily follow that this will result in infectious disease transmission. in this section, routes of transmission and evidence of actual transmission in the home are reviewed.bacteria, viruses, and fungi exist throughout our environment and can be transmitted to individuals through a variety of methods. direct contact includes person-to-person spread or contact with blood and other body fluids, such as occurs in fecal-oral spread. endogenous infection occurs when an individual contaminates one region of the body with microbial flora from another area. other modes of transmission include contact with droplets and airborne spread by droplet nuclei. 20 indirect contact is transmission through a contaminated intermediate object. usually, the intermediary is the hands. for example, a parent who changes a diaper of a baby infected with shigella and proceeds to prepare a meal for the family without handwashing could transmit the pathogen to the entire family. another example of indirect transmission is use of a cutting board to prepare raw chicken and then to slice fresh fruits and vegetables. common source transmission is often responsible for e. coli o157:h7 outbreaks caused by consuming undercooked, contaminated meat.although we did not find any data published between 1980-2000 regarding viral contamination in the home, viruses are a major cause of common illnesses and can survive in the home environment. worldwide, respiratory syncytial virus (rsv) is the primary cause of childhood viral respiratory infection. 20 rsv is transmitted via inanimate objects and direct contact with infected persons. 21 the virus is capable of surviving for a number of hours on inanimate objects and surfaces, providing ample opportunities to contaminate the hands of caregivers. contaminated hands can indirectly spread the virus to others in the home, including the caregivers if they touch their eyes or nose without handwashing. while barrier precautions have proven effective in lowering the rates of transmission in a hospital setting, goldmann asserts that it is entirely probable that careful handwashing after contact with infected infants would have been equally effective. 20 perhaps more widespread than rsv among people of all ages is the common cold. children can expect to average 4 to 8, and adults, three to five episodes per year. there are more than 100 serologic types of rhi-novirus, and contracting one type provides no immunity against another. 20 influenza is spread via airborne nuclei droplets, but the most likely route of transmission of rhinovirus is contaminated hands. 22 in the united states, the second most common community infection is gastroenteritis. an important cause of gastroenteritis is rotavirus, which is transmitted by the fecal-oral route and possibly through respiratory spread and contaminated hands and surfaces. rotavirus has been implicated in outbreaks in hospitals, daycare centers, schools, and nursing homes. there is the potential for transmission of rotavirus within the home since it is present on hands, various surfaces and objects. 23 other gastrointestinal pathogens, such as hepatitits a virus, parvovirus, adenovirus, and other enteroviruses follow a similar transmission pattern as rotavirus. 24, 25 hepatitis a, for example, has been implicated in numerous foodborne outbreaks and in various settings such as hospitals, day-care centers, and schools. 26 it is commonly spread via contaminated food and water. in laboratory experiments, bidawid et. al simulated cross contamination of fresh lettuce with hepatitis a from fingers of adult volunteers. 27the potential for cross-contamination in the kitchen has already been briefly discussed. when not properly cleaned and/or disinfected, countertops, cutting boards, and other kitchen surfaces provide an optimum milieu for survival of microbes. 11 according to the centers for disease control and prevention, between 1983-1992 the primary food preparation practices contributing to foodborne disease were improper storage temperatures and poor personal hygiene of the food handler, 28 and these faulty practices are common in the home. in a study of kitchens in 40 australian homes, daily practices were videotaped over the course of 1 to 2 weeks. the most common unhygienic practices viewed included infrequent and poor handwashing technique, lack of handwashing prior to preparing meals, pets in the kitchen, hand contact with the face, mouth, nose, and hair during food preparation, and an all-purpose towel for hands and dishes. in addition to these lapses in hygiene, deli meat was left outside the refrigerator and uncovered for 2 hours; a dish towel that had fallen to the floor and been stepped on was subsequently used to wipe off the counter; and a dishtowel was also used to cover cooked meat and thereby cross-contaminate it. 29 practices caught on film in american homes did not differ substantially from their australian counterparts. the same towel used to wipe up raw meat juice was then used to dry washed hands. in only 1 in 4 homes were raw meat and seafood properly stored on the bottom shelf of the refrigerator so as to prevent dripping liquids from contaminating other foods; 35% of those preparing meatloaf undercooked it, 42% undercooked the chicken, and 17% did not completely cook the fish. 30 further, the american society for microbiology conducted a telephone survey of more than 7,000 people in the united states. eighty-one percent of respondents claimed to wash their hands prior to handling or eating food. after petting an animal, 48% reported that they do not wash their hands, nor do 33% after coughing or sneezing, or 22% after handling money. 31 in a telephone survey conducted in australian homes, 40% of respondents allowed raw meat to thaw at room temperature, 85% cooled cooked food to room temperature prior to refrigeration, and close to 70% did not know the right temperature for refrigeration of perishables. 32 in addition, 1 in 4 respondents did not recognize handwashing as important in the reduction of cross-contamination and foodborne illness. 32 based on these findings, it is likely that everyday activities in the home will result in microbial spread. a study of the transfer of serratia rubidea and the virus prd-1 from common household articles to the hands confirmed that infection is possible from daily contact with contaminated objects. 33 transmission of the bacterium and the virus were demonstrated on telephone receivers, faucet handles, and sponges, and transfer to hands was highest from hard, nonporous surfaces. 34 if a small amount of stool from a person infected with salmonella were transferred from the individual's contaminated hands to the receiver, the next user could pick up >10 5 colony-forming units (cfu) on his/her fingertips, and could transfer >3.5 × 10 4 cfu, or 35% of the total, to the mouth, a dose sufficient to cause disease. 33 after wringing out a household sponge, 10 5 -10 6 bacteria and viruses were found on the hands of test subjects. 34 in another study, bacteriophage [phis] x174 was applied to door handles and the hands of volunteers. test persons touched the handles and shook hands with the volunteers. the hands of the test persons were then sampled for the virus. both skin surfaces and contaminated door handles were efficient sources for transfer. up to 14 people became contaminated after touching the same door handle, and subsequent transmission was traced to six additional people from these primary contacts. 35each year 76 million americans develop food poisoning, 29 and about 20% of reported foodborne illnesses occur in the home. 30 ninety percent of salmonella infections are thought to be associated with the home environment. 28 in the uk, cross-contamination has been implicated in about 6% of foodborne outbreaks within the home, while poor hand hygiene is responsible for about 4%. 36 in addition, it has been estimated that cross-contamination in the home contributed to 14% of salmonellosis outbreaks. 36 in a household in which one person has been sick with salmonella, it has been estimated that there is a 60% chance that at least one other member of the household will also be infected. 8 both hands and inanimate surfaces are responsible for the cross-contamination that leads to secondary infections in the home. other bacteria and viruses transmitted via the fecaloral route most likely spread throughout the home in the same manner.in another study, the home environment was implicated in the spread of salmonellosis among children under four years of age. 37 isolates were obtained from children infected with salmonella and samples were taken from multiple locations in the home. pulsed-field gel electrophoresis patterns showed identical serotypes from the index case and the home environment. isolates which exhibited identical serotypes were found in locations such as vacuum cleaner, dirt surrounding front door, and refrigerator shelf as well as in household members and pet animals. children can carry the infections acquired in nursery schools or play groups into the home, where up to 50% of household members may become infected via cross-contamination. 8 in a study of an outbreak of diarrhea caused by e. coli o157 in new jersey, 80% of contaminated hamburgers were consumed in the home. 38 while the home may not have been the primary source of contamination, proper cooking may have prevented the spread of the organism.the use of communal laundry facilities also has been correlated with the transmission of microbes and higher rates of infectious disease symptoms among household members. 39 in this study, a variety of home hygiene practices in 398 households were examined, including personal hygiene, food handling and general cleaning and laundry practices. in a logistic regression analysis of these potential risk factors only communal laundry practices (p = 0.009) and lack of bleach (p = 0.04) were significantly associated with increased risk of infectious illnesses among household members.in households in which one member had a primary infection of campylobacter jejuni, 15% of household contacts were symptomatic during the same time period. while most instances were attributed to a common source, intrafamilial spread of infection was implicated in 6/21 (28.6%) cases. 40 a welsh study concluded that the secondary household transmission rate for sporadic shiga toxin-producing e. coli o157 (stec o157) infection was between 4% and 15%. 41 in another study, colonization of one family member with s. aureus had no bearing on the observed carriage rate of another family member. when both child and guardian were colonized with methicillin resistant s. aureus, however, the same strain was most often seen, indicating that transmission between household members probably occurred. 42 recently, risk models such as the hazard analysis and critical control point (haccp) and quantitative microbial risk assessment (qmra) based on early detection and prevention of future health risks within the home and community have been proposed. 12, 43, 44 cleaning refers to the mechanical removal of dirt and soil from an object or area. disinfection, on the other hand, is the chemical destruction, inactivation, or killing of microbes. detergents and water are the preferred products for cleaning; products containing substances such as alcohol, bleach, quaternary ammonium compounds , and phenolics can be disinfectants depending on the formulation and use of the product. under normal conditions, cleaning is adequate for households, but in some circumstances such as an outbreak or the handling of potentially contaminated food, disinfection may be indicated.in a study designed to test the effectiveness of a variety of household products against several enteric bacterial pathogens, commercial products containing ammonia resulted in a 4-6 log reduction and phenolic and alcohol based products were associated with a reduction of 4 logs. baking soda and vinegar were generally ineffective (<3 log reduction). the commercial disinfectants inactivated both antibiotic-susceptible and resistant bacteria. 46 in another study, only bleach was effective against s. aureus, salmonella typhi, and e. coli. while concentrated ammonia and vinegar were effective against s. typhi and e. coli, none of the other productsborax, ammonia, baking soda, vinegar, or dishwashing detergent-demonstrated antimicrobial activity against s. aureus. 47 four disinfecting agents were evaluated for their ability to prevent the transfer of a human rotavirus from stainless steel disks to the fingers of volunteers: disinfectant spray (0.1% o-phenylphenol and 79% ethanol), domestic bleach (6% sodium hypochlorite diluted to 800ppm of free chlo-rine), quaternary ammonium-based product (7.1% quaternary diluted 1: 128 in tap water), and a phenol-based agent (14.7% phenol diluted 1:256 in tap water). viral reductions on disks treated with the disinfectant spray were >99.9%, 97.9% for bleach, 95% for phenolic, 54.7% for quaternary, and 52.3% with tap water. virus was not detected on the fingers that had contact with disks treated with disinfectant, bleach, and phenolic, but contact with tap water or quaternary-treated disks resulted in transfer of 5.6% and 7.6% of the residual virus, respectively. 23 the same products were tested against rhinovirus. after 1 to 10 minutes of contact with the virus, the alcohol and phenolic-based disinfectant spray reduced virus infectivity by >99.9%. virus was not detected on the fingers of volunteers who had contact with the treated disks. bleach reduced the viral load by 99.7% after 10 minutes of contact, and once again no detectable virus was transferred to fingers. the quaternary-based product inactivated only 14.7% of the virus, and the phenolic only 62.3%. contact with the quaternary-based treated disk resulted in the transfer of 8.4% of the residual infectious virus, while the phenolic-treated disks resulted in the transfer of 3.3%. 48 a particularly impressive study was one in which 8 volunteers licked dried human rotavirus that had not been treated with anything, and all became infected. an alcohol and phenolic-based disinfectant spray applied to the virus interrupted the transfer of the virus; none of the 14 volunteers who consumed the spray-treated virus became infected, whereas 13 of 14 who ingested the unsprayed virus became infected. 49disinfection in the home is dependent not just on the product, but also on how it is applied. during a 30 week study in arizona, 15 homes were supplied with a variety of disinfectant products, but no specific use instructions were given. subsequently, most of the disinfectants were removed, specific ones were introduced, and a cleaning schedule was established. while the greatest reductions in coliforms occurred after initial introduction of products, introduction of the cleaning schedule led to even greater microbial reductions in the 14 kitchen and bathroom sites studied. 50 these results are consistent with the findings of an earlier study demonstrating that disinfectants used in a timely manner after contamination by food or hands reduced further contamination. 51 kitchen. studies in the uk have demonstrated that cleaning with detergent and hot water alone did not significantly reduce campylobacter and salmonella from contaminated kitchen areas. however, when cleaning was supplemented with hypochlorite there was a significant reduction in the number of bacteria from contaminated sites. in addition, detergent and water washing of dishware was only effective if followed by a rinsing process. 15 in fact, soap and water can actually increase contamination in the home when not followed by rinsing. 52 this suggests that when rinsing is impractical or not feasible, cleaning alone may be insufficient and disinfection may be indicated. in the uk, antibacterial dishwashing liquid has been shown to effectively reduce numbers of recoverable microorganisms on dishes, but not on used sponges. 53, 54 zhao et al., inoculated raw chicken with an indicator organism, enterobacter aerogenes. the same cutting board was then used to prepare chicken and chop raw vegetables, and 10 3 -10 4 cfu of bacteria was transferred to the vegetables. treating the cutting board with a kitchen disinfectant after preparing the chicken reduced the transmission of bacteria to almost undetectable levels. 55 disinfection in conjunction with paper towel wiping are reported to be the best procedure for cleaning surfaces contaminated with raw meat. 56 laundry. standard laundry practices have changed over the years, and may also contribute to the transmission of microbes in the home. people less frequently hang their clothing and linens outside where the sunlight can aid in denaturing many of the microbes, and ironing, which allows steam to penetrate and reduce the microbial load in the fabric, has become less common. finally, lower water temperatures with smaller volumes of water are used for washing. 7, 8 jaska and fredell (1980) found no significant differences between a phosphate or a phosphate substitute detergent on s. aureus survival on laundered fabrics and reported that the most important predictor of bacterial reduction in the laundry was the water temperature. 57 the temperature of the water used for washing does not seem to affect the bacterial counts in the fabric in the presence of sodium hypochlorite bleach; that is, both hot and cold water in combination with the bleach cycle are equally successful in reducing bacteria counts, 58, 59 but in the absence of bleach, warmer washing temperatures (55°c) are more effective 60 and colder temperatures may increase the cross-contamination rate of articles washed together. 61 hence, attaining maximal bacterial reductions in both the machine and fabrics depends both on bleach and the water temperature. [58] [59] [60] 62 although relying on wash water temperatures to achieve meaningful bacterial reductions is impractical in north america since water heaters are typically set at 120&scedil;c, sodium hypochlorite bleaches for compatible fabrics and newer laundry products containing oxygenated bleach which can be used on colored fabrics will achieve such reductions.bathroom. in the bathroom, splashing and aerosol droplets are responsible for transfer of some contamination from toilets and sinks to surrounding areas in the bathroom, but a chlorine block effectively reduced the level of contamination in the toilet. surrounding areas, however, were not affected by the chlorine, suggesting that direct shedding or hand contact was responsible for contamination of the toilet seat, handle, and floor. 63 a summary of studies of the activity of various household cleaning and disinfecting products are summarized in table 2 . this body of research suggests that a product containing an ingredient with disinfectant properties, such as alcohol, bleach or a phenolic, may be indicated for home use if a household member is ill with an infectious disease or in other high-risk situations.reviews of studies linking hand hygiene and reduced risk of infection have been recently published. 64, 65 the major benefits of hand hygiene for the general public is for prevention of infectious agents found transiently on hands and spread by the fecal-oral route and from the respiratory tract. 22, 66 in general, non-antimicrobial soaps are adequate to reduce such transient flora, but in 11 experimental studies reviewed by keswick et al., use of antimicrobial soaps was associated with significant reductions in rates of superficial cutaneous infections. another 15 experimental studies reviewed demonstrated a reduction in bacteria on the skin with use of antimicrobial soaps, but none of these studies assessed rates of infection as an outcome. 67 increasing public awareness stimulated by several highly publicized and serious outbreaks from commercially prepared foods has raised questions about food safety and the appropriate hygienic practices of food handlers. this concern extends to others such as child care providers, educators, sales personnel, and homemakers who have physical contact with members of the public. despite public awareness, however, hand hygiene as practiced by the general public does not meet recommended standards-members of the public wash too infrequently and for very short periods of time. 68 a single recommendation for hand hygiene practices in the home is probably inappropriate. hand hygiene is clearly indicated before and after behaviors that are associated with microbial contamination, especially including toileting, diapering, and preparing or eating food.options for hand hygiene include plain soap and water or use of an antiseptic. generally, plain soaps do not kill microorganisms but rather wash them off with friction and rubbing, removing the majority of microorganisms. for general home use when household members are healthy, plain soaps are often considered to be sufficient. 69 many antiseptic products are available over-the-counter, and are often labeled "antibacterial." these are detergent-based, requiring a traditional handwash with water. non detergent-based antiseptic products are waterless hand rinses, gels or wipes, which usually contain alcohol. they are also readily available to the public over the counter, can be used when no running water or towels are available, and, similar to antiseptic hand washes, have rapid and broad spectrum activity and excellent microbicidal characteristics. such products, however, are not a substitute for handwashing when the hands are physically soiled, since they are not good cleaning agents. 70, 71 alcohol-based products may be most beneficial in circumstances where immediate antimicrobial activity is needed after encounters that result in a high probability of contamination and where soap, running water, and/or clean towels are not readily available.because the skin is the most important and first-line barrier to infections, it is vital that the skin of the hands be kept as intact and healthy as possible. the skin's water content, humidity, ph, intracellular lipids, and rates of shedding each play a role in retaining the protective barrier properties of the skin, and these factors are affected by hand hygiene. for example, changes in skin ph associated with handwashing may pose a concern since some of the antibacterial characteristics of the skin are associated with its normally acidic ph. some soaps can result in longstanding changes in skin ph, reduction in fatty acids, and, subsequently, changes in the microbial flora. 72, 73 hence, some hand hygiene practices such as frequent washing with detergents can result in skin dryness, irritation, cracking and other problems.moisturizers prevent dehydration, damage to barrier properties, desquamation, and loss of skin lipids, restore the water-holding capacity of the keratin layer, and increase the width of corneocytes. 74, 75 they may even help to prevent the transmission of microorganisms from the hands. 76, 77 for those individuals with dry or damaged skin on the hands, it is important to use emollients or lotions to replace lost fatty acids and keep the hands hydrated.several recent reviews regarding hand and skin hygiene have been published. for additional information, the reader is referred to references. 78, 79 since hands serve as one primary mode of fecal-oral and respiratory transmission, specific indications for use of antiseptic hand products in the general public occur when:• there is close physical contact with individuals at high risk for infection (e.g., neonates, the very old, or immunosuppressed); • an individual is infected with an organism and may potentially transmit the agent by the direct contact route (diarrhea, upper respiratory infection, skin infections) or in close physical contact (touching) with infected individuals; • an individual is working in a setting in which infectious disease transmission is likely (food preparation, crowded living quarters such as chronic care residences, prisons, child care centers, and preschools).the purpose of this paper was to examine research literature from the last twenty years to determine the potential role of the home environment in the transmission of infectious disease. kitchens, bathrooms, and washing machines harbor a wide range of potential pathogens, and routine practices within these areas of the home can either prevent or facilitate cross-contamination within the home. the potential for transmission of microbes in the home exists, and several studies have demonstrated that transmission does occur. hence, even though infectious risks in the home may be less than in healthcare settings such as the hospital or nursing home, they are certainly present. commercial disinfectants and cleaning products vary in their ability to remove microbes from household surfaces, but successful strategies for reducing microbial risks in the home include both adequate cleaning practices and appropriate use of cleaning and disinfection products. care should be taken to use these products according to instructions in order to maximize removal. in general, these products clearly have a role as part of an overall hygiene strategy within the home. lastly, the behavioral aspects of infection prevention in the home such as food handling practices, warrant increased public attention and education.throughout most of history towns and cities had higher death rates than those in rural areas, creating what amounted to an urban health disadvantage. this was largely because of their densely packed and insanitary conditions, which made their residents especially prone to diseases spread by contagion and contaminated water. so the very creation of these unhealthy man-made environments was responsible for much of the increases in morbidity and mortality. of course there were times when some of these problems were reduced. for example, from the mid-third century bce some of the buildings in major cities in the indus valley, such as mohenjaro daro and harappa, had installed drainage systems and even running water to remove human waste in rooms we would call toilets (possehl 2002) . in subsequent centuries civilizations such as the minoans in crete built underground clay pipes for water supply and sewage removal. but it was roman engineering in the centuries before the common era that endowed towns and cities in their empire with the most sophisticated water systems to date, bringing clean water from long distances to their settlements, adding water fountains and public toilets near town squares, and encouraging cleanliness through the many public baths, although their use of easily worked lead for some the water pipes did produce some poisoning. moreover, vitruvius's classical book on architecture (morgan 1960, p. 21) , probably written during the time of augustus, included advice to town builders to make sure their settlements were not sited near marshy ground which were known to be prone to fevers and ague, probably what we now know as malaria.these technical advances in various early civilizations were often forgotten or ignored by subsequent urban builders. the result was especially disastrous in the rapidly expanding, but unsanitary and overcrowded large towns created in the industrial revolution where levels of mortality and premature death reached such critical levels that political action was finally taken to solve the problem, primarily through sanitary, water supply and building regulatory policies. these policies produced the first major changes to improve the health of urban residents over the last two centuries, at least in the countries of what became the developed world, and should be known as the first healthy city movement. the second major change in the health of people in urban places developed from the late nineteenth century onwards. impressive reductions in mortality and disabilities occurred in part through reductions in family size, better hygiene and nutrition and healthier physical environments because of the public health interventions, but also by unprecedented increases in the medical profession's ability to cure people from many diseases and impaired bodily functions. together with improvements in prosperity it removed the historic urban disadvantage in health, so that urban areas in the developed world had longer longevity rates than those in rural areas.by the end of the twentieth century doubts began to be cast on the ability of existing practices alone to further improve the health of the population, especially in urban places. three new sets of challenges can be recognized. first, new medical difficulties have arisen that threaten to turn back the gains of the past centuries, such as disease-causing bacteria that are resistant to drugs, and the increase in new chronic diseases. they not only pose problems in poor developing countries, where they are compounded by inadequate sanitary and clean water facilities and poor building structures, but in the developed world as the population ages and needs more care. second there is a revived emphasis upon the so-called 'determinants of health' the factors that influence health and ill-health, many of which are environmental in nature and are not always effectively dealt with by individual medical care procedures and affect health over the long term. for example, one of the biggest contemporary problems is air pollution, especially from fossil burning in urban areas and in households with open fires. a recent world health organization report (who 2014a) estimates that over 7 million deaths a year occur from this cause, not directly, but by creating premature deaths from heart disease and respiratory tract cancers. the long term effect of this and other factors means there is a need to focus as much upon the reduction of these problems and the promotion of health, as upon treatments of diseases or decaying body functions. third, various agencies, from the world health organization's healthy city programme that began in 1986, to local governments and community groups, have been advocating new ways of improving health in cities. these amount to new organizational changes and targeting of particular problems and have a strong urban basis, for this is where increasing numbers of people live. like so many of the new urban themes that have been advocated in recent years, the approach stresses the need for a commitment to look beyond current practice in health care, as well as the need for political, community and wider stakeholder involvement as this who statement shows.being a healthy city depends not on current health infrastructure, rather upon, a commitment to improve a city's environs and a willingness to forge the necessary connections in political, economic, and social arenas…. it aims to: to create a health-supportive environment; to achieve a good quality of life; to provide basic sanitation and hygiene needs; to supply access to health care. (who 1998) the emphasis upon factors other than the existing health care system requires a more holistic view of the various determinants that affect the health of the population in urban areas. in many ways it represents a new emphasis upon a different type of public health approach, one which has gradually declined from the 1880s after the success of the sanitary approach in improving the physical environment. this has has strong links with emerging ecological ideas (ashton and ubido 1991) .this chapter begins the review of all these changes by summarizing these new attitudes to health, not just ill-health, before reviewing the nineteenth century urban improvements that helped reverse the high mortality rates. this is not included only for historical reasons but because it provides an exemplar of policies that are still needed in many cities in developing countries today if the health of their urban residents is to be improved. the historical review is followed by sections providing a summary of the very serious new challenges to medical care, followed by descriptions of the policies that can be used to improve the various health determinants and then the initiatives of the healthy city movement. although many of the policies may be made and financed by national governments, there is not only an important urban component in the delivery of the services, but also the increasing realization that life in an urban habitat may be creating new health problems.health is not an easy concept to define. superficially it seems to relate to the idea of a population that is disease-free. however, the constitution of the world health organization has described health in a wider way: "health is a state of complete physical, mental and social well-being, and not merely the absence of illness" (who 1948) . the trouble with this health definition is that the use of the word 'well-being' covers much of the human condition and does not lend itself to easy measurements. nevertheless the phrases 'well-being' and 'absence of illness' do mean a wide view of health issues is envisaged. later this led to a more wide ranging statement about health promotion, as much as curing illness, from the european office of the who in its ottawa charter for health promotion in 1986.health promotion is the process of enabling people to increase control over, and to improve, their health….to reach a state of complete physical mental and social wellbeing, an individual or group must be able to identify and to realize aspirations, to satisfy needs, and to change or cope with the environment. health is a positive concept emphasizing social and personal resources, as well as physical capacities. therefore, health promotion is not just the responsibility of the health sector, but goes beyond healthy lifestyles to wellbeing. (who-e 1986, p. 1) this description emphasizes that the health sector cannot solve health problems alone. it has led to the popularization of the concept of 'wellness', which is being used to describe a more holistic approach to the improvement of health, emphasizing health promotion, as much as treatment.health is not simply the absence of illness and disease, but as something we build with our families, schools, communities and workplaces, in our parks and playgrounds, the places we live, the air we breathe, the water we drink and the choices we make. (alberta health 20142014, p. 4) so there is a new emphasis upon prevention, of encouraging healthy living, not just treating our way out of ill-health through existing and future medical knowledge. yet a more healthy living is not the only benefit; the work of researchers discussed in the knowledge city discussion (chap. 11) has shown the link between i.q. growth and disease reduction, which means a healthier population is likely to be a more productive and innovative one, which assists future economic and social progress (eppig et al. 2010) . these new perspectives have led to the need to pay more attention to the many factors, or health determinants, that affect health in both the long as well as the short term. they lead to interventions designed to create healthy cities that are not limited to the current health care system.it was well known throughout history that urban places were less healthy than rural areas and from the seventeenth century some individuals provided quantitative evidence of these differences. for example, john gaunt (1662) in england showed that 1 in 30 died annually in london, whereas the rates in the country were 1 in 50, with a third of deaths from infant mortality. plagues were particularly feared. although always present, there were extreme epidemic plague years, usually at 10 or 20 year intervals in london but with even more severe outbreaks, such as those in 1563 and 1625 where deaths increased five to six times above normal rates (harding 2012, p. 31) . limited medical knowledge meant that there was no clear understanding of the causes of the high mortality but most attributed it to miasma, the effects of foul air and filth in these densely populated, unsanitary urban areas. within cities there were important variations in mortality rates as shown by villermé's pioneering study in paris in 1817 which showed how wealthy areas, such as the second and third arrondissements, had annual mortality rates of 1 in 62 and 1 in 60 respectively, whereas the two poorest areas, arrondissements 11 and 8, had higher rates of 1 in 43 (la berge 1992) . in recent years these historical spatial variations within cities have been investigated more thoroughly. for example, it has been demonstrated that the richer areas in the centre of seventeenth and eighteenth century london, with its more substantial houses and a better fed and clothed population, had far lower mortalities than warmed rooms, but led to indoor pollution. outside the buildings the emissions of gases and particles from coal fires often created choking fogs, full of particulates, in damp, river valley environments subject to inversions, adding to the respiratory risks. this was related to a sixth problem, the often dangerous working conditions in mines and industrial plants, or even in home-based industries, which led to deaths or injuries from machinery or various industrial processes, especially those that gave off noxious fumes or by-products. a seventh problem came from the increase and concentrations of poor people in the cities. their poverty was due to the limited wages and often intermittent work, which left most with limited means to buy nutritious food, warm clothing or adequate shelter. combined with poor hygiene it made them more prone to disease. an eighth problem came from the limited medical knowledge and access to it at the time. this was made worse by the reluctance of many to embrace new ideas, while the poor had too little money to even get medical assistance, unless it was from charity provided by church organizations. the effect of these problems on the lower class in particular was calamitous, as seen in a description by engels of the labouring classes who were: … for the most part, weak, thin and pale. their weakened bodies are in no condition to withstand illness and whatever infection is abroad, they fall victims to it. consequently they age prematurely and die young. (engels 1844, pp. 118-119) these descriptions by engels and the more substantial works 50 years later by charles booth (pfautz 1967; davies 1978) , who produced detailed maps of the degree of poverty in each street in london, district measurements of the degree of social condition in major districts (davies 1978) , and seventeen volumes on the conditions of life and work-places in the metropolis, identify many of what we now call the social determinants of health. only a few in these slum areas were able to escape the environment within which life was lived, which created the milieu for urban ill-health and premature mortality, although conditions were better in the more prosperous areas of well-built and maintained houses. hence, the physical build and social environment in which so many of the disadvantaged lived lay at the root of their ill-health and early mortality.the work of chadwick, the descriptions of novelists and social commentators, as well as doctors such as snow (frerichs n.d.) , in exposing these problems eventually led to increasing political debate about the need to improve these environments (berridge and gorsky 2012) . some of the pressure for change came from altruism, the view that we are all humans and that the poor should be helped, a particular belief among christian religious organizations. also important in supporting built-environment changes was the realization by many in the political classes that an unfit, weakened population needed to be improved if the country was able to assert and defend itself by healthy effective armed men. these reasons, plus what amounted to panic from the high spikes of mortality, especially during the cholera outbreaks, also meant the better-off felt threatened. it is also important to emphasize the role played by associations such as health of towns association established in britain in 1844. branches were quickly established by business and social elites in most major centres. their members organized public meetings to present facts on mortality variations and exerted great pressure on governments to create laws that led to the development of sanitary and clean water systems in towns, as well as public health officials to monitor and often agitate for change (ashton and ubido 1991) . they helped promote the idea that there must be improvements in the physical fabric of towns and their infrastructures. yet there were still those who believed the fault for the conditions in these areas of squalor lay in the poor themselves, either because people were too lazy or immoral to improve their condition, or they were simply inferior and prone to disease.four main sets of changes were crucial in transforming the urban health conditions of many settlements. the main one consisted of improvements in the physical fabric of cities, helped by a series of major public health acts and new technologies. for example, in britain, the 1845 and 1875 public health acts laid down enforceable building standards, not simply in construction but in minimum sizes of houses and lay-out, plus tarmac roads, as well as the requirement for small gardens and at least outside toilet facilities (hall 1988) . critical in these changes were the additional requirements for a clean water supply and new sewer lines to connect the housing areas to plants to disperse and process the sewage, although initially many dumped it into the nearest water body, where many obtained their water. increasingly it was the responsibility of the municipal government to provide such facilities, in addition to fire protection, garbage collection services, and the banning of animal husbandry in urban areas to reduce their waste. this led to greater powers for local governments in providing these services, replacing previously inadequate and sometimes private provision, as well as the important addition of medical officers of health to monitor health conditions in local areas. although often known as the 'sanitation phase' it may be better summarized as a regulatory and engineering phase of improvement. it was the engineering advances in supplying water from often distant reservoirs, and then filtering water-first through sand and later disinfection with chlorine to kill microbes-that led to clean urban water supplies, which were later helped by the invention of engines that allowed water to be pressurized for further distribution to residences. another major change came with the development of toilets, using the new water supplies, where the flushed water containing human waste, was carried away by new sewer systems that also removed other waste water. later, the addition of sewage processing plants to process the effluent improved the systems, instead of the earlier approach of just dumping it into the nearest water body, although far too many urban places still do. also the new regulations included effective inspection systems that controlled and improved building quality and industrial plants, and eventually, the safe disposal of toxic by-products. overcrowding was gradually reduced by decisions to eradicate older slum areas and build at lower densities, while the development of unions gave workers more ability to argue for workplace safety, as well as better wages.the creation of a better physical urban environment helped reduce the spread of water and airborne communicable diseases. a second set of factors dealing with broad social changes in health improvement, were also influential. lower fertility rates decreased family size and reduced child mortality. increases in prosperity led not only to better nutrition from more food supplies, but better clothing and housing. more cleanliness and a knowledge of hygiene was also important. in addition there was a gradual and crucial improvement of medical knowledge and nursing capabilities.a third trend came from greater acceptance of a new valuation of nature and appreciation of the utility of green space that began with the romantic revolution in art. this stimulated the creation of public parks for leisure and escape from the noise and filth of the city, and cemeteries for the safe disposal of dead bodies (reps 1965) . these ideas later led to the ideas of adding green space to the planning of new subdivisions. restricted at first to wealthy residents, these planning ideas gradually filtered down to middle class developments and to model towns of workers (davies and herbert 1993) and eventually to the garden city ideas. they led to a more comprehensive approach, advocates for a complete town combining the best of the town and country, whose ideas influenced subsequent suburban designs, issues discussed in chaps. 2 and 4 especially. new ideas about the restorative values of nature also led to the belief that it could contribute to better health, which in turn was assumed to develop an improved morality, unlike the social degeneration seen in cities and especially slum areas which were thought by many to breed moral, as well as physical diseases. in britain it led to many new movements designed to encourage a more active and outdoors life-style, from the addition of sports and physical exercise in schools, to the scout and guides movement from 1908, with their outdoor orientation and camping trips, to the 1926 new health society which sought to improve nutrition, as well as to the sunlight league in 1926, which extolled the health-giving properties of sunlight (carter 2012) . similar movements occurred in many countries, especially in germany where there was greater emphasis on the need for hygiene to be taught in schools and to be part of everyday life, stemming from the work of dr weyl's 10 volume treatise on hygiene that began in 1893 (schott 2012) . although many these social movements of the early twentieth century faded during the war period and its austere aftermath, the revival of the environmental movements from the 1960s and the more recent ideas of the nature deficit in children discussed in chap. 4, can, in part, be regarded as the partial inheritors of these earlier traditions.a fourth transforming trend was less a matter of policy or organizations than of fashion and life-style, namely the benefits of spa and seaside towns. these were regarded as being sited in healthier environments, allowing the opportunity to improve health by sojourns in these centres. the earliest examples came from the expansion of spa towns from the seventeenth century, places with mineral springs which were assumed to have therapeutic properties, obtained by either immersion in, or by drinking such waters (adams 2012) . many of the early european spa towns were revivals of settlements on old roman mineral water sites and were primarily patronised by the elite, which meant they became as much social, as medical, centres. up to the 1930s they were patronized primarily by the elite and their therapeutic values were highly regarded. but in the u.k. many declined after the creation of the national health service in 1948 because this nationalized system was not prepared, except in a few cases, to subsidize patients to attend what were expensive courses of treatment. although there has been a recent revival of some spas in britain and the development of many new private ones, it has been concluded that they are based primarily upon methods of treatment, rather than the particular place properties of climate or water (adams 2012) . however, in continental europe there has been a much greater continuity and use of many of the old spas, as health providers were more likely to prescribe such courses of treatment for all classes. the bracing qualities of sea air was also recognized and promoted from the late eighteenth century, providing a healthy alternative to the stink, noise and fevers found in cities. again it was the upper classes who led the initial growth of these centres. with increasing affluence by the end of the nineteenth century, the middle classes, and eventually the working classes after the introduction of paid holiday time, also found temporary solace in these seaside places. bodily emersion in the sea, exercise by swimming, and the apparently beneficial effects of tanning, were added to the initial atmospheric benefits, although the fear of skin cancer from over-exposure to the sun has reduced the time people spend on tanning in the last 20 years.by the end of the nineteenth century the changes described above began the health transformation of many urban places in developed countries that led to a rapid decline in premature deaths. soon after, a new phase of improved medical knowledge, training, surgical techniques, the use of new technologies, and the discovery of antibacterial drugs and vaccinations for many diseases, increasingly played a major part in reducing deaths. although advances in sanitation and environmental improvement were still being made, what became known as the biomedical model became dominant in health care. this model attributes morbidity and mortality to molecular level pathogens brought about by individual life-styles, hereditary biology, or genetics, and it altered public health to personal 'risk' factors such as smoking, diet and exercise. (corburn 2009, p. 49) although local government continued the progress of ensuring improvements in the physical fabric, and public health officials monitored local health conditions, the growth and dominance of what amounted to germ theory ideas and the success of individual cure and care approach by doctors and hospitals meant it was the medical profession, not city officials, as in the engineering and regulation phase, that increasingly became the main decision-makers in health care. in addition, there was a move away from what is usually called the 'urban field view' in health terms, where residents and professionals searched for the particular qualities of place, caused by the interactions between the various elements, that caused ill-health. this was seen in the early sanitary phase, which led to more context-specific and localized policy responses. although the move to laboratory sites and techniques produced great results, the reduced interest from what were real world, not controlled conditions, meant that the local milieus that caused or assisted diseases were often underestimated.in addition, the new profession of planning increasingly downplayed the need to put health issues in the forefront of their concerns. certainly many planning departments emphasized the need for a more ordered and efficient land use distribution, especially to ensure that noxious industry would be separated from residential areas, while ensuring the latter would have various effective public facilities, from roads, sewers, schools, recreational areas etc. these issues were connected to health improvements. but corburn (2009, p. 41) has described how attempts were made by some late nineteenth century american planners (marsh 1909) , to argue that the planning profession should focus primarily on the key issues of social justice and the health of cities that had motivated the nineteenth century reformers. such opinions failed to influence leaders of the new american planning association. so efficiency and also aesthetics, such as the city beautiful ideas, became the main emphasis. yet planners often assumed that efficient land use planning was itself a way of improving health, especially after acceptance of the neighbourhood unit principle, with its insistence on lots of green space, the incorporation of many facilities within the unit, and the positioning of main roads outside the unit. in addition, the removal of slum areas and their replacement with new tower blocks was also seen as a way of improving the housing conditions of the poorest classes and hence their health. however there is more than a whiff of social determinism in planning, since it is assumed that the provision of new housing in these new low density layouts and new high-rises would automatically alter behaviours and improve health. advocates did not anticipate that the neighbourhood units would became car-suburbs as vehicle ownership increased, contributing to the lack of exercise, or that many of the high estates would become crime-ridden areas with few jobs, limited security and social isolation, creating new areas of deprivation, ill-health and often racial segregation. hence in health terms a new set of problems emerged in these newly developed urban environments, while disadvantaged areas persisted. these were not effectively addressed by municipal planners. also the increasing domination of the biomedical model of medicine meant that despite the sterling work of community health specialists, most attention was focused on the cure of the diseases of individuals, not on wider and often long term issues that contributed to these problems, or on the recognition that decision-making on health care issues should involve more than medical professionals.at first sight the impressive gains in medical knowledge, care, and disease prevention, and their constant improvements over the past century, would imply that the health of people in urban areas would continue to improve. however new problems threaten to reduce the life-span of people in coming generations compared to their parents, a potential general health reversal unknown in the last century, except in exceptional circumstances such as war. among the varied problems, eight in particular, demand solutions through new medical advances and care and some of these may be influenced by the increasing urbanization trends. table 13 .1 shows that the who estimates of the top twenty reasons for the direct causes of mortality in 2015 and 2030 is no longer dominated by the communicable diseases that so devastated the populations of cities especially in the past; most seem to have been conquered. today the majority of the deaths come from so-called chronic diseases, linked to organ failures, such as heart attacks and strokes, to cancers of various types, and diabetes. these diseases now account for 35 million deaths a year of a total mortality of 57 million, which has led to calls for urgent world attention to be paid to these problems (who 2010 ). yet despite the major advances that have taken place in the treatment of such diseases, especially if the problem is diagnosed early, table 13 .1 shows they are still predicted to be the highest ranking sources of mortality in the foreseeable future. moreover, these chronic diseases are no longer restricted to the developed world, for 80 % of the deaths from such causes now take place in low or medium income countries, places that are the least equipped to deal with such problems. clearly there is need for more research into the cures for these problems, some of which come from long exposures to unhealthy environments or poor life-styles over many years, which means better health education and monitoring. also more treatments for such diseases in the developing world is needed. indeed it has been estimated that less than 3 % of the international development assistance going to developing countries is spent on non-communicative diseases (who 2010) , showing the continued fixation with diseases spread by infections. a related issue here is the increased costs of providing care for patients with such chronic conditions, which require longer periods of care and greater expense.these changes in the causes of mortality are also related to the general problem of coping with aging, for it is estimated that the global population of those over 65 years will almost double from the current 600 million to 1.1 billion by 2035, resulting in a change from 8 to 13 % of the population. some of these people will be healthy and active but many will have ill-health and there is predicted to be major increases in the numbers of people suffering from various forms of dementia, such as alzheimer's, for which there is no known cure at present, except for interventions that help to delay or reduce its impacts. recent estimates show that 35.6 million people in the world are already suffering from this disease of cognitive impairment and loss, conditions that already leads to health care costs of $ 604 billion (who-adi 2012). the numbers with dementia are predicted to almost double by 2030 and will more than triple to 115.4 million sufferers by 2050. this will require much larger numbers of senior centres and homes to cope with, and treat, the growing number of patients, as well as finding enough qualified staff. it has been known that many life-style factors are correlated with those who have the disease; for example, people who are active and socially integrated and those with higher educational attainments less likely to be at risk. in 2014 a major new study focused on the impact of a series of modifiable life-style factors on the incidence of alzheimer's, a major type of dementia (norton et al. 2014) . it revealed that seven factors-physical inactivity, smoking, mid-life hypertension, midlife obesity, diabetes, depression and low educational attainment-were all significantly correlated with the disease and that one-third of cases could be avoided by changes in life-style. for example, those who did not engage in at least three 20 min bursts of rigorous exercise a week were 82 % more likely to develop the disease. the importance of the study is that the estimated huge increase in numbers could be drastically reduced by these life-style changes. the problem of coping with this wave of new cases will be hardest in the developing world, where there are less resources to deal with the problem, especially in cities where there are likely to be fewer family or long term friends to help with care. although increases in the elderly population is a growing problem in most developed and middle income countries, there are marked spatial inequalities in this effect, with aging in japan occurring more rapidly than in other developed countries. it is creating one of the most severe current problems, but also provides a warning to other countries. the population over 65 years of age in japan reached 23 % of the total in 2011 and is projected to be 38 % by 2050 with the population declining by a third from the current 127 million in 50 years. it is estimated that by 2035 there will be 69 persons over 65 years of age in japan compared to 100 in the working population (25-64 years), up from 43 in 2011, whereas the world today has only 16 in the over 65 age category. some of the effects of the aging trend may be reduced by raising fertility rates and by people working longer. but these skewed future rates will not only require more health care but will lead to potential gdp losses unless labour is replaced by capital and more immigration is allowed, which in the case of japan, has never been a policy palatable to the majority. since caring for this aging population is now a major problem, and many villages and small towns will soon be dominated by old people, japan instituted a long care elderly insurance scheme. this is funded by compulsory taxes on people over 40 years of age and other taxes. few other countries or cities facing aging populations are making such provision. indeed in some countries, such as the u.k., government cutbacks since the 2007 financial depression has led to major cuts in the budgets of local authorities and care for the aged is falling at a time when there is greater need. however in some cities there is a gradual realization of the need to plan for this aging process. for example, in many american cities, such as new york and cleveland, there are now departments of aging in the municipal organization, which are designed to prevent elder abuse and also to provide programmes to assist the elderly, especially by creating on-line websites that list the various services that seniors can access and use to obtain help. a more general approach to mitigate the effect of aging occurred with the who's establishment of the global network of age-friendly cities and communities in 2006 (gnafcc). initially based on 33 cities in 22 countries the network is designed to provide guidance to other cities wishing to implement policies that promote healthy and active aging by creating an active and accessible urban environment. key components are the involvement of seniors in the discussions and policy formulation and to provide indicators to measure progress as well as evaluations of their effectiveness in subsequent years. eight domains of city life have been identified in a guide for age-friendly cities, as well as communities, within urban places (who 2007) . these domains are in the fields of: transportation; respect and social inclusion; outdoor spaces and buildings; social participation; housing; information and communication; community support and health services; civic partnership and employment opportunities. historically many churches, and neighbourhood networks based on long residence, as well as families have provided fellowship and help for seniors. but in a more mobile and secular society these local support systems have decayed, making it imperative to plan for an active older population, not simply to house them. it is tragic that so many old people's homes are built in remote locations in cities, with few places to walk to, or to obtain goods, resulting in the almost warehousing and segregation of old people, rather than building premises to support active living near shopping or transit nodes and also adopting the other recommendations of the who's age-friendly city network (gnafcc) issues largely ignored by new urbanism and other themes.one of the biggest challenges to modern medicine is to create a more equitable pattern of 'cure and care'. the poorest people in developed countries and the majority in the developing world still have limited access to health care facilities, even of a basic level, with resultant high and unnecessary death rates from diseases where cures are available. one stark example can be seen in table 13 .1 which shows the persistence of high death rates from the old scourges of childbirth, such as preterm birth problems (11) and birth trauma (18). a large proportion of these 1.9 million deaths occur in rural areas, which could be cured by access to modern medical knowledge and better health care, which should occur with greater urbanization, one of the reasons why both diseases are expected to drop substantially in the next 15 years and result in lower rankings.much of the reduction in mortality and ill-health rates in urban places has been due to the way that the most widespread communicable disease threats, such as measles, chicken pox, polio or tetanus, have been controlled by vaccinations that provide adaptive immunity against the pathogens that cause these diseases, and by antibiotic drugs that kill bacterial infections. so only respiratory infections (no. 3 in table 13 .1), diarrhoeal diseases (no. 5) and tuberculosis (no. 13) are found in the top twenty of the major causes of death today (who 2012a). in total only a fifth of the annual deaths in the world now come from infectious diseases. yet the proportions vary spatially, with levels of 40 % in the less developed world to close to only 7 % in developed countries such as the u.k. (davies et al. 2013, p. 27) . the limited availability of effective health care, antiseptic methods and the availability of vaccinations and antibiotics in the developing world, combined with limited clean water, sanitary facilities, and more airborne pollutants, means that these treatable diseases still kill far too many people, given existing medical knowledge. so there is still a lot of room for real progress in the fight against such diseases in the settlements of poorer countries. moreover, the current control over the most infectious diseases should not lead to complacency. some, such as smallpox (kopolow 2003) have been eradicated, with polio well on the way until new outbreaks occurred in afghanistan, pakistan and northern nigeria, a result of war and fanatical islamists preventing vaccinations. others, such as increasing cases of tuberculosis in cities such as london, seem to come from immigrants arriving with the infection from countries where the disease is still endemic. this means that more effective screening of the health background of immigrants is probably needed. also, there is always the threat of new outbreaks of many of the diseases largely controlled, because of increasing numbers of people refusing to accept vaccinations. so vigilance to spot new outbreaks and their source, as well as mass vaccination programmes are still needed. there is also the threat of new, previously unknown diseases appearing, with the case of the acquired immunodeficiency virus (aids) and (severe acute respiratory syndrome (sars) providing opposite examples of early failure and success in coping with the problems. in the former case holt (2014) has described how the growth of the disease caused by a virus, spread through sexual contact and contaminated blood, which quickly mutates and was difficult to treat. it led to a high of 2.2 million annual deaths. originally unrecognized from its origin in infected monkeys in africa its spread from the 1980s was helped by governments, such as south africa, which refused basic treatment to victims. today antiretroviral drugs can halt its progression, allowing people to lead an active life, although they are not cured. so since 35.3 million are infected worldwide, the virus is still estimated to be the sixth most common cause of death in 2030 (table 13 .1) and remains as a major threat. by contrast, the respiratory disease, sars that spread between november 2002 and july 2003 provides an example of the dangers that can quickly emerge in our connected world (enserink 2013) . it originated from a species jump of the virus to a chinese farmer from its host in bats and civets and then to others in local markets and hong kong. in this case it was relatively quickly diagnosed when travellers from hong kong brought it back to north america due to vigilance of doctors in major hospitals in canada and the united states, alerted to a new disease in southern china, and its rapid identification by canadian researchers and the u.s. centre for disease control and prevention. victims were isolated in special wards, with their contacts being tracked and warned (enserink 2013 ). in addition, civets in the southern chinese markets that acted as hosts were destroyed. the use of masks and other protective clothing by carers, and the careful cleaning and sanitation of all surfaces near infected people, also reduced the spread of the infections. in the longer term, the search for cures is vital. what the example also shows is the need to have large numbers of wards or places available to be turned into isolation rooms if a similar major outbreak occurs-a scale of resources which may still be rare in most urban centres, even in the developed world. in the past, separate quarantine hospitals, and even areas, were set aside in or near cities for people with infectious diseases. for example, north brothers island in new york fulfilled this role, especially for immigrants, although it is now abandoned and its buildings are decaying. if infectious diseases cannot be controlled by vaccines and drugs this type of separation may again have to be practiced. the history of the sars outbreak shows the need for rapid genome typing of a suspected new disease and the ability to quickly create large numbers of isolation wards to quarantine victims. it illustrates how a multipronged and international effort is needed to prevent the spread of new communicable diseases. yet there is little doubt that there are many diseases that are still unknown, or like the hemorrhagic fever, ebola, kills 70% or more of infected people and does not have a cure. until recently it had not spread beyond a few isolated areas of africa and seemed to be containable. but in 2014 a major outbreak occurred in three countries of west africa, which has raised the spectre of a major spread. assistance in dealing with the outbreak is being helped by the addition of skilled international medical teams, but the burial practices of many cultures in the area, plus suspicion of western medical practices and the desire to avoid the stigma of having a family member diagnosed with the disease, handicapped containment, showing how cultural factors and very limited medical facilities impede medical progress. with the exception of hiv-aids the world has managed to avoid pandemics for almost a hundred years since the so-called spanish flu, a virus causing a virulent form of influenza that killed at least 50 million and infected 500 million world-wide in 1918-1920. but the new travel contacts and the increasing concentrations of people in urban places, puts this generally positive history of controlling communicable diseases in the twentieth century at greater risk, which is also linked to another emerging problem.this is the title of a provocative and chilling small book by the british medical officer of health and her colleagues (davies et al. 2013 ). in it she describes an emerging crisis of antimicrobial resistance (amr) caused by the fact that many microorganisms (bacteria, fungus, virus or parasites) no longer respond to the drugs that have been invented to counteract their effect in creating various diseases. although reporting is flawed, it is estimated that 25,000 people die from such problems in europe annually from the inability of formerly effective drugs to work, more than are killed on roads. almost similar levels of deaths occur from amr in the u.s.a. (cdc 2014; who 2014b) . the reason is that the bacteria have developed resistance to the drugs that killed them. it was something that sir alexander fleming warned about after accepting the nobel prize for his discovery of penicillin in 1923, namely that it is a fact of nature that bacteria and viruses mutate and develop new forms, and those new disease-causing types will be resistant to drugs that previously killed them. hence no drug is going to be effective forever. the scale of this problem should not be underestimated, for similar conclusions have been reached by other reports on the problem in the u.s.a. (cdc 2o14) and by the who (2014b) in its first comprehensive survey of a number of amr bacteria. if this mortality was linked to some visible, known specific disease, there would be public pressure for a cure. but since the deaths from these resistant microbes are scattered throughout the country, they appear to be almost hidden, so the scale of the problem has been underestimated until the last few years. the detailed tables in the who report (2014a) also show that there are great variations between countries in the scale of the problem, which varies with different disease-causing microorganisms. some of the biggest worries are seen in the case of tuberculosis where 20 % of previously treated cases proved to be resistant to multidrug treatment cases in some countries, while in many places gonorrhoea cases are now being treated with the final drug that works. in the case of cyprus 36 % of a sample of people tested proved resistant to anti e. coli drugs, while 68 % of sampled people in greece were resistant to microorganisms that caused pneumonia (who 2014b). in addition, south east asia is a region where new resistances to anti-malarial drugs have emerged. certainly the sample sizes vary in each case study and cannot be used to conclude they represent the whole population. but the evidence is sufficiently worrying for the authors of the three main reports to date to use the words 'crisis' and even 'catastrophe' in descriptions of the problem. diseases that were thought to be controlled could return and kill large numbers, while the drugs routinely used to prevent infections after surgery are proving less effective in many areas. in some areas multi-drug treatment has proved effective, but this is very expensive and involves specialised individual treatment that may be the equivalent of $ 80,000 annually, making their use out of the question for poorer people.the problem of amr is made worse because the major pharmaceutical companies are no longer researching new antimicrobial drugs to replace those previously effective. from 1934 to 1968 14 classes of antibiotics were created, but only five since that time and none since 1987 (davies 2013) while currently the who (2014b) recognizes 27 different types of effective vaccinations. the reason for the decline in antibiotic development is the costs of innovation, perhaps over $ 1 billion in research, testing and satisfying the regulatory agencies. companies believe the costs do not justify the potential financial return, given that many of the drugs may be needed only once or on a few occasions to cure some infection-unlike the daily drug regimes for many suffers of chronic diseases. also, limited patent time, and the small returns from poor countries where patients cannot afford the drugs although the need is high, adds to the reluctance to invest in amr development. so a 'market failure' has occurred, which means the inability of the market to prove a strong enough attraction to create new amr drugs. britain's chief medical officer of health has identified the problem starkly.we are losing the battle against infectious diseases. bacteria are fighting back and are becoming resistant to modern science. in short the drugs don't work… our response needs to be global and multifaceted to… manage and mitigate the risk of antimicrobial resistance, which is just as important and deadly as climate change and international terrorism. (davies et al. 2013, pp. ix-xiii) there have been many suggestions to solve the emerging crisis. one is to resolve the market failure that has reduced research. this can be done by helping companies to finance new drug research, increasing the participation of government and university researchers, as well as encouraging charitable organizations to work with companies in joint venture financing, such as the medicines for malaria venture. in addition, quicker means of identifying new bacterial and viral strains are needed, which is happening through the development of genome sequencing while new serums may be effective. linked to this is the need to have rapid communication through international health agencies about the appearance of new infections, allowing countries to take precautions, which is the role of america's amr monitoring system set up in 1996 and the who's geneva hub (cdc 2013) . what is also needed is low-tech advice, such as better education to reduce the spread of infections by thorough handwashing and sterilization on surfaces near infected patients. also there is need for more radical cleaning methods in hospitals, such as the vaporizing technique that sterilizes everything in hospital wards (zoutman et al. 2011 ). there are some signs of success in these efforts, for more careful procedures have reduced rates of a particularly troublesome bacterium called methicillin-resistant staphylococcus aureus bacterium (mrsa) in britain by 80 % since the 2008 peak, when increasing numbers were picking up infections in hospitals (davies et al. 2013) .it has also been argued that there are other reasons for amr. too many antibiotics have been given out routinely, often for viral infections that they cannot solve, while many people do not take the full dose, meaning bacteria are not properly eradicated and those that resist multiply. in addition, broad spectrum drugs are often prescribed, designed to cover many diseases, making bacterial mutations more likely. more specific drugs aimed at particular diseases would help, but this requires better diagnostic tests. also this broad spectrum approach and indiscriminate use of antibiotics are killing off some of the many millions of 'good' bacteria that exist in our bodies and are helpful for our health. so the who and governments at many levels are emphasizing the need to educate doctors and the public to reduce their routine drug use, especially for minor infections that do not need them, which decreases the opportunity for bacteria resistances to emerge. this over-use is especially a problem in countries where antibiotic products can be bought in shops without a prescription. it is not only a developing world issue, but one that exists in many mediterranean countries, where resistances to five basic bacterial strains have grown, whereas the figure in the u.k. where the drugs need a doctor's prescription was only 0.4 % (who 2014b). the growth of illegally produced and often ineffective antibiotics is another challenge that needs to be rapidly contained. an even greater problem comes from the routine antibiotic doses given to farm animals, especially in the high density farming of chickens, pigs and cattle, without waiting for infections to emerge and isolating the infected cases. this greater exposure to the drugs again makes it more likely that resistant bacteria will emerge. such farming practices are routine in north america but banned in europe, resulting in europe closing its markets to meat products from north america. to drastically reduce this drug use is going to be difficult, given the profits that pharmaceutical companies make from such practices. we may see similar problems to those experienced by attempts by governments to reduce tobacco advertising etc. which led to huge lawsuits by the tobacco firms. action on amr is occurring at last, but is long overdue, if what senior medical people and authorities describe as an emerging crisis is going to be solved.most people in the developed world now spend most of their lives in indoor environments, for time-budget surveys have shown that the average american spends only an hour a day outside. this has led to increased attention being paid to the health problems created by these indoors environments (godish 2001) . in the less developed world the continued use of charcoal or wood burning fires for cooking, with inadequate smoke extraction, leads to respiratory problems and far too many premature deaths, estimated at 4.3 million annually (who 2014a). in the developed world the hazards associated with the historic use of asbestos for insulation and lead in paint has become well known, and their poisonous effects have gradually been removed by eliminating them in new buildings, although older structures may still have these and other contaminants. the health and crime effects of lead in paint and from car emission fumes have already been described in the discussion on safe cities (chap. 12). although these and other poisonous materials are being identified and eradicated, a wider set of problems associated with indoor living have come from what has been described as 'the sick building syndrome'. indeed, it was estimated in 1984 that up to 30 % of new office buildings were affected by the problem (epa 1991) . a wide range of factors contribute to this syndrome, such as: poor ventilation causing polluted air to circulate; poorly sited intakes which bring in exhaust and other fumes; biological contaminants in water ducts and tanks; various toxic chemical emissions from insulation materials, plywood and artificial fibres, as well as from the over-use of poisonous cleaning chemicals; while dust containing materials brought from outside, as well as insects, spores, dirt and skin particles, exacerbates asthmatic conditions, itself a disease that is rapidly increasing. fortunately, the smoking bans in workplaces, restaurants and public places has helped reduced the problem. it must be acknowledged that it was often cities that began the process of making such practices illegal and subject to fines. another problem comes from the fact that living mainly indoors in a climate-controlled environment means that the body does not have to consume so many calories to keep warm. so people with the same eating habits are more likely to become overweight by spending too much time indoors.the increase in indoor living has also reduced exposure to sunlight and its ultraviolet radiation which creates health-giving vitamin d in the body. without it there are sunlight deficiencies. in the densely populated slums of nineteenth century cities it led to high incidences of rickets in children-a disease of bone deformation. traditional societies in northern climes were protected because their diet included high levels of vitamin d from oily fish. fortunately the disease was largely eradicated in developed countries in the twentieth century by lower density layouts, and mandatory green spaces in new housing areas, as well as by dietary supplements containing the essential vitamin d, such as by the provision of free milk and the cod liver oil supplements given to children in britain during world war ii (gille 2004) . sadly, new cases of rickets have emerged in children occupying crowded houses in parts of london (michie 2013) . a reduction in vitamin d can also lead to a depressive illness known as seasonal affective disorder (sad). originally seen in countries with long winters and cloudy skies, such as in the deep, fiordic coastal areas of norway in particular, it has become increasingly prevalent in those who do not venture outdoors. however, this can be cured by increasing the amount of time spent outside in sunlight, or through light therapy from intense light pads (lurie et al. 2006 ) and adding vitamin d to diets.another worrying medical trend in recent years has been the explosion in the incidence of autoimmune diseases (ai), such as type 1 diabetes, multiple sclerosis, schizophrenia, rheumatoid arthritis, crohn's disease, coeliac disease (gluten intolerance), several forms of cancer, and, as some researchers suggest, autism yang et al. 2013 ). these diseases are given the ai label as they are caused by the body attacking its own tissues, with some researchers suggesting they currently affect 5-10 % of the world population, proportions that seem certain to increase, even if they are not yet in the highest causes of mortality and ill-health (ramagopalan et al. 2009 (ramagopalan et al. , 2010 . the exact causes are still unknown, but it has been recently found that these diseases have higher rates in the developed lands of higher latitudes, as well as in urban, compared to rural societies, and with seasonal peaks in late winter and spring (disanto et al. 2012 ). it has also been suggested that these associations seem to account for the higher levels of diseases such as ms in women in cloudy areas such as the orkneys, in increases in black-skinned individuals who are second generation immigrants in inner city london, as well as in women in iran since the islamic revolution forced many women to wear all-embracing veils (gille 2004; michie 2013) . researchers are suggesting that the environmental effect of low sunlight exposure in both northern and, it must be stressed, urban places, results in vitamin d deficiencies, which may also be at least a partial cause of the explosion in the incidence of many of these non-skeletal problems. the recent increases in asthma rates also seems to have similar causes. litonjua and weiss (2007) have calculated that asthma now affects 300 million people worldwide and has shown a 50 % increase since the 1970s, which also seems to be the result of a deficiency of vitamin d, in this case one that impairs lung development in the foetus .more recent research has also discovered that natural levels of vitamin d are also low in mothers with children born in late winter-early spring. this is due to a lack of exposure to the vitamin d-causing properties of sunlight, again linked to more indoor living. research reviews have implicated over 18 of these autoimmune diseases (ai) with low vitamin d levels in pregnancy so that deficits in this vitamin go beyond its role in bone metabolism that leads to rickets (yang et al. 2013) . although the precise causes of the relationships are still under investigation, the low vitamin d effect may be exacerbated by genetic risk and perhaps mothers' diets litonjua and weiss 2011) . researchers have suggested that it is probable that the low vitamin levels may make a pregnant mother's body create antibodies that cause particular genes to malfunction as well as damaging the brain of the foetus. these antibodies are not flushed away before birth, but remain in the body and cause certain genes in some people to malfunction in later years, resulting in the body being attacked by its own immune system. this problem in early gestation means that adding vitamin d later in life does not solve the problem. it has also been argued that this vitamin also seems to be essential in providing adequate amounts of serotonin in the brain, which have been shown to be low in autistic children who have low empathy levels, which provides an explanation for the higher incidence of the disease with males and those born in late winter (patrick and ames 2014) .although ai research is still in its infancy, recommendations to combat their increase are emerging. one is the recommendation that pregnant women eat more natural sources of vitamin d in fruits and vegetables and take supplements of the vitamin. this research also suggests that the accepted wisdom since the late 1960s of reducing exposure to sunlight because of the risk of skin cancer needs to be modified, for moderate exposure amounts is needed to reduce the subsequent increase of susceptibility to these ai diseases.it seems likely that a gradual decrease in exposure to sun due to sun avoidance behaviours in western societies (sunscreen, clothing, sun avoidance, increased time spent indoors) reached a critical level in the early 1970s, such that humans were not spending enough time outdoors and vitamin d levels reached acutely low levels. vitamin d is essential to the normal functioning of the human immune system. (litonjua and weiss 2007, p. 747) all these suggestions seem especially applicable to the poorest population, often in overcrowded parts of cities with few park spaces. although attempts have been made to ensure poor mothers and their children are provided with vouchers for fruit, vegetables and free vitamins, such as in britain's healthy start programme for children at risk, it has been reported that less than 10 % used this opportunity-a depressing and unnecessary result attributed to gaps in supply chains, delivery systems and poor staff training (michie 2013) .all these emerging problems may be amenable to further breakthroughs in medical research and the greater spread of effective care. but as the cases of the failure of some antibiotics and the aging population in particular indicate, there are huge problems developing that will need a great deal of research work to combat. moreover, if infectious diseases cannot be controlled by antibiotics, the historic danger of diseases spreading by contagion in large urban areas will re-emerge. this risk is reinforced by the new fast transports of air and train, including cramped subway systems, which crowd people into what are effectively sealed containers and deliver them to far flung destinations where they quickly and anonymously disperse into the larger settlements and may infect populations not used to the diseases they may carry. also, other emerging health problems, such as ai diseases, seem to have an association with our increased urban living. these negative effects of urban living mean there should be a major emphasis on providing healthier urban behaviours and environments.the so-called 'health field' concept promoted by a former canadian minister of national health and welfare (lalonde 1974) is often regarded as an important marker of a renewed emphasis upon public health after its dominance faded from the 1880s once urban environmental conditions improved. the health field approach moved away from an emphasis upon medical care alone, by stressing the need to investigate all four key categories of the factors that affect health: human biology (all factors related to the body, including genetics); environment (all features outside the body that affect health, but over which individuals have little control); life-style (personal decisions made by individuals that affect health, such as drug-taking etc.); and provision of heath care facilities (their quality, availability and accessibility of health care). other studies have provided alternative versions of the main categories of what are now known as health determinants, sometimes in diagrammatic form (dahlgren and whitehead 2006) . these summary features have been extended by more recent research that has shown the need to look more closely at a subset of these determinants that are often overlooked, namely how various characteristics of the social realm-such as the effect of the socio-economic inequalities, or from stress or social exclusion-influence health outcomes. these factors are part of what are being described as the social determinants of health (wilkinson and marmot 1999, 2003) , although the term has sometimes been used to categorize most determinants under the 'social' title (lcc 2012, p. 6) .these summaries of the various health determinants provide useful initial descriptions of many of the relevant groups of factors that influence ill-health. but it does seem worthwhile to extend and re-arrange the ideas to provide a more comprehensive view. in fig. 13 .1 eight broad domains of factors that influence health are identified together with the surroundings contexts. within these health determinant categories, examples of the more specific factors can be identified which have deleterious effects on health. many of these were not routinely dealt with by current health care systems, but are now being more closely investigated by epidemiologists and other researchers. these domains may be initially considered as separate categories of related factors for the sake of clarification; in reality many often combine with one another to create ill-health, especially in our complex, multi-faceted urban places. also, many of the factors have two-way relationships with one another, including modifications on human biology through epigenetic processes linked to life-styles or environments that affect the operation of genes. moreover, some of the features are directly linked to disease; others take more time to cause ill-health. but the influence of all these factors cannot be discounted when evaluating health in an area, since they provide the background conditions that lead the body to be weakened and prone to specific diseases. although these factors can be looked at individually, in practice they combine in a spatial context to create differential place characteristics, not simply in physical or built-environment terms but also through the economic and social environmental characteristics and life-style choices. this ensures that each location will have very different risks and protections for health outcomes. so a continuing challenge for a research field such as epidemiology is to get to the root causes of ill-health and premature mortality in various locations and to provide new preventative health policies that relate to all the health determinants. unfortunately, as the authors of a text on unhealthy cities have argued, the twentieth century approach to public health has until recently ignored or at least underestimated many of the spatial variations in these determinants; …in part because public health has been burdened with a tradition that overemphasizes individual-risk factors, the consequences of social and environmental conditions for health promotion and illness have been overlooked. (fitzpatrick and la gory 2011, p. 155) so even though the twentieth century focus on the biomedical model has ensured major advances in the level of health and continues to do so, hopefully by solving the problem of abr and the new diseases, there is also a pressing need to reduce the negative place-based factors that contribute to ill-health by investigating the impact of other health determinants.these are the first three health determinants shown in fig. 13 .1. the most fundamental influence on the health of persons or populations stem from their biological constitution, their ability to ward-off and recover from disease and disabilities. in this context features such as age, gender, life-history and the genetic make-up of people are all important. age is really a matter of being more prone to certain problems as the body ages and experiences what amounts to wear and tear, or in the early years when a baby may not have developed the strength or immunities to fight off the dangers in the local environment. gender is also important, as males or females may be more liable to suffer more from one type of disease or disability than others. the latter certainly live longer on average than the former, although some of the differences are due to greater risk-taking in males and their more unhealthy life-style choices. some families may have flaws in their genetic make-up that make them more prone to certain diseases. in addition, some groups have a greater ability than others to resist certain diseases, not because of inherent racial features, but through centuries of developed immunity to problems caused by some pathogens. others do not have these resistances. the tragic result of these differences not being understood was seen in the european age of exploration when the indigenous peoples of the americas died in their tens of millions from diseases introduced by europeans. table 13 .1 separates medical knowledge from health care since high levels of knowledge does not mean there is 'cure and care' for all individuals in an area, especially while there are many different forms of care and differential access to it. continued research and effective and equitable application in all of these determinants are obviously needed, especially given the need to counteract the severe challenges identified above that come from emerging medical problems. nevertheless, there are still many spatial inequalities in the provision, availability and effectiveness of medical care, not simply within and between cities, but in urban centres in the developing world that have limited facilities and where only the affluent get adequate care. in addition there are increasing worries about accelerating health care costs, with ever more technical procedures and longer treatments for the new chronic diseases. some indication of the escalation of costs can be seen by the fact that the budget of the national health service in the u.k., which provides universal coverage for all citizens, was originally close to $15 billion (£9 billion equivalent) when adjusted for inflation to provide current value in 1948 when the programme began. but the budget is now is now more than 12 times this original amount and is a growing at 4 % a year, with increasing needs from an aging population. although more careful administration and costs savings in hospitals or in care facilities may reduce the figure, the size of the budget and its growth make it unlikely that they will do more than modify the total, meaning that new ways of funding the system, perhaps by larger tax increases will be required. these costs are more difficult to absorb in the less developed world, where access and availability to care is limited. indeed globally, health care availability is inversely related to need (howatt et al. 2012) . this is leading to the development of so-called frugal technologies to solve medical problems at lower costs, using less sophisticated techniques, in order to increase availability in low income areas. another problem that has emerged is the corruption and fraud in some countries. for example the u.s. system is largely a private one, although there are government agencies that provide care and subsidies for the aged (medicare) and the poor (medicade). recent reports suggest fraud could be as high as $ 272 billion annually, which is around 10 % of u.s. medical spending (te 2014). the health care fraud comes from many sources that include: suppliers charging medicade for non-existent supplies; patients claiming benefits to which they are not entitled; doctors or health clinics charging for extra or nonessential services, and filing prescriptions for painkillers and then selling them; people stealing medical cards and using them to bill medicare for services that they are not entitled to. steps are being taken to reduce this enormous leakage of funds, including simplifying the claims systems and providing more vigorous checking. this problem of wasted money may be more obvious in the complicated u.s. system but certainly exists in other jurisdictions and must be reduced so that health care money can be spent more wisely and fairly.the fourth determinant contributing to the health or ill-health of populations come from the life-style choices that people make, although these effects are often cumulative and take place over decades. the strong adherence to the principle that a population in democratic countries should be able to make their own choices reduces the ability to create quick solutions, especially of a coercive nature, so multipronged approaches are usually needed. it has already been noted that the population in the developed world in particular spends too much time indoors. there is a need to redesign areas and to provide leisure spaces where more outdoor activity is encouraged. however, the most obvious pernicious effects of life-style choices come from the increase in the use of addictive substances that drastically reduce the life-span of people using such products. for example, despite the now well-known health hazards of smoking, an estimated 1.2 billion people still use tobacco regularly and the proportions of smokers in even oecd countries is often still over 20 %. this also puts the individuals adjacent to smokers at a high risk of smoke inhalation, either first or second hand, and leads to higher rates of respiratory problems and cancers. similarly, drug use leads to premature deaths and other crime problems. but a more general problem comes from the overuse of alcohol, which leads to liver and heart diseases, as well as contributions to traffic accidents. a recent study revealed that 25 % of russian males die before the age of 55-compared to 7 % in the u. k.-with an average age of death for males at 64, a result of overconsumption of vodka (zaridze and peto et al. 2014) . however there is also evidence that beer and wine in small proportions has a positive effect on health (preedy 2011) and helped reduce mortality rates in historic cities where beer with alcohol killing bacteria was safer than contaminated water.all these problems require determined efforts to produce a reduction of addiction levels. in the case of tobacco use many initiatives have helped reduce the problem, such as: increasing taxes and banning advertising on products, adding health warnings, increasing educational programmes to avoid or reduce use, and banning their use in public spaces-but the constant litigation by tobacco companies has reduced progress. still more effective policies are needed, which probably need a combination of persuasion and regulation. outright prohibition of products drives the issue underground, and criminalizes the behaviour, as shown by the u.s. prohibition of alcohol in 1920-1933. many of the anti-tobacco policies could be applied to reduce binge drinking. the same applies to drug use, where despite billions spent in attacking the sources of supply and distribution the problem is as worse as ever. some have argued that removing criminal prosecutions and treating drug use as a medical, not criminal, problem would help reduce the addictions. but the majority opinion is still against such a change, which means that alternative methods must be found.a more recent health problem associated with life-style relates to dietary choices. changes in the diet of people in many western countries, with overconsumption of sugary drinks and foods rich in fat, red meat, sugar and salt has led to increased obesity, leading to a greater probability of ill-health from a number of diseases. for example, it is currently estimated that one-third of school age children in the u.s.a and two-thirds of american adults are overweight or obese, with far higher rates in afro-american and hispanic women (ogden et al. 2014) . being overweight or obese increases the risk from a variety of chronic diseases, especially heart failure, stroke and diabetes which are among the top causes of mortality with numbers projected to increase substantially in the next 15 years (table 13 .1). this trend is not simply a result of increasing purchasing power-although this makes a huge contributionbut also comes from the relentless advertising by manufacturers to increase demand for their products, especially to children, creating what amounts to an obesogenic environment. in addition far larger portions of most meals and drinks are available compared to 30 years ago, which compounds the problem. another contributing factor is the limited availability of healthy food options in low-income areas.there is little doubt that national legislations are being enacted to address this growing problem. for example, almost a third of the population in mexico were reported as being overweight, 14 % have diabetes and the average daily consumption of sugary drinks was half a litre. this led to mexico's 2013 decision to increase by 10 % the tax on sweetened beverages, using major advertising campaigns to support the policy. in other countries, such as britain, attempts are being made to create agreement partnerships with large retailers to reduce the number of sale prices on products with large portions of fat and sugar, as well as on alcohol products. many also believe it is important to reduce the level of advertising on such products, especially those aimed at children. the mandatory labelling of calorie levels in tinned or packaged products is also taking place, in the hope that the public will become more aware and make more informed choices about what, and how much, they are eating. yet only a multifaceted strategy will solve this increasing crisis as summarized in a who report (2000) on obesity: preventing and managing the global epidemic. unfortunately, limited progress has been achieved since its publication. however, some cities are taking the lead in public health actions such as those relating to diet, before national regulations are developed. for example, alcon (2012) has argued that mayor bloomberg's leadership in promoting healthy initiatives in new york provided one of the first examples of a municipal politician taking controversial stances in this field. this led the health commissioner, thomas farley, to note that: …for way too long public health departments have defined their responsibility as essentially infectious disease control, rather than the improvement of health of the population. (alcon 2012 (alcon , p. 2038 the new york approach has been to implement policies to reduce levels of addiction and improve diets, such as by the banning of smoking in public places and businesses, plastering anti-smoking advertisements on subways, banning transfats in restaurants, and an attempted ban on large sugary drink containers that was struck down by the courts. in addition there has been greater targeting of crime problem areas, for most have high levels of ill-health, as seen in the crime measures described in the discussion on safe cities (chap. 12), and in creating district public health offices in areas of low health, such as one in the bronx.in other countries more and more planning decisions are being made to improve the walkability of subdivisions and adding segregated bicycle paths to increase this form of transport, as described in chaps. 4 and 6. such policies are designed to increase exercise levels, which in turn improves health. but it is overeating the wrong types of food that is the major problem in most areas. in addition, the trend that has reduced play time, sports and exercise periods in schools is being reversed in many cities in an attempt to increase the fitness and therefore health of children, while the increasing popularity of physical health clubs for adults shows that a start has been made on the problem by at least some people. although it is difficult to quantify the effect of exercise, recent surveys indicated that 9 % of premature mortality in noncommunicative diseases is due to low levels of activity, although this varied with the type of disease or illness (lee et al. 2012) , while other researchers argued that participation in sport is associated with a 20-40 % reduction in all causes of mortality (khan et al. 2012 ).behind these first four domains of health factors are four categories of environmental determinants, related to the natural, built, economic and social environments. although the causes of disability and premature mortality often relate to one or more of these factors, a who survey of the environmental effect on ill-health (prüss-üstün and corvelán 2006) estimated that 24 % of the global disease burden (health years lost) and 23 % of the annual deaths are due to what are described as 'modifiable environmental factors', proportions that rise to closer to a third for children. these are described as the factors in the physical and built-environments that can be altered; they exclude factors such as disease vectors in water bodies, impregnated bed nets, as well as social behaviours or life-styles. the who report showed that the burden of environmental effects on premature mortality and ill-health is far higher in the developing countries and varies with disease type. studies of the risk factors of different diseases show that 85 out of the 102 types covered had an environmental factor, although these varied considerably. the highest mortality proportions were seen with diarrhoea (94 %) and malaria (42 %), far higher than the 20 % from lower respiratory causes, although this rises to over 40 % in developing areas, primarily due to fumes from the use of solid fuel fires in enclosed spaces. the risk factor may be greater than previously thought, as recent work is showing that environmental effects can be passed through generations through epigenetic processes whereby genes are turned on or off (tollefsbol 2014) .the first of these environmental influences are those from the physical conditions, features often forgotten when the focus of attention is upon cities in the developed mid-latitude world that have less extreme environments. for example, health is often affected by extreme deviations from the normal climatic regimes, such as in cases of extreme cold or heat and high humidity, where the elderly, young and those in ill-health, die in larger numbers in such weather conditions. some of these problems are made worse because of the heat-island effect of all the concrete, steel and bricks in cities. for example, in july 1995 a chicago heat wave led to temperatures reaching over 40 °c-although the effective temperatures as felt by the body in the sun and in buildings were far higher-resulting in the deaths of over 600 people (klinenburg 2002) . the size of the mortality from this event in one city is worth comparing with other statistics. in the decade after 1992, 2190 americans died from heat-related causes compared to 880 from floods and 150 from hurricanes. although this shows that extreme heat can result in spikes of mortality, it is important not to underestimate the effect of disasters from natural hazards when many thousands, even millions, of people have been killed by major storms, earthquakes, volcanic eruptions as described in chap. 8.the second health effect of the physical environmental comes from various biotic hazards, ranging from snakes to toxic plants, although these are often less of a problem in cities as they are often deliberately eradicated. of greater significance are the diseases spread by contagion in a densely populated area by pathogens developed in, or carried by, various animals or insects. perhaps the best known historic examples come from the various plagues, such as the black death plague that spread from asia via trade routes and peaked in 1348-1350 in europe and led to the deaths of 75-200 million people. this was between 30 and 60 % of europe's population-although it must be noted that the century also saw the end of the medieval warming period and poor harvests which led to food shortages and a severely weakened the population (herlithy 1997) . more modern examples range from the previous descriptions of the rapid global spread of hiv-aids, which contrasts with the containment of sars.the mortality rates and ill-health effects of many tropical diseases are still far too high. many, not all, now have cures, but these are not often available in many cities and regions. one of the biggest health problems is still associated with malaria, spread by parasites carried by certain types of female mosquitoes in tropical and subtropical areas. although not in the top 20 causes of death in table 13 .1 it has been argued that the 0.66 million deaths estimated by the who represent gross underestimates, with the true figure being closer to 1.24 million, let alone the debilitating effects on many people (murray et al. 2012) . certainly medicines such as quinine, several recent drugs, and the use of nets over beds at dusk and night when mosquitoes are flying have reduced the risk of the disease. so has the draining of marshes and standing water pools in urban areas which reduce the number of places where the insects breed. snowden's (2006) detailed study of the effects of malaria in italy until it was finally eradicated in 1962 showed how the disease had previously led to low productivity, premature death and economic backwardness in the country. it needed a multi-pronged state strategy from the early twentieth century to remove the scourge, one that involved medical breakthroughs, swamp draining, rural clinics and education for preventative measures. in tropical areas the hoped-for final solution by chemical spraying of marshes with ddt in the 1960s proved illusory, as the parasites have bred resistance to particular drugs and the sprays used led to the poisoning of the water which created other problems for a whole range of birds and animals. so despite determined efforts to reduce its effects, through new drugs, swamp draining and more recently through experiments with the mass inoculation of populations in some areas to reduce the number of people acting as hosts to the parasite, malaria still remains a significant cause of ill-health and premature deaths. this may get worse as some of the malaria-giving parasites are becoming resistant to the drugs used to treat them, which makes new treatment discoveries a priority.these are only a few of the examples of death and disability caused by factors from the physical environment, especially from the hotter wetter environments where a large number of other serious diseases lurk, such as dengue, yellow fever, typhoid etc. some people in these areas have increased tolerance to these infections, but many of these diseases have an increased ability to harm people who have travelled from other environments without the appropriate medical treatment. one of the big emerging problems is the effect of global warming. this will probably lead to lower yields from current crop varieties in an aggregate sense, leading to food shortages given world population growth, unless new varieties can be developed. in addition, the warming will allow many flies and insects, and hence the pathogens they carry, to spread further north, infecting people with little immunity. so malaria may be spread again to europe, as west nile disease is already becoming common in north america. the fact that diseases, such as african dengue and chikungunya fever, have recently spread to the caribbean, probably in the blood of an infected airline passenger and then into the local mosquito population, means that these and other infectious diseases are likely to occur in more northerly locations, causing additional health problems.the second set of environmental factors that affect health come from poor manmade or built environments, issues identified as causing high mortalities that led to the first healthy city movement. progress in built-environment improvements, including the infrastructures such as transport systems, to reduce their negative outputs has not been halted, at least in the developed world. for example, many public sector high-rises have been razed because of high crime rates and poor construction (coleman 1985) . in terms of harmful outputs from cities, chap. 6 has described the major improvements in the technical ability to more safely process and use the effluent in sewage processing plants, while water can be re-cycled for human use. in addition, instead of new expensive solutions to bring water from long distances, a series of new devices for reducing run-off and using this water mean that new water conservation measures are being used in some jurisdictions that will help water shortage in drier climates. however, these nineteenth century advances, let alone those of recent years, are still limited in the cities of the less developed world, for the who (2012b) estimates that 1.1 billion people still lack access to clean water and 2.6 billion do not have even a basic latrine, although have been major improvements in these basic sanitation and water supply facilities in the last decade. many of these people live in rural areas. but very unhealthy conditions linked to poor water supply and limited sanitation also exist in many urban places in developing countries, especially in the informal shanty towns that are the homes to many in the towns and cities of developing countries. one result of poor sanitation is the annual death toll of 1.8 million from diarrhoea, currently fifth in the who table of annual deaths. although it is estimated to fall to ninth position, it may still claim 1.6 million deaths a year in 2030, even though it is relatively easily treatable by modern medical techniques.health problems in cities are not simply a result of poorly constructed buildings and infrastructures; there are often health problems associated with the use of manufactured substances whose poisonous side-effects are often underestimated. some of these were identified in chap. 12 (safe cities), such as the lead in gasoline that produced more toxic car exhaust emissions that have been shown to affect brain development and subsequently i.q levels and increased crime rates (reyes 2007; markus et al. 2010 ). more apparent are the deaths and disabilities from road accidents, which are among the most important causes of premature deaths (davies 1997) . the who's global study on road safety (who 2013a) showed that 1.4 million people die on the roads annually, projected to increase to 1.8 million by 2030, with somewhere between 20 and 50 million more suffering serious injuries today (table 13 .1). certainly there are signs of improvement in the mortality rates in countries such as the u.s.a., with deaths now down to 34,000 a year in 2012, from levels of 54,000 in the early 1970s, which is still a rate of 1.08 deaths per 1000 people a year and the size of a small country town. even this figure is unacceptable. in any case there is little room for complacency in world terms. after all, 91 % of the fatalities are now in low and middle income countries, places that contain only half of the world vehicles so far. this high proportion is because only 28 countries (with 7 % of the world population) have compulsory road safety standards in five critical areas: drink and driving regulations, speeding, failure to have seat belts, child-retaining devices, and the enforced use of helmets for motorcyclists and cyclists. in many countries mortality rates could be reduced if the following problems were solved: lack of driving tests; safe crossing places and pavements for pedestrians; refusal to obey traffic signals and adherence to the designation of one side of the road for traffic in one direction; erratic driving behaviour; and limited effective ambulance services that can quickly administer care and remove traffic victims to hospitals. although mortality and injury rates have dropped in most of the developed world there is still room for progress in their cities, such as better designed roads and junctions, especially at high traffic accident areas, effective laws to reduce distracted driving, segregated bicycle lanes, more public transit, and, as some cities are showing, saving lives by reducing speed limits in residential areas to 30 km/h or below. improved transport systems and the use of bicycles also provide more healthy options, with the latter in particular providing exercise.the man-made urban environments also affect health through the higher noise levels and the stress that many people feel in these areas, often combined with an absence of meaningful supportive relationships, issues usually dealt with under the social determinants of heath category. more specifically, health is also affected by all the pollutants generated by human numbers and their activities, from faecal matter to noxious products of industrial process and in household goods, poisonous chemicals and nuclear outputs in some places, and to the fumes and particulates from burning fossil fuels (epa 1999). these not only cause local health problems, but by altering the atmosphere are threatening to alter the climate of the planet. many of these have already been described in the sustainable development discussion (chap. 5). a who report (2014a) on pollution levels in 1600 cities of the world maintains that air pollution-both indoor due to stoves and fires and outdoor because of vehicle and industrial emissions from fossil fuel-leads to over 7 million deaths annually from these sources. although the indian government disputes the figures, the source shows that delhi now has worse air quality than beijing, as measured in small airborne particles that are less than 2.5 micrometers in size (pm25) which are associated with increased rates of bronchitis, lung cancer and heart disease.however, not all aspects of a created environment are damaging. the addition of parks, green spaces, recreation trails and nature areas etc., have long been regarded as having a positive effects on humans as the discussion on the relationship between green space and health in the chapter on green cities has shown (chap. 4). such areas provide an antidote, in at least some cities, to the increase in urban densities and indoor living.many investigators, from the nineteenth century social commentators to the present (adler and ostrove 1999) , have shown that people living in disadvantaged socioeconomic circumstances suffer more ill-health and earlier death rates than others. however the adoption of the 'care and cure' medical approach has tended to blame some health problems on life-style choices, rather than the wider structural circumstances of their life in the socio-economic environment that negatively affect their health. these components of disadvantage are now usually labelled as the social determinants of health, with wilkinson and marmot (1999, 2003) using empirical research results to identify ten significant factors in causing ill-health, summarized as: the social gradient, unemployment, work conditions, food, stress, early life, social exclusion, social support, addictions and transport. but it does seem useful to separate the factors into what amount to economic and social factors, rather than having one long list, while the addictions and transport factors have already been dealt with in the previous discussions on life-style and man-made environment respectively.one of the most powerful explanations of ill-health among the economic determinants is described by wilkinson and marmot (1999) as the 'social gradient'. this means that people who are in the lowest income brackets have shorter lives than people in higher income brackets, as seen in the canadian example in fig. 13 .2, features that also apply to more ill-health. the pattern is much more pronounced in less developed countries. less money for food, heating, adequate clothing, ability to pay for and access to medical care, knowledge of how to look after oneself, are all contributory factors, but the lack of education and hence ability to improve one's position in the social hierarchy is also a major contributing factor to this general trend. populations that have higher levels of educational and occupational qualifications tend to have lower levels of dementia, indicating that there is some kind of cognitive reserve that counteracts the effect of this neuro-degeneration (prince and acosti et al. 2012 ). however, it was previously noted that the modification of other life-style factors, such as physical inactivity, could drastically reduce the incidence of the disease (norton et al. 2014) . another powerful social determinant of ill-health is the unemployment rate, as is limited work satisfaction and difficult work conditions. in general, people at the lower end of the social gradient also have longer periods of poorer health in their later years due to various causes. rates of various mental diseases are also higher in cities.the level of nutrition is also critical in improving health. the increasing numbers of food additives, such as excessive salt, sugar and food preservatives found in many products in supermarkets and fast food outlets, have led to higher incidences of heart diseases and obesity in particular. certainly some of these issues are a result of poor life-style choices by disadvantaged people, but they often lack local sources of healthy food. a good diet, with a variety of vegetables and fruit, and adequate amounts of each, is essential to maintaining health, for malnutrition leads to ill-health and also vitamin deficiencies which can lead to diseases. there is still controversy over these issues, but a meta-analysis of research findings confirmed a linear relationship between stroke risk and low fruit and vegetable consumption, with latest research suggesting that well over six portions of fruit and vegetables a day are needed to obtain the necessary vitamins (qu et al. 2014) . nutritious food may not be available in disadvantaged areas as shown by the concept of food deserts, areas in poor inner city areas that are without adequate food outlets that supply healthy and fresh foods, a characteristic that was described in chap. 4. health education may improve the choices made, but this is rarely as effective as expected, unless it starts at an early age in school, but even then family food choices may reduce possible progress.the presence of large social gradients or economic inequality in many countries and within urban areas also means that many people also lack the economic power to improve their shelter, or clothing, which then affects their state of health. for most of the twentieth century better wages, welfare measures and social provision led to a decline in inequality levels in developed countries. but as chap. 3 has shown, the past 20-30 years have seen levels of inequality in income and wealth rising in developed countries, while the explosive growth of urban places in the less developed world has led to larger areas of poor squatter settlements. progress towards healthier cities requires more attention to the provision of basic needs in food, shelter, education, etc., and to improve the capabilities of the disadvantaged population to better their own condition and-as addressed by just city initiatives (chap. 3)-giving more people a voice in decisions that affect their areas. some of these needs can be addressed by municipal actions, for example: in shelter by subsidized housing or community based non-profit housing agencies; in nutrition, through organizations providing food banks for those in need; or through planning decisions that take the health impact of a displaced population into account. however, the most fundamental changes are probably still made by national or state policy through taxation, welfare, social provisions and ecological regulations to remove the structural disadvantage of those at the low end of the social gradient that are created by societal not personal factors.a series of interacting factors that may be described as the lived-experiences of people are usually called the social determinants of health. a key factor is the presence of strong supportive networks of family or friends, which are correlated with better health. the opposite applies to those who are subject to social isolation, which may be by choice, but more likely a result of the absence of friends or family, perhaps due to age, poverty, disability, poor self-esteem. poorer health is also found in those suffering social exclusion, especially discrimination on ethnic or religious grounds. indeed, loneliness and social isolation-which is different to depression-has been shown to increase the propensity to functional decline and ill-health, as well as increasing the chances of earlier mortality (cacioppo and patrick 2009; perissinotto et al. 2012 ). in addition, there is the problem of stress, which comes from the workplace as well as in homes and neighbourhoods, and is now accepted as having a biological effect.hormones associated with the chronic stress burden protect the body in the short run and promote adaptation (allostasis), but in the long run, the burden of chronic stress causes changes in the brain and body that can lead to disease (allostatic load and overload). brain circuits are plastic and remodelled by stress to change the balance between anxiety, mood control, memory, and decision making. such changes may have adaptive value in particular contexts, but their persistence and lack of reversibility can be maladaptive. (mcewen 2012, p. 1) these social determinants create a poorer quality of life, with lower self-esteem and well-being. but others exist. for example, it is also being recognised that a healthier life is more likely when there are high levels of positive nurturing, such as when children are given a more supportive start to life through good education, nutrition and a caring environment with limited exposure to stress or violent behaviour (brooks-gunn et al. 1993) . this means helping mothers as well as their children to develop in such environments. in later life, worries about safety, let alone actual physical violence, are also important contributory factors in ill-health. in addition, some beliefs and values, such as refusal to accept certain types of medical care because of religious beliefs/prejudices, are additional negative factors.the extent to which there are supportive facilities in an area, from quality schools, to churches and community associations or the provision of home-help, can also create more caring social environments in an area, creating the social capi-tal that provides support, although these may be considered as part of an area's infrastructure. added to such problems from these essentially empirical characteristics, are those that come from the affective dimensions, which deal with attitudes and feelings. areas of high crime with social and health disadvantages have at least 10 types of negative attitudinal characteristics that can negatively affect well-being. these were labelled as areas or 'terrains' of: social inadequacy; despair and limited goals; exclusion and discrimination; acceptance of decay and destruction; anxiety and fear; spontaneity of actions and emotions; indifference to others; low restraint and self-control; anti-social attitudes; and peer group (gang) allegiance (davies 2004) . all these attitudes reduce the well-being and the health of people in areas where these attitudes are found, and needed to be countered if progress is to be made in improving the lives of people affected by such features.many social commentators, from those of the nineteenth century to the present, have suggested that being poor and stressed seems to literally make one sick. in addition, the effects of poverty, stress, exposure to violence, poor nutrition and limited affection is also known to lead to far lower acquisitions of early language skills in children and hence subsequent intellectual progress. also, fonagy (2003) has argued that the usual socialization of young children 'out of aggression' that occurs in nurturing parenting is limited in disadvantaged areas, producing a rapid and irrational response to perceived threats. this type of primitive, unconscious reaction to stimuli based on previous experiences, bypassing any rational evaluation, has been identified by the cognitive psychologist aaron beck (1999) as the main basis of an inadequate control of emotions, which leads people to violence in subsequent life. increasingly, it is recognized that these health and behavioural associations are not a matter of life-styles choices, although they may contribute to the situation. what amounts to a biological embedding of the effects of the early environment occurs through epigenetic processes that affect the influence of genes, while it was earlier observed (sect. 13.2.2.8) that recent research is showing a strong relationships between vitamin d deficiency in pregnant mothers and increasing rates of autoimmune diseases in their offspring.stimulated by the work of professor elizabeth blackburn who was awarded a nobel prize in 2009 for her work on the way that the social environment has embedded biological effects, the mechanisms of these connections are now being explored in more detail, as seen in a special issue of proceedings of the american academy of sciences (boyce et al. 2012) and in a book edited by tollefsbol (2014) that reviews transgenerational epigenesis effects. one of the ways in which this environmentalembodiment relationship occurs is by the shortening of telomeres, which are rather like a cap on the end of chromosomes that protects the dna during replication (epel et al. 2004 ). this reduction is associated with higher levels of ill-health and predisposition to many diseases in later life. a recent pioneering study of 9 year old afro-american children who had suffered chronic stress from their upbringing in poverty, unstable families and who were subject to harsh parenting and maternal depression, revealed a shortening of their telomeres compared to children from more affluent and nurturing backgrounds (mitchell et al. 2014) . so these disadvantaged children are likely to experience what amounts to premature aging and morbidity through degraded physical functions that make them more prone to disease. but the effect was not uniform. this association between the social environment and telomere length (tl) was also moderated by the extent of genetic variation in the subjects within the neurotransmitter pathways of the serotonin and dopamine genes that control the extent of pleasure and excitement responses. so some of the subjects had a genetically influenced higher likelihood of sensitivity. it was shown that those with highest sensitivity levels were more affected by their environment, having the shortest tl when exposed to these stressful environments. but they had the longest tl when exposed to advantaged environments. the researchers suggest that this points to the presence of a genetic predisposition in the responses to the social environment. the children with high sensitivity levels get even worse off from the poor nurturing and environment, but have greater benefits from better conditions. yet those with limited genetic sensitivity may not be so affected by the negative social environment, which may explain why some people survive the highly disadvantaged area and their resilience enables them to subsequently flourish. yet the general effect is that the children have their biological structure damaged by the stressful social environment of their upbringing, leading to future health problems. these findings mean that children in these areas are not simply disadvantaged because of locally poor educational opportunities to improve their life. their negative environment effectively ages them and makes them more liable to ill-health. this recent research provides justification for early childhood interventions providing effective nurturing, creating less stressful environments to reduce the probability of what amounts to physical damage in epigenetic processes. the research has moved the known correlations between childhood disadvantage and future ill-health to causal relationships, although not all will be affected to the same extent.a final domain of influential factors affecting health is more wide-ranging in the sense that it shows the cultural context-health connection, illustrating how the culture of societies-which includes political power and relationships-affects all of the other determinants. figure 13 .1 shows that cultural factors can impede or improve each of the various health determinant categories. for example, there have been many cases where a religious or sub-cultural group in countries or cities have refused to believe in particular medical treatments, while new medical advances have also been resisted by some practitioners. the adoption of malaria nets over beds in east africa is a good example of the former. the uptake of nets supplied by international agencies in the 1990s was extremely slow at first despite overwhelming evidence showing their effectiveness. the white nets, however, were deemed too similar to the shrouds used to cover the dead, so they were not used. when the colour was changed from white to green they were quickly adopted by the local population. there is also a cultural-political background to the level of medical facilities. governments may provide less or more money for medical care. in terms of life-style choices, regulations on access to addictive substances make it easier or harder to obtain these unhealthy substances.the impact of each factor varies according to the various circumstances in and between urban places. indeed all these factors combine in various proportions to make significant place differences in the health of income groups and areas, especially in an urban context, between and within diverse towns and cities. the intra-urban differences often lead to an ecology of health disadvantage within cities, creating what has been called an urban health penalty (greenberg 1991). these unhealthy areas are characterised by limited health care facilities, people with poor life-style choices, substandard residences and often polluted conditions, low incomes, few economic prospects and a stressful, unsafe and socially isolated life. these conditions are made worse by feelings of hopelessness and the negative biological embedding of the harsh social environment. increasing concern about the persistence of these pockets of ill-health has been one of the reasons why a new approach to the health care structure of many cities was developed.towards the end of the twentieth century, the challenges associated with improving the health of the population led many to the realization it was not appropriate to depend only on treating our way out of ill-health through the work of the medical profession alone. new forms of organizations and initiatives were also needed as well as a wider ecological view. it led the world health authority (who) to create the healthy cities programme in 1986 (kenzer 1999) . to some extent this was a broader version of the ottawa charter of 1986 that had established criteria for making canadian cities healthier. although initially restricted to the developed world, the healthy cities programme spread to cities in all parts of the world from 1994 and by the end of 2013 comprises a network of over a thousand cities worldwide, with both continental organizations as well as national ones, such as the 29 cities that comprise the u.k. network. the most successful healthy cities programmes maintain momentum from five values: a clear vision to promote health; the commitment of local community members; the ownership of policies; a wide array of stakeholders; and a process for institutionalizing the programme (who 1998). it is left to adopters to organize their own structures on the basis that governance varies widely between countries and locals know their own needs and priorities. the risk of this autonomy is that some cities lack the resources to develop good guidance and policies. to counteract this, membership of this network allows cities to learn from one another and to use 'best practice' ideas pioneered by other centres. the influence of this programme has also led many non-members to review their own approaches to improving health care, in which six major new trends are prominent, namely: creating health impact assessments; new political engagements; raising public awareness; adding community engagement; improving private participation; and finally, a more specific spatial targeting to improve conditions in persistent areas of ill-health.one way in which local governments have become more engaged in health issues can be seen in initiatives that focus on the bureaucratic deficiencies of particular departments with respect to health issues. for example, planning decisions have rarely taken public health issues into account in reviewing and approving development applications, except in zoning decisions and insuring that such issues as roads, sewers, water and other utilities are provided. however, towards the end of the twentieth century new interests emerged that stressed the need to assess the health effects of public projects on the residents of cities in particular. in part this may be seen as an extension of the increasing use of environmental impact assessments. these were designed to investigate the physical and biotic impacts of new developments and were given statutory approval in many countries as relevant issues to be considered in decisions made by government planning authorities. initial support for the health impact assessment (hia) concept came from the who's concerns over the effectiveness of new sanitation projects in developing countries which led the organization to produce a review of procedures for analysing the effects of new development on health (birley 1995) . a more general impetus came from the gradual realization that 'health' cannot be considered in isolation. in some regions it has become a vital consideration in all types of development, especially in terms of changes planned for the urban environment. this can be seen in article 152 of the 1997 amsterdam e.u treaty which states:a high level of human health protection shall be enshrined in the definition and implementation of all community policies and activities. in europe the specific concept of the health impact assessment (hia) emerged from worries that public development proposals were not being analysed for health impacts (scott-samuel 1996) . for example, concerns about noise and other health impacts over manchester airport's second runway proposal in the 1990s led to guidelines for health assessments, soon after, the u.k. government committed itself to using hias as an important strategy in development reviews as part of the need to identifying and reducing health inequalities (scott-samuel 1998) .the so-called gothenburg consensus that emerged after a meeting of the who in the swedish city in 1999 attempted to bring some order into the evaluation process by identifying key features that were essential in the development of a hia (who 1999) . in addition to the general desire to maximize health outcomes they stressed the need for five values: democracy, so that all people can participate and help formulate policies; equity, to involve people from all walks of life; sustainable development in the long and short term; the ethical and transparent use of evidence, which recognizes that qualitative and non-scientific evidence can also be important in assessing impacts; and a comprehensive approach to health that considers the physical, mental and social well-being of all sectors of society and their involvement. many of these values mirror the arguments used by proponents of a just city approach to development within cities (chap. 3) as well as those seeking to create greener, more sustainable places (chaps. 4-6). it was also agreed in gothenburg that a hia should also include four major elements: reviews of the evidence that showed the effect of any new development policy or programme on the health of a population; consideration of the opinions, expectations and experience of those affected; recognition of the need for more informed understanding by both decisionmakers and the public of the effects of the proposed policies; and proposals for adjustment or other options to maximize the positive effects of any policy, and to minimize their negative consequences. these elements illustrate the seriousness of the desire to take public opinion into account and to consider views from the various stakeholders.a review of 88 hias from 1996 to 2004 (davenport et al. 2005) revealed that not all were successful. it was concluded that only when certain conditions applied were they successful in influencing policy, namely: when there was institutional support for solving health problems; when key decision-makers were involved in the design of analyses; and when there was a statutory framework within government procedures for using a hia. without these conditions, various bureaucratic evaluation procedures just avoided the issues. yet hias are now becoming as familiar as environmental reviews in some countries. a good example of the way in which health concerns raised by a community obtained crucial institutional support from a city's public health department (phd) can be seen in the trinity plaza proposal in inner city san francisco in 2003, although it was not technically a hia. the planning department supported the proposal for the redevelopment of the trinity plaza area near downtown in 2003, which involved plans to convert 360 rentcontrolled housing units into 1700 market-rate units in several high rise towers. it ignored the fact that the development was one of the latest gentrification projects that involved a major displacement of low income people who had lived in the area for decades (corburn 2009 ). the project led to a great deal of community anger and a pressure group to oppose the proposals. the mission anti-displacement coalition (mac) created what they called a people's plan to retain affordable family housing, preserve local jobs and asked for community oversight over land use changes. fortunately for the community's case the public health department in the city had moved away from only dealing with its traditional biomedical and sanitation focus and started to address the social determinants of health in the city, setting up workshops to learn about community concerns and providing advice about ways of improving areas. this led the phd to intervene in the trinity plaza project on the side of the community, supporting its view that the displacement of the existing residents would cause financial hardship, given higher rents in other locations, and ensure the loss of community relationships and stress to the individuals who would be evicted, leading to increased levels of ill-health from these social determinants. the gradual acceptance of the health consequences of this project eventually led to discussions between the phd, developers, planners and community activists, which led to a revised proposal in which 12 % of the project would be allocated to below market-rent housing, with existing occupants keeping their homes at current rates. in corburn's (2009, p. 130) succinct phrase: "the department of public health had entered the world of urban development and staked-out a new space for human health". although there are still problems about the continued gentrification of the mission area, this san francisco example provides a useful exemplar of the way in which health issues are being increasingly seen as relevant in planning reviews of new developments, irrespective of whether there is a formal hia process in the cities.the need for greater political engagement is another major principle of the who's healthy city movement. hopefully this would lead to the allocation of more finance and resources to improve health promotion and care. this new emphasis on local political involvement in health care, instead of only medical decision-making, has often taken time to achieve in many cities, often with limited initial results. for example, liverpool in england moved from setting up a healthy city committee in 1988, to a healthy city team (hct) in 1994, which produced a new plan for liverpool in co-operation with the local primary care trust (otgaar et al. 2011) . this trust was one of the uk's 153 similar bodies under the national health system that forms the first level of health care via family doctors and dentists, etc. unlike the initial committee, the team had the skilled personnel to develop not only a vision statement, but a plan for achieving their goals, and consulted widely with citizens and medical professions and various other community groups. however, its plan was not simply about better health care and health promotion, but also related to how these would help to achieve greater business prosperity, social justice and environmental protection in the city. despite its progress the hct was wound up in 2000, in part because it seemed to need the greater involvement of the traditional medical professions. it was replaced by a new organization, essentially a new partnership, which is called liverpool first, to plan and monitor health care in the city. this is now the joint responsibility of the liverpool municipal council and the local medical primary care trust. this organization has a wider range of stakeholders, ensuring input from many local organizations, from community groups, private businesses and various public sector services, thereby creating a more coordinated approach involving many people. this development in liverpool has been duplicated elsewhere, which means that the planning of health care in britain is no longer the domain of only the medical profession in those urban areas that have adopted this model. the local authority connection means that there is a more democratic basis, while the involvement of many other agencies and groups provides additional ideas and skills, to make a more comprehensive approach to improving the health care of residents in cities.new members of the healthy city network have to create a health profile to show their situation in comparison with other centres. this creates greater public aware-ness of the level of health in particular cities and frequently leads those with poor profiles to take steps to find ways of improving their record. for example, one of the reasons why liverpool joined the healthy city programme was its recognition that it had one of the worse health records in the u.k. where life expectancy at birth was 74 years, compared to 79 in edinburgh and 78 years in london. only glasgow with a life expectancy of 71 years had a worse record among major british cities. also, over half of liverpool's population lived in the bottom 10 % of deprived british areas, places that were classified by measures of multiple socio-economic deprivation, while a quarter of the population had long-term debilitating illnesses (lpct 2007) . part of these problems stemmed from liverpool's decline since the 1930s, when its population was over 800,000, and the poor health habits of many in the population. this poor health profile was not only a problem for its people but also created a negative image, which had the effect of repelling rather than attracting innovative migrants or businesses. so health promotion and participation campaigns were initiated which involved the general public as well as a range of health care and social service professionals. in some ways this decision to attract public attention is another version of the comments made earlier in the chapter about the way that the health of towns association in britain in the mid nineteenth century encouraged discussion of the mortality crises in various towns that often led to major local improvements.the so-called big health debate, which took place in liverpool in 2006-2007, provides a good example of this process. it began by surveys to find major topics of health concern, followed by workshops involving medical professionals and representatives of the general population, then focus groups that worked on particular problems that had emerged, as well as analyses of the use of health facilities (lpct 2007) . one of the findings was that the general public felt they lacked the power to take control over many parts of their life, especially in health care, and were critical of being unable to influence decisions that affected them. so there was clearly an unmet need to involve the public in the discussions and the decisions being taken over health care.for most of the twentieth century there were few examples of effective local community engagement in urban health planning under the older top-down approaches dominated by medical professionals. usually the so-called 'community engagement' process involved people being informed about the decisions of medical planners after the main decisions had been taken, or were invited to attend public meetings which pretended to discuss issues of concern but were really designed to reduce resistance to changes. however the healthy cities goal of stressing the need for more democracy and community participation is leading to a different approach to previous practices. in the case of british cities such as liverpool the new attitudes were encouraged by a national government white paper called our health, our care and our say (dh 2006) , which outlined:the need for a wider range of community-based services, offering patients choice, convenience, fairness and a much better experience of the nhs. the white paper also focuses on prevention and the need for the nhs to work in partnership with local authorities, voluntary agencies and local people so we are all working to build the foundations for better health in local communities. (lpct 2007, p. ii) the result was a model in which more community care was envisaged, given the fact that many are living longer, but often with debilitating illnesses that need local and home care, not hospital stays. also a new type of participation was proposed to create more transparency and openness to discuss issues of public concern. it also anticipated capacity-building in the population, by improving their knowledge of the issues and encouraging their contribution to the debates, a process in which their opinions were carefully evaluated. this led to what was described in liverpool as 'the big debates' about health care. they revealed that a major concern of many people was about their limited access to health care. this is a problem found in many cities, as decisions about the locations of both the offices of doctors or hospitals were usually made without effective public consultation. indeed at a more general level it is remarkable how many hospitals in the developed world seem to be located close to wealthy areas, or have limited rapid public transport access since they are in inaccessible locations, while physician's offices are few and far between in poor areas, illustrating a failure of the market to serve all the population. indeed few countries have adopted the dutch model of planning which ensures that the major facilities that serve the public, or have large public use, such as hospitals, have to be located on major transit routes to maximize their accessibility.the health surveys in liverpool showed that people were prepared to accept the emerging trend of the increasing concentration of specialized medical facilities so long as basic facilities were locally available within a short travel time. research results in a major report showed the locations of various health facilities and mapped the travel distances and times to these facilities from various points in the city. geographically, it demonstrated that many residential areas had either few health care facilities or limited access to them. incorporation of these results into discussions on how to solve these problems of access led to a new and comprehensive approach for health care in the region, with the subtitle the 'outside of hospital strategy', which has created a four tiered system of health care in the metropolitan area (lpct 2007) . at the local level are the general practices, with single or multiple doctors serving 1800-18,000 patients. above these, 20-25 neighbourhood heath centres are planned to serve populations of 20,000-25,000 and are located in places that could be reached by public transport in 15 min. these centres are anchored by doctors and health care professionals but also contain other social and community services. the third level consists of nhs treatment centres serving up 100-150,000 people that are located so they can be reached within 30 min by public transport. these provide primary and secondary care, such as minor surgeries, diagnostic tests, counselling and therapies, as well as outpatient clinics. the fourth level consists of the main hospitals serving 300-500,00 people that carry out major surgeries and other specialised medical procedures and care, in which some facilities concentrate on particular medical areas, such children's care or mental problems. this four-tiered system is designed to create a more integrated and community-based delivery system based on the problems of various areas, conforming to the goals of greater choice, access, fairness and convenience in a national white paper (ds 2006) . also some of the centres provided a new set of jobs within areas that previously had few medical facilities. the second and third levels of treatment centres made access to public transport a major location principle, showing the need to cater for people without cars, while the addition of these new, more local units was designed reduce the growing pressure on the emergency wards of major hospitals.liverpool also showed the way in which more effective public involvement in hospital re-planning can occur, as seen in the case of alder hey children's hospital in the west darby suburb, which treats over 200,000 patients each year, many from other primary trusts outside liverpool (freeman 2006) . additional new hospital buildings were built and the adjacent decaying and unsafe springfield park was rejuvenated-with walking trails, sports pitches and greater surveillance to improve safety-in addition to creating better connections for pedestrians and cyclists to surrounding houses and retail facilities to the south. the design and location of the new buildings, both their interior and exterior plans, were discussed in public meetings, with local citizens providing ideas and modifications of initial ideas, which led to a feeling of positive involvement with the site's redevelopment. determined efforts were also made to ensure the project would be more sustainable, such as in building construction, energy use and creating links with local transport facilities. moreover, instead of the hospital being simply a place of 'care and cure', the hospital trained its staff to help patients and their parents adopt a healthier diet and life-style, providing greater health promotion in an area where premature deaths and disability due to poor life-style choices is far too high (otgaar et al. 2009, pp. 49-51) . these examples show how public engagement moved from the top-down, informationimparting style, to one of genuine attempts to find out the major problems that concerned patients and the public, but also to involve the local residents, as well as experts in various aspects of health care, design and accessibility, in a genuine interactive process of consultation and engagement.in a more social context there is also evidence of increasing interest in developing local community interactions. for example, in helsinki the city developed a series of 'neighbourhood houses' staffed by a core of city coordinators, but also by many volunteers. they organize physical and social activities, primarily, but not exclusively, for young people to provide them with new opportunities, such as sports, and in doing so guide them away from anti-social activities (lafond et al. 2003) . in some ways these 'houses', managed by the health and safe city advisory committee in the city, provide a contemporary version of older community associations found in many western canadian cities that arose spontaneously (davies and townshend 1994) . however in these cases there was no anti-crime agenda as in finland; most started with sports activities for children but added additional social functions for adults, or various youth clubs, and often generated funds to build their own community hall with help from city and provincial grants. historically, of course, even older community-based social centres and youth clubs were created by churches, where parish halls provided places for local interaction and facilities. however, the decreasing numbers of church members and rival denominations in many cities has meant that their ability to act on behalf of the local area has been drastically reduced, although many still provide support for their church members or space for other groups. there can be little doubt that there is a need for more secular local organizations like the helsinki approach, or the contemporary ymca and ywca that have evolved out of their christian origin. all these local centres provide important places for social and recreational contact, not simply for the youth, but as centres that may also alleviate the loneliness of many old people in cities.although the objective of these more comprehensive health initiatives has been to involve as many stakeholders as possible, the contribution of the private business sector in health has not been as widespread as it could be, although many of the schemes discussed above do have representatives from private businesses. part of the problem is that some firms do provide extra medical benefits for their workers, and feel that this is enough. others, especially in europe, provide some employees, usually at managerial levels, with stays in spas, presumably to recover from the stress of decision-making!. hence such firms are reluctant to also contribute to general health care schemes for which the benefits seem to be beyond their immediate interests. in some cities there are signs that private firms see the advantages in participating in schemes to promote better health, especially when there are new business opportunities. this is certainly the case in helsinki where the promotion of new technology, a focus on health and new organizations to promote healthy living, has led to many initiatives (otgaar et al. 2011) . for example, forum virium (fv) was established with support from major national organizations and companies to promote and create new digital services in several areas, including health care. this led to a photo and diary service for day-care centres to provide parents with images of their children's activities, a service that has subsequently spread to many countries, creating a new business venture. in addition, fv helped create the healthy helsinki programme that initiated several ventures to improve health through citizen empowerment, such as a mobile health project. set up with help from telecom companies, it enabled participants to monitor their leisure and exercise levels, getting positive feedback through mobile devices if they increased their levels in attempts to change their behaviour. elsewhere the development of computerized personal health records, together with interactive mobile devices, has not only enabled users to store their own data but provide access to training, life-style and nutrition advice while in a neighbouring town it led to the monitoring of the growth in children, which identified abnormalities. more generally there are increasing numbers of smart applications for health-related issues being provided for use by smart or mobile phones, such as regular personal contacts to reduce isolation. also, organizations such as the toronto rehabilitation institute (tri) are not only treating patients with long term disabilities from injury or aging, but actively pursue commercialization of their new technical products, such as their slingserter and robonurse for lifting patients (tri). they are also in the forefront of research in providing assistance to people with cognitive impairment through smart alert systems to remind people to turn-off stoves and taps, and how and when to complete many regular routines, through sensing devices; in addition, like the japanese, they are also building robots to help with these tasks. such devices also provide help and relief to carers, but enable people to live longer in their homes rather than being forced into homes for the aged or hospitals, which dramatically increase costs of care.although there are clear business opportunities for companies to provide the hardware and software for such new monitoring systems, there is always the danger of intruding on personal privacy. however, municipal bureaucrats are often wary of getting involved since they have their functions to perform and the public benefits of some programmes may not be easy to evaluate. nevertheless, the new electronic technologies can be used to monitor health more effectively than in the past and more private company involvement is not only possible, but needed in healthy city initiatives so long as personal privacy is not compromised.in the last decade of the twentieth century national governments of developed countries, often stimulated by the who healthy cities programme, started to emphasize policies that compel, not simply advise, all levels of government and their agencies to help reduce health inequalities, especially in cities. for example, in london it led to the creation of a london health commission composed of representatives from the various boroughs and organizations such as the nhs, transport and the local development agency (lhc 2008) . this commission was designed to ensure that health concerns are involved in all the tasks of the greater london authority and the 33 boroughs within it that have statutory authority for a wide range of services and functions. previously, local governments and the primary care trusts of the nhs did not consider the health impacts of their various planning and development projects. this change meant there was now a statutory obligation for the mayor of london to act to reduce the inequalities. the health commission developed a strategy called living well in london that ensures that investments in housing and public spaces are made to create an environment that helps people make more healthy choices and promotes links between the many agencies-from housing, to police, social services and organizations dealing with drug and alcohol abuse and homelessness-that may help to improve the determinants of health. in some deprived areas new multi-functional facilities have been developed, such as the hub in canning town, a large building that houses a health centre with doctors and nurses as well as a pharmacy, with many other services indirectly linked to health and community improvement, such as a training centre, an internet café, community meeting rooms, and a safety group etc. in other boroughs of london local strategic partnerships have been established to improve the quality of life and health of residents. the board of these organizations include representatives from the public sector, including the nhs, local government and police, and the private sector, composed of people from citizen groups and various businesses. although they have no powers to create actions, they are influential in ensuring that health considerations are given a priority in the various plans and actions of the partner organizations. they also encourage the establishment of thematic groups to focus on specific health improvements, including encouraging local residents to identify and solve health related problems. in addition to these partnerships, a 'targeted site' approach has identified areas of extreme deprivation and health problems as places for special programmes to improve the local conditions. the well london alliance programme created 14 projects in 20 of the most deprived parts of the city in 2007, dealing with quite small areas of 1500-2000 people (wla 2007; otgaar et al. 2011 ). these are not policies of planning or housing departments alone, but involve multiple agencies-including the ymca, two charities, a technology transfer agency, the arts council, a local university and major hospital trust-programmes which are funded by grants from the national lottery. the various agencies contribute their own expertise to the projects. however, in an attempt to get more local input, the residents affected were consulted about the projects through site visits, action workshops and discussions in the community cafes that were established. surveys revealed a lack of co-ordination among the existing social services and revealed that the people in the areas were not simply deprived economically, but lacked hope and ability to improve their conditions, typical problems that affect the development of grass roots organizations (davies and herbert 1993, chap. 6 ). an important focus of these targeted well london programmes has been to emphasize better nutrition, create exercise opportunities, and develop a series of other programmes to improve the negative various social determinants of health problems, through a series of socalled 'heart of the community' projects. these are designed to reduce loneliness and improve community relationships, such as involving the youth in the design of projects, creating access to healthy facilities in the area, from encouraging new shops, to finding safe walking routes. they also focus on reducing crime, developing personal improvement programmes to improve the mental well-being of people in the area and try to create a sense of ownership over local facilities and projects. by having control group areas where no intervention has occurred, the effectiveness of the various initiatives were measured in the 5 year project period from 2007 in order to create evidence-based policy evaluation, in the hope that the programmes that work can be copied successfully in other areas. however, despite these targeted initiatives there is a pressing need for more social housing in london. the influx of capital from overseas rich people, combined with the strength of the financial services sector in particular, means that land and house prices continue to rise, with the result that essential workers, such as nurses, social workers, police and teachers, are priced out of the market.the type of comprehensive, multi-agency approach described above is only one of the ways in which attempts are being made to improve the health of disadvantaged people. another is the targeting of poor people by giving income supplements on condition the children attend school and keep their vaccinations up to date, an approach pioneered by the brazilian bolsa familia programme which has reduced the poverty level of over 44 million people. more specific health care access for the poorest in american cities can be seen by the addition of new community clinics, either free standing or mobile. they provide health care in disadvantaged areas, where there are few local physicians or pharmacies, creating centres that provide a range of services, such as physicians, dentists, as well as counselling and health promotion units. in impoverished parts of american cities, school health education and provision is an increasing trend, which often includes the addition of clinics, especially aimed at targeting adolescents and their problems (fitzpatrick and lagory 2011) . a national assembly of school-based health care acts as a co-ordinating and advice centre for these school-based clinics which have grown from 20 in 1980 to currently over 2000 in 44 states. research has shown that schools with clinics have fewer disciplinary problems, course failures, and school absentee rates, as well as better health (smith 2013) .there is also a long history of the work of particular individuals acting as the catalysts for change in particular deprived areas. for example, a venezuelan physician, america bracho, was influential in establishing latino access, a non-profit organization in the poor, mainly spanish speaking area of santa ana, an area of a third of a million people in los angeles, one of the toughest, crime-ridden, deprived and unhealthy areas in the country (lha 2009). also churches have long had a role in trying to cater for the poor and the disabled. in recent years more active approaches have developed, such as the communities of shalom (cs) set up by the united methodist churches. initiated by the rev joseph sprague it has now created hundreds of shalom zones in impoverished areas from its beginning in 1992, training local residents to promote health information and social capital. in many american cities some churches have partnered with public health departments in local universities to create facilities and programmes to improve the health of people in poor neighbourhoods, using trained local volunteers and specialists, such as the congregations for public health in birmingham, alabama (cph). all these examples represent the contemporary equivalents of the settlement houses of nineteenth century cities, designed improve the educational, health and economic prospects of people in impoverished areas, although these were mainly secular, as seen in work of hull house in chicago and many other cities (adams 1910) . another policy has tried to improve to areas of high disadvantage and ill-health by seeking to reduce concentrations of poor families, such as by scattering, instead of creating, public housing clustering, and by removing families to other locations where there are better facilities and more social mixture (rubinovitz and rosenbaum 2000; comey et al. 2008) . although there have been some successful resettlement schemes the scale of the areas of impoverishment means that it cannot be a solution for all areas.space constraints mean that the examples discussed have only focused on developed countries to show that even in areas where there are extensive heath care programmes there is room for major improvements in targeting the most unhealthy places. a far, far bigger problem exists in the developing world where at least of the third of their population, over 860 million in total, live in informal shanty towns. many of these places desperately need updated and modern versions of the types of services, from clean water supply to sewage and other utilities, that were created in the european urban improvements of the nineteenth century, deficiencies which lead to poor hygiene and debilitating illnesses. these informal settlements are characterized by high levels of deprivation, due to poverty, with flimsy informal housing-whose rents often take up a third of the non-food expenditure-unemployment, limited skills or education, low environmental quality, often with high crime, and with many residents, especially the elderly, having few social contacts and high levels of loneliness. also, many of these areas lack proper property rights. this situation is often made worse by the presence of toxic outputs from nearly factories that ignore any environmental regulations even where they exist. but it is often argued that these slums, not all populated initially by rural migrants, should be welcomed as they provide the opportunity for improvement, unlike rural areas. some have shown improvement, but the idea of the slum being a temporary waystation on the way to prosperity is increasingly being challenged. a large survey of slum dwellers (marx et al. 2013 ) has confirmed that many people get trapped in these areas, leading to generational poverty and also illness, despite the opportunities that enable some to escape. even in the cities of middle income countries there are still many slum areas, for example in buenos aires about 10 % of the population lives in the 56 shanty towns called villas miserias. most of them lack schools, medical facilities, basic utilities and have poor drainage, so heavy rain causes flooding, and have limited employment and higher levels of ill-health. in 2011 the city created the secretariat of habitat and inclusion to coordinate the efforts to incorporate these areas into the city and upgrade their facilities, but its efforts are handicapped by a small budget. one of its schemes is a so-called urban acupuncture programme that adds sports facilities, plazas and community centres to the deprived areas to act as focal and service points. however the programme has not been as effective as promised because the secretariat is underfunded and is seen as a top-down agency. this often ignores the grass root organizations that have developed in these areas which emphasize that their real need is also for more adequate social housing and basic services, including health care. elsewhere attempts are being made to provide more community facilities and to connect slum areas, which are often isolated on hillsides with few roads, with other parts of the city, such as by the gondolas in bogota. in many other slum areas, such as in rio de janeiro, the problem of safety is paramount because of their control by local gangs. this is being tackled by what amounts to a blanket invasion by security services, followed up by stimulation of grass roots organizations, the provision of local community and a school facilities, and a permanent police presence to guarantee safety.despite occasional attempts to improve the condition of people in these informal settlements there is still an enormous amount of work to do, given the scale of these problems and the limited funds and trained personnel of the city administrations. indeed, at base the older developed world solutions to create healthier, man-made environments are still needed. although modern medicine, especially for infectious disease has kept mortality rates low so far, the constant exposure to unhealthy conditions and stress in these slums, combined with the new growth of antimicrobial resistance mean that these areas could be the breeding grounds for future epidemics. this fear should speed up efforts to improve these often squalid environments.improving the health of people in cities is part of their basic needs and a matter of social justice. it is one of the most important of the new policies contributing to liveable urban places. the old urban health disadvantages were solved by the nineteenth century engineering and regulatory approaches, and by the enormous advances in medical knowledge and care. yet too many urban places still need basic sanitation, safe water supplies and adequate numbers of health care professionals and facilities. in addition new concerns have arisen about gaps in the delivery of health care, even in the developed world, with a need to address the societal structural conditions that lead to high inequalities and poor health. the new healthy city programmes are creating positive changes through greater political involvement and community engagement, with policies designed to improve access to health care, such as spatial targeting and the use of health impact assessments. the concept of `wellness' stresses the need for active health promotion and research into the impact of the many health determinants, especially the often downplayed environmental, economic and social domains.although these new approaches are undoubtedly improving the health of people in many cities, they are not enough. it has been shown that urban living creates greater risks from such problems as traffic and pollution, but also from less time spent outdoors. one problem is that some pregnant mothers who have limited exposure to sunlight may be inhibiting the development of their foetuses, which seems to account for the recent increases in many autoimmune diseases. another comes from an enormous recent rise in levels of myopia in young urban chinese and other asian children in particular, with 70% of children affected in some areas. studies have discounted the general effect of genetic factors and shown that the children affected are not spending enough time outdoors, with too much time studying indoors and exposure to electronic devices. control groups of australian children and rural chinese did not have this problem, which seems to be a consequence of a lengthening of the eyeball along its main axis due to a lack of exposure to sunlight (lougheed 2014, rose and saw 2013) .increasing challenges also come from the failures of the major antibiotic drugs that counter many diseases, which could reverse many medical advances. there are also increased risks from new communicable diseases in densely populated and interconnected urban places, as shown by the case of hiv. but a more recent example is seen by the rapid spread of ebola in west africa, with over 5,000 deaths and at least 14,000 cases by the end of october 2014. 40 as rene dubois (1959) observed in many books, nature in the form of some microbe will always strike back at human bodies in some unpredictable way, for new viruses constantly emerge and existing ones mutate and become resistant to drugs. ebola's rapid spread was due to its ability to mutate rapidly and suppress human immune systems. but it was also a consequence of several environmental and cultural factors: the inability to recognize its initial appearance, probably from cross-species infection from the viruscarrying fruit bats; its spread in areas of high density, poor sanitation, high mobility levels, and very limited health care systems in personnel and facilities; a lack of trust in authorities after years of war; and where traditional healing and funerary practices involved a lot of touching, which led to greater spread since bodies are especially infectious by extruding the body fluids that spread the virus. the heroic efforts of the charity médicine sans frontières helped many people, but did not have the resources to contain the outbreak, with an often 70% death rate among infected people. unfortunately it took over six months for the who and other countries to start a massive effort to try and contain the disease by providing: supplies of soap, alcohol swabs and disinfections to help reduce ebola's spread; thousands of trained doctors and nurses to attend the sick; enough protective clothing; building isolation hospitals to treat patients; as well as tracing the contacts of infected people, which was impeded by the absence of detailed local maps. this outbreak showed we cannot be complacent about the threat of new diseases. there is pressing need to have enough of the needed facilities available to be sent quickly to areas where new diseases are detected and a necessity to boost research to find vaccines and drugs to combat such new diseases and older ones like malaria that are still endemic.many of these problems go beyond the ability of cities alone to solve them, although their density and connections make them more vulnerable, especially those with poor sanitation. cities rarely have the power or finance to improve health care on their own, but they can initiate new programmes to improve their facilities. yet their very size means that their politicians and citizen groups should be able to mount successful lobbying of national governments to take the more active, comprehensive and multifaceted measures to improve health in urban settlements.i n the late months of 2019 leading into january of 2020, a novel virus emerged in wuhan, china and was given the name severe acute respiratory syndrome-coronavirus-2 (sars-cov-2; figure 1 ); the associated disease was termed covid-19 (co-rona-vi-rus d-isease 2019, figure 1 ). 1−3 the virus quickly spread across europe and into north and south america, leading the world health organization (who) to declare it as a pandemic on march 11, 2020, with over 118 000 infections in over 114 countries at that time. 4 seven weeks later, the number of cases exceeded 3 million worldwide. 5 sars-cov-2 is a part of the family of viruses known as coronaviridae, which have led to previous coronavirus outbreaks: a sars-cov outbreak in 2002 and a middle east respiratory syndrome (mers)-cov outbreak from 2012 to 2015. 3,6−9 these three viral outbreaks have yielded similar symptoms, including shortness of breath, fever, coughing, and headaches. although coronaviridae is not new to the human population, sars-cov-2 is a larger threat as it has a much higher reproduction number (r 0 ) than previous coronavirus strains, meaning that the number of cases generated by one infected person is higher than previous outbreaks. 9 −13 this, coupled with longer incubations times, latent infections, and delayed symptoms, makes the virus difficult to contain.because of this, there is an urgent need for appropriate disinfection protocols to slow the spread of covid-19. according to the centers for disease control and prevention (cdc), the most effective way to reduce covid-19 infectivity rates is to practice appropriate hand hygiene, specifically employing proper handwashing with warm water and soap for a minimum of 20 s and avoiding touching one's face. 14 in addition, the cdc advocates for the use of alcoholbased hand sanitizers (abhs) but provides warning about products containing benzalkonium chloride (bac), stating:"benzalkonium chloride, along with both ethanol and isopropanol, is deemed eligible by the fda for use in the formulation of healthcare personnel hand rubs. however, available evidence indicates benzalkonium chloride has less reliable activity against coronavirus than either of the alcohols." 13 as bac and related disinfectants are ubiquitous, found not only in soaps but also in cleaning wipes and hospital sanitation kits, knowing their efficacy against sars-cov-2 is imperative to address the spread of the virus. the cdc goes on to reference a recent review, published in the journal of hospital infection by kampf et al., that tabulated the results of previous studies investigating how long viruses within the same family (mers-cov, sars-cov, and endemic human coronavirus) can exist on surfaces ranging from steel and plastic to disposable gowns and surgical gloves. 15 overall, it was reported that this class of virus can persist on inanimate objects with a wide range of times from 2 to 8 h (paper and aluminum) to ≤5 days (plastic, ceramic, and others). since the publication of this and other reports, the scientific community has debated the length of time sars-cov-2 can persist on inanimate objects, with some reporting sars-cov-2 rna on surfaces after >14 days. 10,16−18 with survival times varying among surface types, guidelines for best disinfectant practices are vital, most notably for essential work locations, including hospitals, grocery stores, and delivery centers, that together face higher traffic and risk rate than other locations. currently, the cdc offers limited guidelines for surface disinfectants in the face of covid-19. however, both the scientific community and general public have deferred to the article mentioned above for guidance in best practices, as it also includes a table of previous reports on the ability of common disinfectants to eradicate this family of viruses. 15 the disinfectants in their literature review include two alcohols (ethanol and propanol), sodium hypochlorite, peroxides, aldehydes (formaldehyde and glutardialdehyde), two different types of quaternary ammonium compounds (bac, 1 and didecyldimethylammonium chloride, 2; figure  2 ), and several others. it is from this data table that the cdc provided its recommendations on abhs and regarded bac, a common quaternary ammonium compound (qac), as ineffective at killing the virus. the pertinent data was based on a suspension-based assay found in an article by wood and payne in 1998 (table 1, ref 19) .beyond the use of bac as a hand sanitizing agent, kampf and coworkers also provided one example of bac as a surface disinfectant from an article by sattar et al. in 1989 with an active concentration of 0.04% w/v on a steel surface, showing it to also be ineffective at reducing the viral loading of hcov (endemic human coronavirus) after 1 min exposure (table  1) . 15, 20 combining this with the suspension assay result has sparked debate and worry as qacs, specifically bac, are the active ingredients found in many household disinfecting wipes and sprays and are also used as additives in various soaps and nonalcohol-based hand sanitizers. this is due to their ability to eradicate surface bacteria and common viruses such as influenza by disrupting their phospholipid membrane ( figure  3 ). 21−27 despite the current reluctance of the cdc to endorse a bac-based hand sanitizer against covid-19, the research backing the stance is neither current nor uniformly asserted. in particular, the disinfectant concentrations in the reports discussed herein are inconsistent, with broad ranges of applied qacs from 0.00175 to 1.5% w/v (table 1, figure 4) . additionally, the type of analysis varied widely. most studies utilized suspension-based assays in which the virus was suspended in minimal media, but the contents of the media varied with concentrations and types of organic loading, added salt concentrations, as well as added antibiotics. for surface evaluations, some analyses utilized quantitative carrier tests (qcts) with stainless steel discs as carriers of viral loads, while others simply described evaluating surface contamination but lacked details for reproducibility. it is the goal of this viewpoint to shed light on more recent data regarding the activity of bac against coronaviruses, point out the disparities between available research, and draw attention to the need for further research into qacs. there is a need to not only broaden our understanding of the effectiveness of bac against sars-cov-2 but also design and develop improved qacs for future infection control.based on another article briefly mentioned in kampf et al., the work performed by pratelli in zoonoses and public health analyzed the effectiveness of qacs against canine coronavirus (ccov), another family member within coronaviridae. 28 although these results pertain to ccov, it is within the same family as sars-cov-2 and should aid in evaluating the efficacy of qacs. pratelli utilized a suspension-based assay, suspending cell cultures in eagle's minimal essential medium and supplementing with 10% fetal bovine serum. the report found that ddac was able to reduce the viral loading of ccov by >4.0 log 10 after 3 day exposure corresponding to greater >99.99% clearance (table 1) . conversely, bac was unable to reduce the viral loading (3.0 log 10 ), but the author does note that both agents caused significant morphological damage to the virus. 29 each replicate was exposed to 2 ml solutions of disinfectant with recommended disinfectant concentrations, e.g. bac = 1% w/v. interestingly, it was found that bac did not significantly damage the cell monolayer but was able to reduce the replication of sars-cov after 5 min exposure (table 1) . however, after 30 min exposure to bac, reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction (rt-pcr) found sars-cov rna still present on the surface. this result was consistent against each type of disinfectant analyzed (ethanol, bac, sodium hypochlorite, etc.) as well as against three types of viruses tested (influenza, respiratory syncytial virus, and sars-cov). therefore, it begs the question of whether intact rna alone is an infective agent of sars-cov or if the reduction of cell replication from bac is adequate. this question remains unanswered and makes it difficult to appropriately evaluate efficacy of disinfectants across analyses. additionally, two articles from 1989 and 2009 present discrepancies regarding bac alone as well as within provided commercial formulations. for example, within the 2009 article by dellano et al., the authors analyzed effectiveness of common household disinfectants (one being lysol with 0.1% w/v of bac and ≤70% ethanol) against murine hepatitis virus (mhv, a surrogate vector with structural similarities to sars but lower biosafety level). 6 they found that the bac formulations were effective at inactivating this class of virus after only 30 s exposure (table 1) . this result was echoed in the previous 1989 article by sattar et al. when analyzing bac and ethanol mixtures. 20 additionally, sattar et al. analyzed toilet bowl cleaners (with a solution of 0.04% w/v of bac and hydrochloric acid, ph 1.0). this formulation was again proven to be effective at inactivating coronaviruses, although this lower concentration of bac was only able to affect a 3-log reduction (99.9% reduction) in viral load in the absence of additives. both articles point to the difficulty proving if combinatorial formulations lead to efficacy, or if the qacs aid in the viral reduction.in addition to bac, other commonly employed qacs such as chlorhexidine gluconate (cg, 3, figure 2 ) were also examined in a 2004 editorial by schmidt et al. 30 it was found therein that cg at a concentration of 0.008% w/v was unable to reduce the viral loading of hcov229e, but when added to 70% ethanol, reduced the viral load by 3 log 10 in qct (table  1 ). in addition, the article also examined the effectiveness of combinatorial qacs (presumably cg and bac) at a 0.066% w/v in qcts, which proved effective after 10 min exposure, resulting in viral reduction of 4.0 log 10 . the only example of bac efficacy alone in this article was with 0.01% w/v against transmissible gastroenteritis virus (tgev), a common coronavirus known to infect pigs. within the suspension assay, bac reduced the viral load by 3 log 10 . these analyses again display the incongruity of the reports of qac disinfectant efficacy between research laboratories.a distinct inconsistency regarding the effectiveness of bac is evident in a 2005 article, again by kampf in the journal of hospital infection. 31 contrary to the 2020 review, this earlier report evaluated the effectiveness of four commercially available abhs, three surface disinfectants (two of which contained bac at 0.5% w/v), and one instrument disinfectant (containing glutaraldehyde) against sars-cov. utilizing a suspension-based assay with three different types of organic loads (0.3% serum albumin, 10% fecal calf serum, and 0.3% serum albumin/0.3% sheep erythrocytes), the study showed that each disinfectant evaluated was effective at significantly lowering the viral load across all types of organic loadings. specifically looking at the bac data, one formulation (mikrobac forte) reduced the viral loading by ≥6.13 log 10 , while the other (kohrsolin ff) reduced the viral loading by ≥3.75 log 10 in comparison to ≥4.3 with abhs, all of which had 30−60 min exposure times (table 1) . through this brief literature analysis, it is apparent that the current research on the effectiveness of bac, and more broadly qacs, is inconsistently presented across a select few reports from the past decade. beyond the incongruity between the assays employed, we also hypothesize that the variability in results may be due to the solution of disinfectant, specifically variations in concentrations analyzed; we note that common household wipes are sold with a ∼0.3% w/v concentration of a mixture of bac structures. within our own research efforts, we have found that outdated solutions of bac have increased rates of micelle formations, rendering high levels of variability in effectiveness between assays (unpublished results). furthermore, it appears that the reluctance of the cdc in endorsing bac as a disinfectant against sars-cov-2 is based upon an outlier in one paper (figure 4) .additionally, the question remains if sars-cov-2 rna is an infective agent on its own. it is plausible that qacs are successful in eradicating infectivity if only the rna is detected after treatment. it has frequently been confirmed that qacs are effective against influenza viruses as well as both grampositive and gram-negative bacterial strains. 21−27 in comparing the outer membranes between these and sars-cov-2 ( figure 5) , we postulate that qacs should be effective in decreasing the viral load for disinfection procedures against covid-19 as both contain relatively similar phospholipid bilayers. furthermore, a newer generation of multicationic qacs has recently been developed, which warrants further studies against these emerging viruses. 27 these findings, coupled with the dangerous trend of inappropriately misusing disinfectants, warrants an urgent need to establish consistency in how we analyze the effectiveness of qacs against the family of coronaviruses to allow factual recommendations for use of disinfectants. this pandemic serves as an opportunity for enhanced antiseptics, and more specifically qac development, as commercially available disinfectants have room for improvement both with formulation and concentration as well as effectiveness against both viral and bacterial contagions. the effectiveness of hand hygiene procedures in reducing the risks of infections in home and community settings including handwashing and alcohol-based hand sanitizers there can be no doubt that advances in hygiene during the 19th and 20th centuries, along with other aspects of modern medicine, have combined to improve both the length and quality of our lives. however, since the middle of the 20th century, following the development of vaccines and antimicrobial therapy, and with serious epidemics of the ''old'' infectious enemies such as diphtheria, tuberculosis, and others apparently under control, hygiene has tended to lose its prominent position, and the focus of concern has shifted to degenerative and other chronic diseases. nowhere has the decline in concern about hygiene been more evident than in the home and community.however, whereas advances in medicine and public health seemed, at one time, to offer the possibility that infectious diseases (id) might soon be a thing of the past, it is now clear that this is not the case. in the past 20 years, concern about id and the need for prevention through home and community hygiene has moved steadily back up the health agenda. between 1980 and 1992, deaths attributable to id increased by 22% in the united states alone, representing the third leading cause of death among us residents. 1 two factors are largely responsible for this trend: first, the constantly changing nature and range of pathogens to which we are exposed and, secondly, the changes occurring in the community, which affect our resistance to infection. to what extent our more relaxed attitudes to hygiene practice have contributed to these trends is not known, but poor hygiene is a significant factor for a large proportion of the gastrointestinal (gi), skin, and respiratory tract (rt) infections, which make up the greatest part of the id burden.prior to approximately 1980, common pathogens such as rotavirus, campylobacter, legionella, escherichia coli (e coli) o157, and norovirus were largely unheard of. whereas methicillin-resistant staphylococcus aureus (mrsa) and clostridium difficile (c difficile) were once considered largely hospital-related problems, this is no longer the case. now, community-associated mrsa (ca-mrsa) strains are a major public health concern in north america and, increasingly, in europe. most recently, the severe acute respiratory syndrome (sars) outbreak and concerns about avian flu have raised awareness of the potential for transmission of respiratory viruses via hands and surfaces. demographic trends mean that the proportion of the population in the community who are more vulnerable to infection is increasing, whereas trends toward shorter hospital stays and care in the community also demand increased emphasis on care of ''at-risk'' groups in the home who require protection from infection.in assessing the potential for reducing id transmission through hygiene practice, it is recognized that contaminated hands and failure to practice hand hygiene are primary contributors. in this report, we review the evidence base related to the impact of hand hygiene in reducing transmission of id in the home and community. this report focuses on developed countries, most particularly north america and europe, within the context of renewed public health concerns about ids and their impact on health and well-being. the review also evaluates the use of alcohol-based hand hygiene procedures as an alternative to, or in conjunction with, handwashing. these products are defined by a number of different terms in europe and north america (hand sanitizers, handrubs, and others). for the purposes of this report, we will refer to them as alcohol-based hand sanitizers (abhs). although this report focuses primarily on the home, it is recognized that the home forms a continuum with public settings such as schools, offices, and public transport and cannot be considered totally in isolation. nevertheless, the hand hygiene practice framework proposed in this review is largely also applicable to ''out of home'' settings.this report compiles data from intervention studies and considers it alongside risk modeling approaches based on microbiologic data. currently, there is a tendency to demand that, in formulating evidence-based policies and guidelines, data from intervention studies should take precedence over data from other approaches. although there are those who still adhere to this, it is accepted increasingly that, as far as hygiene is concerned, because transmission of pathogens is highly complex and involves many different pathogens each with multiple routes of spread, decisions regarding infection control must be based on the totality of evidence including microbiologic and other data.this document is intended for infection control and public health professionals who are involved in developing hygiene policies and promoting hygiene practice for home and community settings, including those involved with food and water hygiene, care of domestic animals, pediatric care, care of elderly adults, and care of those in the home who may be at increased risk for acquiring or transmitting infection. the purpose of the review is to provide support for those who work at the interface between theory and practice, particularly those involved in developing policies for the home and community, by providing a practical framework for hand hygiene practice together with a comprehensive review of the evidence base.in recent years, a significant amount of research has been done to identify strategies for changing hygiene behavior. whereas those who manage hygiene improvements often choose to promote hygiene by educating people on the links between hygiene and health, one of the lessons that has been learned is that traditional (cognitive) approaches can raise awareness but do not necessarily achieve the desired effects. if practices such as handwashing are to become a universal norm, a multidimensional promotion that engages the public is needed to persuade people to change their behavior. although we recognize that this aspect is fundamental, it is outside the scope of this report and is reviewed elsewhere. [2] [3] [4] [5] [6] whereas, in the past, research and surveillance largely focused on health care-associated and foodborne illnesses, increasing resource is now being allocated to generating data that give a better view of the extent to which infections are circulating in the community; how they are being transmitted; and how this varies from one region, country, or community to another. although the data in the following section represent a useful overview, we note that the data collection methods differed significantly from one study to another, which means that comparisons from different geographic locations must be interpreted with care. current trends in communicable ids in europe are described in more detail in the recent (2007) european communicable disease epidemiological report from the european centre for disease prevention and control (ecdc). 7 infectious gi disease and hygiene foodborne disease. rates of foodborne illness remain at unacceptably high levels, despite the efforts of food producers to ensure the safety of the food supply. raw meat and poultry and fruits and vegetables bought at retail premises may be contaminated with pathogens. good hygiene practices during food preparation in the home are therefore essential in preventing cross contamination of prepared foods from raw foods and preventing contamination of food by infected household members or domestic animals.the european food standards agency (efsa) 2005 report 8 and the 2007 ecdc report 7 cite campylobacteriosis as the most reported animal infection transmitted to humans. in 2005, reported campylobacter infections increased by 7.8% compared with the previous year, rising to an incidence rate of 51.6 cases per 100,000 people. the efsa states that the source of most human campylobacter infections is related to fresh poultry meat. on the other hand, salmonella infections fell by 9.5% in 2005 to an incidence of 38.2 cases per 100,000 (176, 395 reported cases). the 2003 world health organization (who) report 9 concluded that approximately 40% of reported foodborne outbreaks in the who european region over the past decade were caused by food consumed in private homes. the report cites several factors as ''critical for a large proportion of foodborne diseases'' including use of contaminated raw food ingredients, contact between raw and cooked foods, and poor personal hygiene by food handlers. united kingdom data show that food poisoning notifications reached a peak in 1997-1998 and has since declined but remains in excess of 70,000 per year. 10 in reality, the burden of food poisoning is much higher because most cases go unreported; according to the uk food standards agency, 11 the true number of cases is approximately 4.7 million per year.in 1999, mead et al 12 reported on food-related illness in the united states, using data from a range of sources including national surveillance and community-based studies. they estimated that foodborne illness in the united states causes 76 million illnesses, 500,000 hospital admissions, and 9000 deaths each year. most frequently recorded pathogens were campylobacter, salmonella, and norovirus, which accounted for 14.2%, 9.7%, and 66.5%, respectively, of estimated foodborne illnesses. data suggest that the total number of reported outbreaks has not declined substantially in recent years, ranging from 980 to 1400 outbreaks and between 20,000 and 80,000 cases per year for the years 2000 to 2005. 13 other infectious gi disease. from recent investigations, it is now recognized that a substantial proportion of the total infectious gi disease burden in the community is because of person-to-person spread within households, particularly for viral infections, where it is most often the cause. person-to-person transmission in the home can occur by direct hand-to-mouth transfer, via food prepared in the home by an infected person, or by transmission because of aerosolized particles resulting from vomiting or fluid diarrhea. apart from transmission by inhalation of airborne particles, these infections are preventable by good hygiene practice.the 2003 who report 9 stated that, of the total gi infection outbreaks (including foodborne disease) reported in europe during 1999 and 2000, 60% and 69%, respectively, were due to person-to-person transmission. in the united kingdom, it is estimated that up to 50% of gi infection results from person-to-person tranmsission. 11 a study of united kingdom outbreaks 14 suggested that 19% of salmonella outbreaks and more than half of e coli o157 outbreaks are transmitted by nonfoodborne routes.national surveillance systems vary in their methods of data collection but mostly focus on foodborne disease. inevitably, this means that data on gi illnesses relate mainly to large foodborne outbreaks in restaurants, hospitals, and others, whereas sporadic nonfoodborne cases in the general community go largely unreported. in the united kingdom, even when ''household'' outbreaks are reported, they mostly involve home catering for parties and other functions and are therefore mainly foodborne outbreaks. 15 because milder cases of gi illness often go unreported, this means that the overall gi infection burden, particularly that which is not foodborne, is unknown; the most informative data on the overall burden of infectious gi illness (both foodborne and nonfoodborne) in the community come from various community-based studies, which have been carried out in europe and the united states and are reviewed below.two large community studies have been carried out in europe: one in the united kingdom and the other in the netherlands. the uk study, carried out from 1993 to 1996 involving 460,000 participants in the community presenting to general practice, estimated that only 1 of 136 cases of gi illness is detected by surveillance. the study indicated that as many as 1 in 5 people in the general uk population develop gi illness each year, with an estimated 9.4 million cases occurring annually of which about 50% are nonfoodborne. 11, 16 it was estimated that, for every 1 reported case of campylobacter, salmonella, rotavirus, and norovirus, another 7.6, 3.2, 35, and 1562 cases, respectively, occur in the community; based on the number of laboratory reports, it is possible to estimate the true number of infections occurring in the community (table 1) .from the community study carried out in the netherlands between 1996 and 1999, 17 it was estimated that approximately 1 in 3.5 people experience a bout of infectious gi disease each year. campylobacter was detected most frequently (10% of cases), followed by ghiardia lamblia (5%), rotavirus (5%), norovirus (5%), and salmonella (4%). relative to the population of the netherlands (16 million), 650,000 norovirus gastroenteritis cases occur annually. 18 the us study of mead et al, 12 which also included data from community-based studies, indicated that the total number of cases of infectious gi illness annually is approximately 210 million (of which approximately 64% are nonfoodborne). they estimated that the number of episodes of acute gastroenteritis per person per year is approximately 0.79. from the available data, the authors were also able to estimate the proportion of total episodes that were nonfoodborne. as shown in table 2 , by far the most frequently reported causes of gi illness were norovirus, rotavirus, and campylobacter. for campylobacter, e coli, and norovirus, a significant proportion of cases was estimated as nonfoodborne, whereas, for hepatitis a (hav), shigella, and rotavirus, almost all cases were estimated as nonfoodborne. for salmonella on the other hand, only 5% of cases were considered as nonfoodborne. davis et al reviewed outbreaks of e coli o157 related to family visits to animal exhibits. 19 indications are that norovirus is now the most significant cause of infectious gi illness in the developed world, both outbreak related and endemic. 20, 21 currently, we are seeing increased outbreaks of norovirus, a major concern in japan 22 and also in europe. 23 expert opinion is that norovirus strains now circulating are more ''virulent'' and more easily spread from person to person via hands and surfaces or during food handling. 20 infection with hav is common worldwide, 24 and adenovirus is also a frequent cause of gastroenteritis. c difficile-associated disease now occurs with increasing frequency in the community, in which it usually affects persons receiving antibiotic therapy but also healthy individuals. 25 recently, a new strain (027) of c difficile has emerged in north america, causing infections in the community among individuals with no predisposing factors. 25 a recent study 26 indicated that exposure to a family member with helicobacter pylori gastroenteritis was associated with a 4.8-fold increased risk of infection in another family member and that infection most usually involved person-to-person transmission, associated with conditions of crowding and poor hygiene.using data from the 2006 e coli o157:h7 outbreak in 2006 in the united states associated with contaminated spinach, seto et al developed a model that showed that secondary person-to-person transmission was similar to that in previous e coli outbreaks (12%). the model suggests that even a modestly effective hygiene promotion strategy to interrupt secondary transmission (prevention of only 2%-3% of secondary illnesses) could result in a reduction of 5% to 11% of symptomatic cases. 27 respiratory tract infections are largely caused by viruses. in the united states, viruses account for up to 69% of respiratory infections. 28 the common cold is reported to be the most frequent, acute infectious illness to humans. 29 data from the united states suggest that the mean number of respiratory illnesses experienced per year in adults is approximately 1.5 to 3.0, and, in children under 5 years of age, it is approximately 3.5 to 5.5. 28 approximately 80% of upper rt infections are caused by rhinoviruses. other species causing acute rhinitis are coronaviruses, parainfleunza viruses (piv), respiratory syncytial viruses (rsv), and adenoviruses. 30 although colds are generally mild and self-limiting, they represent a significant economic burden because of loss in productivity and medical costs. furthermore, secondary infections produce complications, such as otitis media, sinusitis, or lower respiratory infections including pneumonia, with its risk of mortality, particularly in elderly adults. several studies have demonstrated that colds are also a trigger for asthma. 31 rsv is the major cause of viral rt infection in young children worldwide. child day care attendance in north america caries with it a very high risk of rsv infection within the first 2 years of life and accounts for 0.5% to 1.0% of hospitalized infants in the united states. 32 influenza is a more serious rt illness, which can cause complications that lead to increased physician visits, hospitalization, and death, the risks being highest among persons aged .65 years, children aged ,2 years, and persons who have medical conditions (eg, diabetes, chronic lung disease). [33] [34] [35] influenza must also be considered in terms of days absent from work and school and pressure on health care services. 35 an important aspect of influenza is the threat associated with the emergence of novel subtypes capable of causing an influenza pandemic. 36 according to bridges et al, 37 influenza epidemics in the united states result in an annual average of 36,000 deaths and 114,000 hospitalizations; among those with influenza who belong to an ''at-risk'' group, a significant proportion develop pneumonia, and up to 1 in 10 can die of related complications. in europe, the 2004-2005 influenza season annual report 38 showed that, of 25 countries, 15 recorded what is regarded as high activity (150 up to 3000 influenza-like or acute respiratory illnesses per 100,000 population).although data indicating the role of hands and other surfaces in the transmission of colds have been available for some time, it is only in the last few years that there has been any real awareness that hands and surfaces may also be a transmission route for flu viruses. 32 evidence that measures such as hand hygiene can reduce spread of rt infections comes from the sars outbreaks in hong kong, which coincided with the latter part of influenza season, when it was observed that, as extensive personal and community public health measures took place, influenza case numbers fell significantly, more so than usual for the time of year. 39skin and wound infections are common in the home and community, but most are self-limited. because these infections, apart from s aureus infections go unreported, little or no data are available on the burden of skin and wound infections in the community. s aureus is the most common cause of infections of skin and soft tissue, which, in a small proportion of cases, lead to the development of bacteremia or pneumonia. 40 serious infections usually occur in health care facilitiesin patients who are immunocompromised-in which s aureus is mostly usually associated with wounds and intravenous devices and in which the antibioticresistant strain, mrsa, is a major concern. infected patients discharged from hospitals and health care workers (hcws) caring for mrsa-infected patients can bring mrsa into the home and pass it on to healthy family members, who become colonized, thereby spreading the organism into the community and facilitating the circulation of these strains. [41] [42] [43] mrsa colonization in an individual can persist for up to 40 months. 44, 45 in recent years, mrsa has been increasingly found to cause infections in healthy members of the community without apparent risk factors. 25 these ca-mrsa strains are different from health care-associated (hca) mrsa strains and are a concern because they equally infect children and young adults. these strains primarily cause skin and soft tissue infections but can also cause invasive infections such as sepsis, pneumonia, and osteomyelitis, which is some cases can be fatal. 25 some ca strains are known to produce panton-valentine leukocidin (pvl), which has been implicated as a virulence factor, 46 although opinion is, however, divided as to whether this is the case; whereas some studies support this notion, 47 others do not. 48 in the united states, ca-mrsa is now a significant concern. ca-mrsa strains have also now been detected in france, switzerland, germany, greece, the nordic countries, australasia, the netherlands, and latvia. 25 in the united kingdom, cases of ca-mrsa and pvlproducing strains have been reported, but the number of reported cases is still small. 25, 49 within the global population that affect our resistance to infection.''at-risk'' groups cared for at home include not only newborn infants whose immune system is not fully developed but also the rapidly increasing elderly population whose immune system is declining. ''atrisk'' groups include patients discharged recently from hospital, immunocompromised family members, and family members with invasive devices such as catheters. it also includes people whose immunocompetence is impaired as a result of chronic and degenerative illness or because they are undertaking certain drug therapies. all of these groups, together with those who carry hiv/aids, are increasingly cared for at home by a caregiver, who may be a household member. a survey of the united states and 3 european countries-germany, the netherlands, and the united kingdom-suggests that up to 1 in 5 of the population belongs to an ''at-risk'' group (table 3) . the data suggest that between 12% and 18% of the population of these countries are .65 years of age. in an intervention study of 148 patients with aids, it was found that patients assigned to the intensive handwashing intervention group developed fewer episodes of diarrheal illness (1.24 6 0.9 vs. 2.92 6 0.6 new episodes of diarrhea, respectively, during a 1-year observation period. 50 gi pathogens are now implicated as causative or contributory factors in the development of cancers and other chronic conditions; examples include hepatitis b virus (hepatocelluar carcinoma), 51 h pylori (peptic ulcer disease), 52 and campylobacter jejuni (guillain barré syndrome). 53 foodborne illness has been estimated to result in chronic sequelae in 2% to 3% of cases 54 ; a european commission report 55 cites evidence of chronic disease, such as reactive arthritis, following 5% of salmonella cases, with 5% of e coli o157 cases progressing to serious and even fatal complications. even mild viral infections can be predisposing factors to more severe and possibly fatal secondary bacterial infections. 56 in devising a strategy for home hygiene and producing hygiene practice advice, the international scientific forum on home hygiene (ifh) has developed an approach based on risk management that involves identifying the ''critical control points'' for preventing the spread of id in the home. risk management (also known as hazard analysis critical control points [haccp] ) is now the standard approach for controlling microbial risks in food and other manufacturing environments and is becoming accepted as the optimum means to prevent such risks in home and hospital settings. 57 the key feature of the ifh approach is that it recognizes the need to look at hygiene from the point of view of the family and the total range of problems it faces to reduce id risks, including food hygiene, personal hygiene (particularly hands) and hygiene related to the general environment (toilets, baths, hand basins, surfaces, and others), domestic animals, and family members at increased risk. adopting a holistic approach makes sense because all these issues are interdependent and based on the same underlying microbiologic principles. haccp also forms the basis for developing an approach to home hygiene that can be adapted to meet differing needs. indeed, it is only by adopting such a holistic approach that the causal link between hands and infection transmission in the home can be addressed properly because hand hygiene is a central component of all these issues.the ifh risk management approach to hygiene starts from the principle that pathogens are introduced continually into the home by people (who may have infection or may be asymptomatic), food, and domestic animals and also sometimes via the water or the air. additionally, sites at which stagnant water accumulates, such as sinks, toilets, waste pipes, or items, such as cleaning or face cloths, readily support microbial growth and can become a primary reservoir of infection; although microbial species are mostly those that represent a risk to vulnerable groups, primary pathogens can also be present. 58 so long as there are people, pets, and food in the home, there will always be the risk of pathogenic microbes. in many homes, there will also be at least one family member who is more susceptible to infection for one reason or another. within the home, there is a chain of events, as described in fig 1, that results in transmission of infection from its original source to a new recipient. to an extent, we can limit the exit and entry of pathogens from and into the body, but the link that we have most control over is that related to the ''spread of pathogens.'' the spread of infection can be interrupted by good hygiene practice, which includes adherence to hand hygiene recommendations and cleaning and disinfecting contaminated environmental surfaces.the risk-based approach to home hygiene is described in more detail by bloomfield and scott 59 and bloomfield. 60 they suggest that sites and surfaces in the home should be categorized into 4 main groups: reservoir sites, reservoir/disseminators, hands and hand and food contact surfaces, and other surfaces. risk assessment is then based on the frequency of occurrence of pathogenic contamination at that site, together with the probability of transfer from that site such that family members may be exposed. this means that, even if a particular environmental site is highly contaminated, unless there is a high probability of transfer from that site, the risk of infection transmission is low. from this, it is possible to determine the ''critical control points'' for preventing spread of infection. the data suggest the following: d for reservoir sites such as the sink waste pipes or toilets, although the probability of contamination (potentially pathogenic bacteria or viruses) is high, the risk of transfer is limited unless there is a particular risk situation (eg, a family member with enteric infection and fluid diarrhea, when toilet flushing can produce splashing or aerosol formation that can settle on contact surfaces around the toilet). 58,61 d by contrast, for reservoir sites such as wet cleaning cloths, not only is there high probability of significant contamination, but, by the very nature of their usage, they carry a high risk of disseminating contamination to other surfaces and to the hands. d for hands and hand contact and food preparation surfaces, although the probability of contamination is, in relative terms, lower, it is still significant, for example, particularly following contact with contaminated food; people; pets; or other contaminated surfaces such as door, faucet, and toilet-flush handles. because there is a constant risk of spread from these surfaces, hygiene measures are important for these surfaces. d for other surfaces (floors, walls, furniture, and others), risks are mainly due to pathogens such as s aureus and c difficile, which survive under dry conditions. because the risks of transfer and exposure are relatively low, these surfaces are considered low risk, but where there is known contamination, for example, soiling of floors by pets, crawling infants may be at risk. cleaning can also recirculate dust-borne pathogens onto hand and food contact surfaces.overall, this approach allows us to rank these various sites and surfaces (fig 2) according to the level of transmission risk; this suggests that the ''critical control points'' for breaking the chain of infection are the hands, together with hand and food contact surfaces, cleaning cloths, and other cleaning utensils. however, although this is a useful ''rule of thumb'' ranking, it is not a constant. for example, although risks from toilets, sinks, floors, and others relate mainly to the relatively lower risk of transfer from these sites to hands, hand and food contact surfaces, and cloths, this risk can increase substantially during occasions when an infected family member has fluid diarrhea or when a floor surface is contaminated with vomitus, urine, or feces. in the following section, we evaluate data indicating the extent to which the hands, both alone and in combination with other surfaces, are responsible for the spread of infection.the criteria for assessing causal inference of a link between hygiene practice and id risk reduction have been reviewed by aiello and larson. 62 establishing the potential health impact of a hygiene intervention such as hand hygiene requires examination of the evidence related to a range of criteria that should include the strength, consistency, and temporality (cause and effect) of the association, together with data on plausibility (biologic or behavioral rationale) and biologic gradient. aiello and larson recognize that, although a single factor such as the hands may be a ''sufficient cause'' of infection transmission, spread of infection frequently involves a number of ''component causes,'' which, together or independently, work to determine the overall risk.the risk assessment approach, as outlined above, indicates that the ''critical control points'' or ''component causes'' of infection transmission in the home are the hands, together with hand and food contact surfaces and cleaning cloths. based on plausibility, the role of the hands relative to other surfaces can be understood by mapping the potential routes of spread of gi, rt, and skin infections in the home as shown in fig 3. this suggests that, for all 3 groups of infections, the hands are probably the single most important transmission route because in all cases they come into direct contact with the known portal of entry for pathogens (the mouth, nose and, conjunctiva of the eyes) and are thus the key last line of defense. figure 3 shows, however, that, although in some cases the hands alone may be ''sufficient cause'' for transmission of an infection (eg, from an mrsa carrier, to hands, to the wound of a recipient), in other cases transmission involves a number of component causes (eg, from contaminated food, to a food contact surface, to hands, to the mouth of a recipient).what this means is that the transmission risk via the hands also depends on the extent to which surfaces become contaminated with pathogens during normal daily activities, ie, the risk of hand-to-mouth transfer will be increased if extensive transfer from raw food to food preparation surfaces also occurs. defining the importance of hand hygiene relative to other hygiene practices, such as surface and cloth hygiene, is difficult because of the close interdependence of these factors.although the focus of this review is the prevention of infection through hygiene practice, fig 3 shows that in some cases airborne transmission can operate independently, without involving the hands, whereas, for gi infection, transmission can operate independently via food. although handwashing intervention studies provide data supporting the causal link between hand contamination and id transmission, defining the importance of hand hygiene relative to other hygiene practices, such as surface and cleaning cloth hygiene, or the risks associated with airborne transmission is difficult because of the close interdependence of these factors. currently, such assessments can only be made on a qualitative basis, using microbiologic data (as in the following section) together with some limited epidemiologic data. in this section, we present epidemiologic and microbiologic data to support the causal relationship between hygiene and id risk. because the risks of hand transfer increase as the risks of contamination of other surfaces increases, data related to relevant surfaces are also included.in recent years, a range of studies has been published, many related specifically to the home, which indicate the extent to which id agents occur and are spread in home and community settings during normal daily activities and their potential to cause infection. these studies include assessments of frequency occurrence of sources of pathogens in the home, their rate of ''shed'' from an infected source into the environment, their rate of die away on hands and other surfaces, their rate of transfer via the hands to the mouth, nose, conjunctiva, and others and/or to ready-to-eat foods, and their the infectious dose. the infectious dose (ie, the number of particles to which the recipient is exposed), their immune status, and the route by which they are infected are key factors that determine the infection risk. the ''infectious dose'' varies for different pathogens and is usually lower for people who are ''at-risk'' than for healthy household members.transmission of infectious gi disease. risks from exposure to gi pathogens via the hands. as shown in fig 3 , exposure to gi pathogens can occur by direct hand-to-mouth contact or indirectly via contaminated food. in the home, food can be contaminated either directly by an infected food handler or indirectly by cross contamination via hands and surfaces from another source, which may be contaminated food, another infected household member (or carrier), or a household pet or farm animal. hand-to-mouth contact is a frequent occurrence, particularly among children; a study of mouthing behavior in 72 young children showed that children ,24 months of age exhibit the highest frequency, with 81 events/hour; for children .24 months of age, this was reduced but was still of the order of 42 events/hour. 63 the potential for transmission of pathogens from hands to ready-to-eat foods is supported by a number of studies: d in a model domestic kitchen, 29% of food preparation sessions using campylobacter-contaminated chicken resulted in positive campylobacter isolations from prepared salads, cleaning materials, and food contact surfaces. 64 d bidawid et al 65, 66 showed that touching lettuce with finger pads contaminated with hav and feline calicivirus (fcv), used as a surrogate for norovirus, for 10 seconds resulted in transfer of 9.2% and 18%, respectively, of the virus. based on the load for hav in feces (10 6 to 10 9 viral particles/g), an estimated 1300 particles were transferred to the lettuce. d rusin et al showed that, when volunteers' fingertips were inoculated with a pooled suspension of micrococcus luteus (m luteus), serratia rubidea (s rubidea), and bacteriophage prd-1 and held to the lip area, transfer rates were 40.99%, 33.97%, and 33.90%, respectively. 67 as stated above, the infection risk from oral consumption depends on the number of bacterial cells or viral particles that are consumed. table 4 shows that, for many of the commonly occurring gi pathogens, the infectious dose is relatively small.sources and spread of gi pathogens to the hands. figure 3 illustrates that the risk of exposure to gi pathogens via the hands depends on the extent to which these pathogens are brought into the home (either by infected people or pets or via contaminated food) and the extent to which they are spread via hands and other surfaces and by airborne transmission. relevant data from various sources, as summarized below, suggest that exposure to gi pathogens via the hands is a frequent occurrence during normal daily activities and that the numbers of organisms transferred by handto-mouth contact can be well within the numbers required to cause infection.household members who are infected, or who are carriers, are a primary source of infection in the home. pathogens that can be carried persistently by otherwise healthy people include salmonella species and c difficile. approximately 3% of adults (mainly those .65 years of age), and up to two thirds of babies, are known to carry c difficile in their gut, although it is not known what proportion are toxin producing. 25 people or animals that carry gi pathogens shed large numbers of organisms in their feces or when they vomit. a single vomiting incident following norovirus infection may produce 30 million viral particles, 72 and, at the peak of a rotavirus infection, .10 11 virions may be excreted per gram feces. 74 surfaces in the home may become contaminated by enteric organisms that are aerosolized during vomiting or by transfer of vomitus and fecal matter via hands. viruses aerosolized from flushing the toilet can remain airborne long enough to contaminate surfaces throughout the bathroom. 75 infectious agents introduced into the home via food include salmonella, campylobacter, listeria, and e coli o157. a variety of foods can act as a source of these organisms, including meat, fish and poultry products, dairy products, fruits, and vegetables. organisms in particles, and moisture or juices, from food will contaminate any surface they come into contact with. an salmonella species up to 10 6 but could be as low as 10-100 cells. 68 contamination may be amplified by transfer to foods, which are then stored incorrectly. campylobacter species 500 organisms can result in human illness. 69 oral dose for e coli 0157 may be as little as 10 cells. 70 in one outbreak, a median dose of ,100 organisms per hamburger was reported. 71 norovirus 10-100 units or even less. 72 may be as few as 10 particles. 73 ward et al showed that 13 of 14 adults became infected after consuming rotavirus (10 3 particles) picked up from a contaminated surface via the hands. 73 efsa survey 76 of salmonella in chicken indicates significant differences among eu member states, with isolation rates between 0% and 68.2%; the level reported for the united kingdom was 7.1% to 9.4%. the efsa also reported that up to 66% of samples from fresh poultry were positive for campylobacter. 77 in the united states, more than half of raw chicken is estimated to be contaminated with camplylobacter. 76 chapman et al 78 showed that 0.4% to 0.8% of meat products purchased from uk butchers were positive for e coli o157. in a recent study in canada, c difficile was isolated from 20% of 60 samples of retail ground meat purchased over a 10-month period, and 11 isolates were toxigenic. 79 the home is frequently a shelter to a range of different pets; more than 50% of homes in the englishspeaking world have cats and dogs, with 60 million cats and dogs in the united states. in the united states, up to 39% of dogs may carry campylobacter, and 10% to 27% may carry salmonella 80 ; cats are also carriers of these organisms. carriage of c difficile in household pets is quite common; up to 23% of pets are affected, although these mostly involve noncytotoxigenic strains. 25 kramer et al, 81 sattar et al, 82 and rzezutka and cook 83 reviewed data showing that gi pathogens can survive on surfaces for several hours and, in some cases, days, particularly on moist surfaces, although infectivity depends on the numbers that survive (table 5) .studies to quantify transfer between hands, foods, and kitchen surfaces 67, 84 showed that transfer rates were highly variable, ranging from as high as 100% to as low as 1%. transfer to hands was highest from nonporous surfaces but lower from surfaces such as carrots, sponges, and dishcloths (,1%). rusin et al 67 sampled volunteers hands after touching surfaces contaminated with m luteus, s rubidea, and phage prd-1. activities included wringing out a dishcloth/sponge, turning off a faucet, cutting up a carrot, making hamburger patties, holding a phone receiver, and removing laundry from the washing machine. transfer efficiencies for the phone receiver and faucet were 38% to 65% and 27% to 40%, respectively. paulson 85 showed that, when gloved hands were contacted for 5 to 10 seconds with surfaces such as cutting boards and doorknobs contaminated with fcv (log 5.9 particles), the log number of particles recovered from hands was 4.7 to 5.4.these laboratory studies are supported by a range of field studies showing spread via the hands and other surfaces during normal daily activities: d following preparation of salmonella and campylobacter-contaminated chickens in domestic kitchens, these species were isolated from 17.3% of hands and hand and food contact surfaces. isolation rates were highest for hands, chopping boards, and cleaning cloths (25%, 35%, and 60%, respectively, of surfaces sampled). 86 d in homes containing an infant recently vaccinated for polio (during which time shedding occurs in feces), virus was isolated from 13% of bathroom, living room, and kitchen surfaces. 87 most frequently contaminated were hand contact sites such as bathroom taps, door handles, toilet flushes, soap dispensers, nappy changing equipment, and potties. d following handshaking with a volunteer whose hands were contaminated from touching a viruscontaminated door handle, successive transmission from one person to another could be followed up to the sixth person. 88 d where fingers were contacted with noroviruscontaminated fecal material, the virus was consistently transferred via the fingers to melamine surfaces and from there to hand contact surfaces, such as taps, door handles, and telephone receivers. contaminated fingers sequentially transferred the virus to up to 7 clean surfaces. 89 d a study 90 with fcv showed survival for up to 3 days on telephone buttons and receivers, for 1 or 2 days on computer mouse, and for 8 to 12 hours on keyboard keys and brass disks representing faucets and door handles. the time for 90% virus reduction was ,4 hours on computer keys, mouse, and brass disks; 4 to 8 hours on telephone receivers; and 12 to 24 hours on telephone buttons. d in homes of infants with recurrent c difficile infection, 12% of environmental surfaces were positive for c difficile, and 1 of 4 other household members carried c difficile in stool. in a control home with no household carriers, none of 84 environment samples were positive for c difficile. 91 d in 4 out of 6 homes in which there was a salmonella case, the causative species was isolated from fecal soiling under the flushing rim and scale material in the toilet bowl for up to 3 weeks after notification of infection. 58 flushing toilets seeded with salmonella enteritidis resulted in contamination of hand contact surfaces such as toilet seats and toilet seat lids.these represent recent examples of studies that have been reported. these and other studies are also reviewed elsewhere. 82, [92] [93] [94] in developing hygiene policies for preventing gi infections, one of the difficulties is assessing risks associated with hand transmission relative to other risks such as inadequate cooking or storage of food or inhalation of infected vomit particles. gillespie et al 15 reported an evaluation of reported outbreaks linked to uk households for 1992 to 1999 that suggested, of the 85% of outbreaks designated as foodborne, cross contamination was implicated in 20% of outbreaks compared with 30% and 31% of outbreaks for which inadequate storage and cooking, respectively, were thought to be the cause. there were no data to suggest what percentage of cross contamination events involved the hands, and gillespie et al 15 expressed concern that most of the reported outbreaks were linked to home catering, thus not necessarily representative of normal daily routine. aerosol transmission can result from settling on hand and food contact surfaces, but, for norovirus, infection can sometimes result from direct inhalation of infected particles of vomit by people immediately adjacent to the person who vomits. the potential for airborne transmission of norovirus was demonstrated in studies in a restaurant and a primary school, in which close proximity to infected persons in the immediate aftermath of a vomiting attack was identified as a risk factor. 95, 96 transmission of rt infections. the last 2 years have seen an unprecedented global focus on developing strategies for preventing transmission of influenza. the who 97 is taking a lead on pharmaceutical interventions such as vaccines and antivirals but has also made recommendations for other interventions, 98 which include highlighting the importance of hygiene, and in particular hand hygiene, in minimizing spread in the home and community.risks from exposure to respiratory pathogens via the hands. as shown in fig 3, exposure to rt viruses can occur either by inhalation of infected mucous or inoculation of the nasal mucosa or eyes with viruscontaminated hands, which then cause infection via the mucous membranes and upper rt. rhinovirus and rsv are deposited into the front of the nose or into the eye (where they pass down the lacrymal duct), either on the end of the finger or possibly sometimes in aerosolized droplets. 99 rubbing the eyes and nose with the fingertips is a common occurrence; hendley et al found that 1 in 2.7 attendees of hospital rounds rubbed their eyes, and 33% picked their nose, within a 1-hour observation period. 100 a review of the data 94 (table 6 ) suggests that the infectious dose for respiratory viruses is relatively small. alford et al suggest that aerosolized doses of as little as 1 tcid 50 (tissue culture infective dose) of influenza virus could infect volunteers. 101 evidence for transmission of rhinovirus and rsv infections via contaminated hands comes from a number of studies: d a number of studies have demonstrated that selfinoculation by rubbing the nasal mucosa or conjunctivae with rhinovirus-contaminated fingers can lead to infection. 100, 102 over a period of 10 years, gwaltny and hayden performed intranasal challenges on 343 healthy young adults who had no antibody to the challenge, and infected 321 (95%). 103 after handling contaminated coffee cups and other objects, more than 50% of subjects developed infection. 104 hall et al showed that volunteers touching contaminated objects and/or the fingers of symptomatic individuals had a higher attack rate of colds if they touched their eyes or nose. 105 d in a 4-year family trial, hendley and gwaltney 104 found that prophylactic treatment of mothers' fingers with iodine reduced the incidence of rt infections. when illness occurred in the family, mothers were instructed to dip their fingers in iodine upon awakening in the morning, then every 3 or 4 hours or after activities that washed the iodine from the skin. the secondary attack rate in mothers was 7% in the iodine group and 20% in placebo families. no infections occurred in mothers after 11 exposures to an infected index case in the iodine group, compared with 5 infections after 16 exposures in the placebo group. d hall et al showed that infected infants excrete prodigious amounts of rsv in their nasal secretions for several days 105 and that rsv could be recovered from hands that had touched surfaces contaminated with secretions from infected infants. 99 hall and douglas found that close contact with symptomatic infants who were producing abundant secretions, or their immediate environment, was necessary for infection. 106 sources and spread of rt pathogens to the hands. figure 3 illustrates that the risk of exposure to rt pathogens via hands depends on the extent to which these pathogens are spread from an infected person during normal daily activities. relevant data come from various sources and are summarized below. taken together, the data suggest that, when a household member is infected, exposure of other household members via hands is likely to occur during normal daily activities and that the numbers of organisms involved are within those required to initiate infection if transferred to the eyes or nose.people infected with cold viruses shed large quantities of virus-laden mucus. droplets of nasal secretions generated by coughing, sneezing and talking can travel over a distance .3 m to contaminate surrounding surfaces. 37, 98, [107] [108] [109] up to 10 7 infectious influenza particles per milliliter has been detected in nasal secretions. 110 the mean duration of a cold is 7.5 days. viral shedding may occur 24 to 48 hours before illness onset but generally at lower titers than during the symptomatic period. titers generally peak during the first 24 to 72 hours of illness and decline within several days, with titers low or undetectable by day 5. children can shed virus for up to 3 weeks, whereas immunocompromised people may continue to shed virus for weeks to months. 98 infectious material can also be deposited directly on hands and tissues during sneezing and blowing the nose. contamination of hands can occur by handshaking or touching contaminated surfaces. pathogens shed into the environment from these sources can survive for significant periods and are readily spread around the home to and from the hands and via handkerchiefs and tissues, tap and door handles, telephones, or other hand contact surfaces: d gwaltney and hendley demonstrated that most subjects with experimental colds had rhinovirus on their hands and that virus could be recovered from 43% of plastic tiles they touched. 104 for people with rhinovirus colds, virus was found on 39% of hands and 6% of objects in their immediate environment. 100 opinion as to the importance of the hands relative to the airborne route for transmission of rhinovirus colds is divided. some investigators 30, 99, 103, 104 maintain that contamination of the hands followed by inoculation of the eyes or nose is of paramount importance; in fact, gwaltney et al found that it was exceedingly difficult to transmit virus orally or by kissing and found little evidence of droplet or droplet nuclei transmission. 100, 113 others maintain that the evidence favors droplet and droplet nuclei transmission as the most important mode of spread. 118 for rsv, there is general agreement that the hands are the primary route for the spread of infection. 32, 105, 106 for influenza, although more data are needed, it is increasingly accepted that not only airborne (both true airborne transmission involving droplet nuclei [,5 mm in diameter] and ''droplet transmission'' involving droplets .10 mm that deposit onto surfaces quite rapidly) but also surface (including hand) transmission come into play. 98, 119, 120 the relative contribution of each mode of transmission is unknown but appears to vary depending on the circumstances, symptoms, respiratory tract loads, and the viral strain. 121 data from animal studies and influenza outbreaks suggest that droplets generated when infected persons cough or sneeze are the predominant mechanism of airborne transmission, 37 although data supporting droplet nuclei spread are also available. 101, [122] [123] [124] it is possible, however, that influenza is less transmissible via hands and surfaces compared with rhinovirus and others because of its lower ability to survive outside a human or animal host. data suggest that, to some extent, airborne droplets and droplet nuclei cause infection as a result of settling on hand contact surfaces. the frequent occurrence of diarrhea and the detection of viral rna in fecal samples tested suggest that the h5n1 influenza virus may replicate in the human gut and could be a source of transmission via hands and surfaces. 125 at present, however, it is thought that this is unlikely. the growing evidence base related to the survival, transmission, and human exposure to rt viruses via hands and other surfaces is also reviewed elsewhere. 32, 35, 37, 82, 94, 99 transmission of skin and wound infections. risks from exposure to skin and wound pathogens via the hands. as shown in fig 3, exposure to skin pathogens such as s aureus can occur via the hands. exposure can produce colonization and/or infection that usually occurs in areas in which there are cuts, abrasions, and others that damage the integrity of the skin. where there are predisposing factors, the numbers of organisms required to produce infection may be relatively small. marples 126 showed that up to 10 6 cells may be required to produce pus in healthy skin, but as little as 10 2 may be sufficient in areas in which the skin is occluded or traumatized. risks associated with exposure to hca-mrsa and ca-mrsa are different. hca-mrsa usually affects elderly adults and those who are immunocompromised, particularly those with surgical or other wounds or who have indwelling catheters. for ca-mrsa, those at particular risk appear to be younger, generally healthy people who practice contact sports or other activities that put them at higher risk of acquiring skin cuts and abrasions. 127 us experience suggests that ca-mrsa may be more virulent than other strains and is easily transmissible within households and community settings (eg, schools, day care centers, sport teams) in which skin-to-skin contact or sharing of contaminated items (eg, towels, sheets and sport equipment) are vehicles for person-to-person transmission. 128 a case-control study 129 involving 55 cases of mrsa in a us prison showed that inmates who washed their hands #6 times per day had an increased risk for mrsa infection compared with inmates who washed their hands .12 times per day.sources and spread of skin and wound pathogens to the hands. figure 3 illustrates that the risk of exposure to skin pathogens via the hands depends on the extent to which people or animals colonized or infected with pathogenic strains are present in the home and the extent to which these pathogens are spread during normal daily activities. transfer of skin pathogens to the hands can occur either by direct contact with an infected source or indirectly via hand contact surfaces or the surfaces of clothing or household linens. relevant data, as outlined below, suggest that, when there is a person in the home who is infected or colonized with s aureus, exposure of other household members as a result of transfer via hands, surfaces, clothing, and others is likely to occur during normal daily activities and that the numbers of organisms involved are within the numbers of particles that could initiate an infection in a susceptible recipient.a study by kluytmans et al suggests that s. aureus is carried as part of the normal body flora in up to 60% of the general population, 130 although a 2006 us study 131 suggests that the carriage rate is much less (31.6%). in the united kingdom, indications are that the proportion of the general population carrying antibiotic-resistant strains of s aureus (either hca-or ca-mrsa) is somewhere between 0.5% and 1.5%, the majority being carriers of hca-mrsa who are .65 years of age and/or have had recent association with a health care setting. 132 although cases of ca-mrsa and pvlproducing mrsa have been reported, indications are that the prevalence of mrsa and pvl-producing strains circulating in the community is currently very small. 25 in the united states, although it is concluded that colonization rates for mrsa in the community are still low, it is nonetheless thought to be increasing. 127, 133 graham et al 131 report on an analysis of 2001-2002 data from the national health and nutrition examination survey (nhanes) to determine colonization with s aureus in a noninstitutionalized us population. from a total of 9622 participants, it was found that 31.6% were colonized with s aureus, of which 2.5% were colonized with mrsa. of persons with mrsa, half were identified as strains containing the sccmec type iv gene (most usually associated with ca-mrsa), whereas the other half were identified as strains containing the sccmec type ii gene (most usually associated with hca-mrsa). several other investigators have examined the epidemiology of mrsa in the us community; differences in the data suggest a sporadic distribution of ca-mrsa, with carriage rates ranging from 8% to 20% in baltimore, atlanta, and minnesota 127 up to 28% to 35% for an apparently healthy population in new york. 134 domestic pets can also be a source of s aureus, including mrsa and pvl-producing strains. [135] [136] [137] [138] [139] manian 136 described 2 dog owners suffering from persistent mrsa infection, who suffered relapses whenever they returned home from the hospital; further investigation revealed that the dog was carrying the same strain of mrsa.people who carry s aureus can shed the organism in large numbers most usually associated with skin scales. 140 kramer et al 81 review data showing that s aureus (including mrsa) can survive on dry surfaces for periods from 7 days up to 7 months. scott and bloomfield showed that, during a 4-hour drying period, up to 50% of s aureus inoculated onto laminate could be transferred to fingertips by contact. transfer to fingertips also occurred when a cloth contaminated with s aureus was used to wipe a clean surface. 141 studies in health care settings, as reviewed by bloomfield et al, 25 147 found that transmission of the mrsa strain from an index case to 2 siblings and the mother occurred at least 3 times, and one family member was colonized for up to 7 months or more.these represent recent examples of studies that show survival and transfer of mrsa around the home. these and other studies are also reviewed by bloomfield et al. 25 intervention studies to establish the causal link between hand hygiene and infectious disease in the home and community both observational and interventional study designs have been used to assess the relationship between hand hygiene and id transmission. by definition, observational studies are not randomized and must utilize careful methods to preserve internal validity. control of confounding and the potential for selection, recall, and other biases are also a concern, for example, individuals who wash their hands less frequently are also less likely to report symptoms. intervention studies on the other hand compare infection rates in groups in which handwashing is, or is not, promoted. intervention studies employing randomization of treatment groups have been considered the ''gold-standard'' in terms of reducing selection biases. these studies have the ability to ensure that randomized groups are similar, apart from treatment allocation and differences that occur by chance. for these reasons, we limit discussion to intervention studies, focusing on gi and rt illnesses, because these are the most common infectious illness symptoms in home and community settings.a range of intervention studies have been carried out to evaluate the causal link between handwashing and id transmission and have been reviewed in a series of papers to assess the consistency and strength of the link. [151] [152] [153] overall, these studies indicate a strong and consistent link between handwashing and gi disease and a significant link between handwashing and rt illnesses. for the most part, these studies have been carried out in child day care centers, schools, and military and other public settings in which the outcome is often measured against a high baseline level of infection. relatively few studies have been carried out in household settings in the united states and europe. difficulties associated with studying households in developed areas include fewer children under the age of 5 years, higher level of hygiene infrastructure, and difficulties in collecting data. given that there are likely fewer susceptible individuals clustered within household settings, the prevalence of gi and rt illnesses is relatively much lower, making it more difficult to detect a significant influence of hand hygiene on the occurrence of illness.whereas some intervention studies are not relevant to this review and have been omitted, others give useful insight into the potential impact of handwashing in the home and in the general community. studies that are included have been selected on the basis of whether transmission routes are likely to reflect those in the home, most particularly whether the relative rates of transmission via these routes (as shown in fig 2) are likely to be similar. for this reason, studies on gi infection in developing countries have been excluded; in these settings, limited access to sanitation means that rates of direct hand-to-mouth transmission from feces is high relative to other routes of transmission (eg, person-to-person transmission via hands, or inadequate food hygiene), compared to settings with adequate water and sanitation in which transmission is more likely to involve person-to-person transmission and transmission via food, rather than direct feces-to-hand-to-mouth. for gi illnesses, we have, therefore, focused on studies carried out in developed country communities, although, even for studies such as those in child daycare centers, in which food preparation is not undertaken by study participants, the data probably reflect mainly the impact on person-to-person transmission. for rt infections, studies conducted in both developed and developing countries are included on the basis that relative rates of airborne transmission versus transmission via hands are likely to be similar regardless of setting.in a recent review, aiello et al assessed the relationship between handwashing and gi outcomes 154 focusing on studies conducted in north america and europe. table 7 summarizes studies providing an effect estimate (risk ratio, rate ratio, and others) as well as 95% confidence intervals (95% ci). in all of the studies, handwashing with soap was the factor studied, although in some, this was combined with hygiene education measures. all studies assessing handwashing and hand hygiene education were conducted in school or day care settings.among the studies in table 7 , the reduction in gi illness associated with handwashing ranged from 210% to 157%. however, 3 of the 5 studies were not statistically significant, including the study that identified a value of 210%. the studies that gave statistically significant results all describe reductions close to 50%. overall, these reviews suggest a consistent causal relationship between handwashing and reduction in gi illness, although the findings are less consistent and of a lesser magnitude than in lesser developed settings in which studies considered statistically significant suggested reductions from 26% to 79%. 154 in assessing rt infections, the reviews of aiello and larson 151 and aiello et al, 154 mentioned above, 161 they reported that hand hygiene (handwashing, education, and waterless hand sanitizers) can reduce the risk of respiratory infection by 16% (95% ci: 11%-21%). these investigators have now updated their estimate with 2 further, more recent, studies that, when all studies are taken together, give a pooled impact on respiratory infection of 23%. 162 based on these studies, table 8 summarizes the results of community-based interventions (excluding health care-related and military settings) on rt illnesses. most studies were conducted in economically developed countries (83%, 5/6). the range of reduction in illness was 5% to 53%, but only 33% (2/6) of the studies were statistically significant. the results suggest that hand hygiene education and promotion of handwashing can reduce rates of rt illnesses, but the impact is less than for gi infections, although it must be borne in mind that the available data are more limited. 154 there are also several studies of handwashing that do not distinguish between gi and rt outcomes. 157, 167, 168 these studies measure outcomes such as illness-related absenteeism, making it difficult to assess the impact on specific disease etiologies. of these studies, only one reported a significant reduction (25%). 157 two were conducted in day care centers, and 1 was conducted in an elementary school. all 3 studies were conducted in economically developed areas (united states, sweden, and israel). 157, 167, 168 several methodologic issues must be considered for these studies. studies that use randomization are more likely to produce study groups with similar baseline characteristics. surprisingly, 40% of the 11 studies in tables 7 and 8 did not randomize. in some studies, randomization may not be an option (eg, in community settings) because the intervention is too complicated to randomize to multiple groups rather than assigning it to a single geographic area. controlling for potential confounding variables is also an important issue, for example, if a study did not control for age and included adults as well as children, the effect of a hygiene intervention may be diluted because adults are at lower risk for diarrheal disease compared with children. in randomized studies, adjustment for confounding in the statistical analysis may not be required if potential confounders associated with intervention and control groups appear balanced, for example, randomization of households in the same geographic area may produce intervention and control arms with the same age distributions, hygiene habits, and health profiles. as summarized in table 9 , of the 11 studies, only 50% (9/18) reported controlling for at least 1 potential confounding factor. although masking (also known as blinding) can be difficult to implement in hygiene studies because subjects, observers, and interviewers are usually aware of the intervention status, a few studies (2/18) were able to employ masking to reduce knowledge of the intervention. masking can reduce biases associated with knowledge of intervention, including changes in behaviors, practices, and data collection methods.for intervention studies, disregarding clustered sample design may cause bias. for example, a handwashing program in a day care center may affect a child's risk of disease through its individual-level effect (the effect of handwashing of a child on his or her own risk of disease) and through its group-level effect (the effect of centerwide handwashing on risk of disease, even if the child is not following the handwashing program). clustered interventions must take into account the grouped data structure in subsequent analyses or must analyze data at the in the section above, which describes the development of a risk-based approach to home hygiene, we evaluated how pathogens are introduced into the home and the chain of events that can lead to healthy household members becoming infected. an assessment of the microbiologic data related to each stage of the infection transmission cycle suggests that the critical control points for preventing the spread of infection in the home are the hands, hand contact surfaces, food contact surfaces, and cleaning cloths and utensils. intervention at the appropriate time (eg, during raw food handling, rather than as part of daily routine cleaning) is an equally fundamental part of a riskbased approach to hygiene. in practice, pathogens may be transmitted by more than one route, and it is impossible to achieve 100% hand hygiene compliance. therefore, interventions to reduce id transmission in the home must be multifaceted.key to preventing infection transmission via the hands (and other surfaces) is the application of effective hygiene procedures. because the evidence reviewed in the earlier sections shows that the ''infectious dose'' for many common pathogens such as campylobacter, norovirus, and rhinovirus can be very small (1-500 particles or cells), intuitively one must argue that, in situations in which there is significant risk, the aim should be to get rid of as many organisms as possible from critical surfaces. organisms can be removed from hands and other surfaces by the following: d physical removal using soap or detergent-based cleaning; or d microbes can be killed in situ by applying a disinfectant or sanitizer.in principle, handwashing using soap or detergent and water mechanically dislodge organisms, but, to be effective, it must be applied in conjunction with a rubbing process that maximizes release of microbes from the skin and a rinsing process that washes the organisms off the hands. although elimination of transient contamination from the hands by the application of a hygiene procedure is plausible, the evidence considered below suggests that, in practice, procedures vary considerably in the extent to which they achieve this. in this section, data on the efficacy of hand hygiene procedures are summarized. a range of test methods has been used to measure the efficacy of hand hygiene products and procedures. although these methodologies yield valuable data, the results can vary considerably depending on the method used. in 2004, sickbert-bennet et al 169 produced a study, based on published literature and their own data, which indicated that factors that affect efficacy measurements are as follows: use of experimental contamination versus normal flora, application method of test organism, type of hand hygiene agent, concentration of active ingredient, volume, duration of contact and application method of the agent, and study method (in vivo panel test vs in vitro suspension test). interpretation of data is made difficult by failure to compare multiple agents in the same study; because of these limitations, comparisons of results from different studies must be interpreted with care.in vivo ''panel test'' studies of the effectiveness of handwashing. in europe, the efficacy of handwashing is established by panel tests that determine the reduction in the number of organisms released from artificially contaminated hands. the test applicable to handwash products is the committee european normalisation hygienic handwash test en1499. 170 in this test, e coli is inoculated onto the hands and dried. the handwash product is applied to the hands with a rubbing action for either 30 seconds or 1 minute. the residual number of bacteria present on the hands is assessed pre-and postwash by a rinse sampling process and the log reduction determined. to make a claim that a product is a hygienic handwash, it must produce a log reduction in release of e coli from the hands at least equivalent to that produced by a reference soft soap product (mean, 2.76 log in 1 minute; range, 2.02-4.27). in the united states, handwashing is evaluated by a similar panel test using serratia marcescens as 171 the product, when evaluated by this method, must produce a 2-log reduction after 5 minutes. a range of studies, based on these methodologies, has been carried out to determine the efficacy of handwashing, and are reviewed by boyce and pittet, 172 kampf and kramer, 173 and sickbert-bennet et al. 169 from their assessment, kampf and kramer estimated that handwashing produced a mean reduction of up to 2.4 log within 1 minute. data from individual studies are summarized in table 10 and suggest that, for e coli, the greatest reduction is achieved within the first 30 seconds, ranging from 0.6 to 1.1 log after 15 seconds to 1.8 to 2.8 log after 30 seconds. extending the washing time to 1 minute produces a reduction of 2.6 to 3.23 log, but increasing the process for more than 1 minute does not appear to gain any additional reduction. relatively few data are available on the effectiveness of handwashing in removal of viruses, but the available data (table 10) suggest that handwashing may be less effective for viruses compared with bacteria.although panel test data suggest that handwashing efficacy is similar across a range of bacterial species, some field-based studies suggest that efficacy can vary quite significantly. in some cases, organisms can be attached to the hands too firmly and may not be removed by handwashing. a study of the spread of salmonella and campylobacter from contaminated chickens via hands during handling and preparation in a kitchen 176 showed that, although campylobacter were efficiently released from the hands by a 30second rub and rinse process, a 2-minute process was necessary to eliminate salmonella. the hand rinsing process is also important; cogan et al 86 showed that, following preparation of salmonella and campylobacter-contaminated chickens in domestic kitchens, 15.3% of hands and hand and food contact surfaces still showed evidence of contamination even after participants had carried out a washing-up routine with detergent and hot water and then used a cloth to wipe surfaces. sites contaminated most frequently were hands (20%); dishcloths, utensils, and tap handles (25%); and sink surrounds (30%). these results were confirmed in further studies 176, 177 in which, after cleaning up with a typical routine involving a bowl of hot soapy water and a cloth, although isolation rates from hands of participants were 5% (1/20) for campylobacter, 45% (9/20) of participants still had salmonella on their hands, and, on 3 occasions, counts recovered were .10 3 colony-forming units. in a further study in which participants cleaned up in the same way but then rinsed their hands under running water for 10 seconds, no samples were positive for campylobacter. however, 15% (3/20) still had low numbers of salmonella isolated from their hands. larson et al showed that the quantity of soap (1 ml and 3 ml) used can also have an impact on the microbial reduction achieved by handwashing. 178 bidawid et al 65, 66 studied the impact of handwashing in preventing transfer of hav and fcv from artificially contaminated finger pads to pieces of lettuce (table 11 ). touching the lettuce for 10 seconds resulted in transfer of 9.2% and 18%, respectively, of the virus. when finger pads were washed before the lettuce was touched, the amount of virus transferred was reduced to 0.39% and 0.4%, respectively. amounts of hav and fcv remaining on treated finger pads were 6.5% and 7%, respectively. surprisingly, virus transfer to lettuce when the finger pads were rinsed with water alone was between 0% and 0.3%, depending on the volume of water used for rinsing.barker et al showed that a thorough 1-minute handwash with soap was sufficient to eliminate norovirus from fecally contaminated hands to levels that gave negative reverse-transcription polymerase chain reaction assays. 89 however, schurmann and eggers 175 concluded that enteric viruses, particularly poliovirus, may be more strongly bound to the skin and that the inclusion of an abrasive substance in handwash preparations is needed to achieve effective removal. handwashing was also found to be ineffective in eliminating adenovirus from hands of a physician and patients. 179 for handwashing, a hand-rubbing time of 15 seconds with soap is generally recommended, although the data in table 10 indicate that 30 seconds to 1 minute is needed to achieve the optimum of 2-to 3-log reduction. in practice, it is doubtful whether people comply with even a 15-second handwash, although there are few data to confirm this. a study of 224 healthy another study with 52 office workers and students showed a mean log prewash count of 4.81 compared with 5.07 postwash. 181 kampf and kramer 173 also reviewed studies from health care settings in which increased bacterial counts were found on the hands after handwashing, and handwashing failed to prevent transfer of bacteria from hands to surfaces. although there are no data available to confirm this, increases in contamination may result from sweating induced by hot water, which flushes resident bacteria from the sweat glands onto the hand surface or aids detachment of bacteria attached to skin scales. it is important to bear in mind that, although soap and water removes contamination from the hands, soap itself has a limited antimicrobial effect, which means that contamination will be transferred to the sink. hospital studies show that pseudomonas aeruginosa and burkholderia cepacia 182 can form reservoirs of contamination in sink waste pipes and can be a source of infection at times when splashes of contaminated water come in contact with hands. mermel et al reported that hands of hcws became recontaminated from faucet handles during a shigella outbreak. 183 soap bars also have the potential to spread contamination from person to person via the hands. 88 efficacy of abhs abhs are formulations that contain either ethanol 1propanol or 2-propanol or a combination of these products. their antimicrobial activity is attributed to their ability to denature proteins. although products containing 60% to 95% alcohol are most effective, higher concentrations are less effective because proteins are not easily denatured in the absence of water. a range of in vivo and in vitro studies have been carried out to determine the effectiveness of abhs and are reviewed by boyce and pittet, 172 kampf and kramer, 173 and sickbert-bennet et al. 169 in vivo panel testing of abhs. in europe, the efficacy of abhs is established by panel tests that determine the reduction in the number of organisms released from artificially contaminated hands. the test applicable to abhs is the committee european normalisation hygienic handrub test en1500. 184 in this test, e coli is inoculated onto the hands and dried. the sanitizer is applied to the hands with a rubbing action for a specified period. the residual number of bacteria present on hands is assessed pre-and posttreatment by a rinse-sampling process and the log reduction determined. to claim that a product is a hygienic handrub, it must produce a log reduction at least equivalent to that produced by a reference product containing 60% vol/vol 2-propanol (mean, 4.24 log in 1 minute; range, 3.17-6.46).in vivo panel testing against bacterial strains. data from in vivo panel tests, summarized in table 12 , indicate that abhs show good and rapid activity against bacterial stains such as e coli and s aureus. efficacy is at least as good, if not better, than that achieved by handwashing with soap (table 10) ; log reductions obtained after a 30-second contact period were of the order of 3.4 to 3.7 or more compared with 1.8 to 2.8 for a 30-second handwashing process. boyce and pittet 172 conclude that, typically, log reductions of the release of test bacteria from artificially contaminated hands average 3.5 log after 30 seconds and 4.0 to 5.0 log after 1 minute.paulson et al 185 compared the efficacy of abhs containing 62% ethanol (contact time 5 minutes) with handwashing against s marcescens, which showed that handwashing (20 seconds rubbing followed by 30 seconds rinsing) produced a log reduction of 2.29 compared with 3.83 for the abhs. hammond et al 186 recorded a 2.84-log reduction for 62% ethanol against s marcescens in 10 seconds using the astm method. sickbert-bennet et al, 174 however, showed that exposure of s marcescens to 60% to 62% ethanol for 10 seconds produced only a 1.15-to 1.55-log reduction compared with 1.87-log reduction for handwashing for 10 seconds, when tested by the astm 1147 method. leischner et al 187 carried out in vivo tests that showed that alcohol gels were significantly less effective against c difficile spores (1.68-to 1.94-log reduction) compared with handwashing with chlorhexidine soap (2.46-log reduction). residual spores were readily transferred by handshaking following abhs use. 187 the reduction in spore counts is higher than expected in view of their known resistance to alcohol and may result from the friction associated with application of the gel rather than a bactericidal action; kampf and kramer 173 state that water alone can produce a reduction of 0.5 to 2.8 log within 1 minute for e coli.using the standard astm 1174 method, sickbert-bennet et al evaluated the effect of exposure time and volume of product used on the efficacy of 62% ethanol. 169 they showed that the use of 7 g of the abhs produced a higher log reduction compared with 3 g (2.7-to 3.8-log reduction compared with 1.0-to 1.8log reduction). rubbing the hands until dry (3-12 minutes) was more effective compared with a 10-second application (1.0-to 1.6-log reduction compared with 0.6-to 1.1-log reduction).two recent field studies indicate that an abhs is equally or slightly more effective than handwashing in reducing bacterial contamination on hands. davis et al 19 compared the reduction of bacterial counts on hands using soap and water or a 62% ethanol-based hand sanitizer (contact time 30 seconds) after animal handling at a us livestock event. there was no significant difference in the distribution of log reductions obtained using abhs compared with handwashing; log reductions in total count ranged from 21.4 to 1.4 and 23.0 to 3.5 for total coliforms. traub-dargtz et al carried out a study at 2 clinics in canada to evaluate the efficacy of handwashing compared with use of abhs (62% ethanol, contact time 30-60 seconds) on veterinary staff performing routine equine physical examinations. 188 mean bacterial load on hands increased by 0.36 and 0.91 log (for the 2 clinics, respectively) as a result of handling the animals, whereas the mean log reduction produced by handwashing with soap was less than 0.6, compared with 1.29 and 1.44 log (for the 2 clinics, respectively) produced by abhs.in vivo panel testing against viral strains. a number of in vivo studies have been carried out to determine the efficacy of abhs in reducing the release of viruses from hands. test methods were variants of the method of ansari et al 189 or the astm e1174 method, 171 in which the virus is applied to the fingertips and the efficacy of the product in reducing the numbers of viral particles recoverable from the hands determined. the residual number of viral particles present on the hands is assessed pre-and posttreatment and the log reduction determined. data collated by boyce and pittet 172 (table  13) indicate that ethanol at 60% to 80% produces a 0.8-to .3-log reduction against a range of viruses, the extent of the reduction depending on the viral strain, the nature and concentration of the alcohol, and contact time.data indicate that activity of abhs against viral strains is less than against bacterial strains and that ethanol has greater activity against viruses than 2-propanol. however, all of the strains referred to in table 13 are nonenveloped viruses, which are known to be more resistant to disinfectants than enveloped viruses. as far as hand hygiene in the home and community is concerned, however, this is key because many of the viral strains responsible for hygiene-related id commonly occurring in community settings (rotavirus, norovirus, rhinovirus, and adenovirus) are nonenveloped. that having been said, the data suggest that, although nonenveloped viruses such as hav and enteroviruses (eg, poliovirus) require 70% to 80% alcohol to be reliably inactivated, studies by sattar et al 194 in a number of these studies, handwashing with soap was also investigated. these studies 175, 189, 196 showed that the action of abhs against hav, polio, and rotavirus was significantly better than that achieved by handwashing with soap. however, in the test model used by ansari et al 189 and mbithi et al, 196 inoculated fingertips are exposed to soap solution or abhs by inverting them over a vial containing the product. in practice, handwashing involving rubbing and rinsing is likely to remove larger numbers of organisms from hands. in a further experiment, ansari et al 115 also demonstrated that 2-propanol (70%) was more effective (98.9% reduction after 10 seconds) than liquid soap (77% reduction) against rotavirus.mbithi et al showed that the log reduction of polio and hav virus (0.89-1.34) by application of 70% ethanol was sufficient to prevent transfer to another surface via the fingertips. 196 using similar methodology, bidawid et al 65, 66 studied the impact of ethanol hand sanitizers in preventing transfer of hav and fcv from artificially contaminated finger pads to pieces of lettuce. results (table 11) show that touching the lettuce for 10 seconds resulted in transfer of 9.2% and 18%, respectively, of the virus. when finger pads were treated with 62% ethanol or 75% ethanol (contact time 20 seconds) before the lettuce was touched, the amount of virus transferred was reduced to 0.64% and 0.46%, respectively, for hav and 2.1% and 1.2%, respectively, for fcv. although both 62% and 75% alcohol produced significant reductions in virus transfer, significant amounts of virus were found to remain on treated finger pads. in all cases, treatment with ethanol was less effective than handwashing.kampf and kramer 172 and boyce and pittet 173 suggest that, to achieve satisfactory activity against nonenveloped viruses, higher alcohol concentrations and extended contact times are needed. absolute ethanol reduced viral release from hands by 3.2 log, 80% ethanol by 2.2 log, and absolute 1-propanol by 2.4 log 197 but with a contact time of 10 minutes. schurmann and eggers 175 concluded that high alcohol-concentration products are effective against enteroviruses only under favorable conditions (large disinfectant/ virus volume ratio, low protein load). other studies also demonstrate superior activity of high ethanol concentrations against nonenveloped viruses such as polio, hav, and adenovirus. 198, 199 in vitro testing against bacteria, viruses, and fungi. whereas in vivo tests can be used to indicate the efficacy of products under use conditions, in vitro suspension tests are used to establish whether efficacy extends to a broad range of organisms.in vitro testing bacterial and fungal strains. alcohols have excellent and rapid activity against gram-positive and gram-negative vegetative bacteria and fungi when tested in vitro. 172, 173 a study by fendler et al 200 (table 14) shows the efficacy of an abhs containing 62% ethyl alcohol against a range of bacterial and fungal species, giving 4-to 6-log reduction in 15 to 30 seconds.in vitro testing against viral strains. data, as reviewed by boyce and pittet, 172 confirm that enveloped viruses such as herpes, influenza, piv, and rsv are very susceptible to alcohols. data from individual studies (table 15) suggest that activity against enveloped viruses is equivalent to that against bacterial strains. however, in agreement with in vivo data, alcohols tend to be less effective against nonenveloped viruses, although this is not the case for all strains. fendler et al 200 confirmed good activity for ethanol (62%) against piv and herpes viruses (.4-log reduction in 30 seconds) and some, but relatively less, activity against the nonenveloped rhinovirus, cocksackie virus, adenovirus, and hav (1-to 3-log reduction in 30 seconds). hammond et al 186 showed .5-log reduction against herpes and influenza virus but also .4.25-log reduction against rhinovirus type 16. there are no data on efficacy against rotavirus in vitro.in vitro tests suggest that alcohols are relatively effective against fcv, although gehrke et al 190 (table 15) found that 1-propanol was more effective than 2-propanol and ethanol. it was also found that these alcohols were less effective against fcv at 80% than at 50% and 70%. at this concentration (80%), 1-propanol, 2-propanol, and ethanol produced log reductions of only 1.9, 1.35, and 2.16, respectively. by contrast, duizer et al 201 showed that 70% ethanol produced less than a 2-log reduction for fcv after 8 minutes and a 3-log reduction after 30 minutes.these data are confirmed by a further study (mcneil-ppc unpublished) using in vitro suspension test methods as used to generate data in table 15 . the data (table 16) show that 62% ethanol gave a 3to 6-log reduction in 30 seconds against a range of nonenveloped viruses including not only rsv, piv, and influenza a and b but also against some strains of rhinovirus and echovirus.efficacy of abhs under conditions of soiling. alcohols are considered inappropriate when hands are visibly dirty or soiled because they fail to remove soiling. however, in a number of in vitro studies, in which the efficacy of abhs was determined in the presence and absence of soil (10% fetal calf serum or 0.3% bovine serum albumin), soil produced little or no loss of efficacy. 198, 202 larson and bobo showed that, in the presence of small amounts of protein material (eg, blood), ethanol and 2-propanol were more effective than soap in reducing bacterial counts on hands. 203 using the astm 1174 method, sickbert-bennet et al 169 showed that applying protein to hands did not produce any significant reduction in efficacy of abhs or handwashing but produced a modest but significant increase; log reductions for handwashing were 1.18 to 1.39 and 1.56 to 1.87 in the absence and presence of protein, respectively. log reductions for abhs were 0.18 to 1.07 and 1.35 to 1.55 in the absence and presence of protein, respectively.one of the problems in developing hygiene promotion policies is the lack of quantitative data on the relative health impact of different hygiene interventions. although intervention studies yield quantitative data on health impact, as discussed in section 4.2, the reliability of these estimates is difficult to confirm. by contrast, in vivo and in vitro tests are more economic to perform and can be used to determine relative efficacy of different procedures but give no assessment of how the contamination reduction on hands correlates with health impact. in an attempt to overcome these problems, haas et al have applied the technique of quantitative microbial risk assessment (qmra) to estimate the relative health benefits resulting from use of different hygiene procedures. 204 this approach involves using microbiologic data from the published literature related to each stage of the infection transmission cycle to calculate infection risk.in a recent study, 205 these investigators developed a model for studying the effect of hand contact with ground beef during food preparation, which was used to study the impact of handwashing and use of abhs in preventing subsequent transference from the hands to the mouth compared with no handwashing. pathogenic e coli and e coli o157:h7 were selected for this study because it is known from other investigations 206 that handling ground beef during home food preparation poses a risk of infection with e coli. to perform the risk assessment, data on the density of pathogens in ground beef, transference from beef to hands, removal by handwashing or abhs, rate of transfer from hand to mouth, and infectivity of ingested pathogens were obtained from the literature and, after screening for data quality, were used to develop probability distributions. for assessing log reductions produced by hand hygiene procedures, only in vivo panel testing data were considered. the median log reduction used in these calculations was 0.3 (range, 0.2-3.0) for handwashing and 4.3 (range, 2.6-5.8) for abhs. table 17 shows the estimates of the infection risk from handling raw beef, as obtained from the analysis. the authors note that these risks are conditional in the sense that they quantify the risk to an individual who has handled ground beef and who engages in hand-to-mouth activity. the probability that an individual will engage in such behavior is not known, and, therefore, a direct comparison with actual disease rates cannot be made. however, with some plausible assumptions, it was assessed that, assuming that there are 100 million individuals in the united states, each of whom handles ground beef once per month, this results in 1.2 3 10 9 contacts per year. assuming that 10% of these individuals contact hand to mouth after handling ground beef, this amounts to 1.2 3 10 8 incidents per year. for e coli o157:h7, using the median risk, this would result in an estimate ranging from 0.014 infections per year if all individuals washed their hands with soap following contact with ground beef to 0.7 infections per year if no handwashing is done. this would equate to a 98% median risk reduction for handwashing compared with no handwashing. if an abhs was used, this would result in an estimate of 0.00005 infections per year if all individuals used abhs following contact with ground beef. this would equate to a 99.9996% median risk reduction for use of abhs compared with handwashing.this study follows an earlier study by haas et al 207 to calculate risks associated with hand-to-mouth transfer after diaper changing of a baby infected with shigella. based on this model, it was calculated that the probability of acquiring infection was between 24 of 100 and 91 of 100 for those who used handwashing with soap after changing diapers. this was based on panel test data 205 conclude that quantitative microbial and id risk models offer a useful tool to assess the relative extent to which different hygiene procedures can impact on id risks. they concede, however, that, although risk modeling represents a promising approach, there are limitations to most models because of the multifactorial nature of infection transmission, the dynamic environment in which transmission takes place, and the paucity of data to specify model parameters.in an earlier section, we evaluated intervention study data to assess the strength of the causal link between hand hygiene and id transmission. in this section, we use these data to evaluate the effectiveness of handwashing as a hygiene measure and in relation to the effectiveness of using abhs as an adjunct or an alternative to handwashing.despite the methodologic limitations, the collective weight of evidence from intervention and microbiologic studies described earlier suggests that handwashing with soap can have a significant impact in reducing the incidence of gi and rt infection. the data, however, show that the health impact from handwashing promotion varies significantly according to the setting and outcome. statistically significant reductions ranged from 48% to 57% for gi illness and 20% to 51% for rt illness. although all studies were carried out in settings such as day care centers and schools, we believe that the modes of transmission in these settings and the relative rates of transmission of rt and gi infections are likely to reflect those occurring in the home.in 2004, meadows and le saux published a review of the effect of rinse-free hand sanitizers in elementary schools over a 20-year period. 208 they concluded, however, that the data were of poor quality and that more rigorous intervention trials are needed. in a more recent study, aiello et al examined the epidemiologic evidence for a relationship between waterless hand sanitizers and infections in the community setting over several decades. 154 in table 18 , we present the studies that specifically examined abhs. only studies with an effect estimate and 95% ci are presented. the type and content of the abhs varied across studies, for example, one study reported the use of a 60% isopropyl alcohol rinse and another study utilized an alcohol-based foam sanitizer. however, most studies used alcohol-based gels or other alcohol-based emollients. the alcohol content included ethanol and 2-propanol at concentrations ranging from 60% to 90%.of the 8 intervention studies, 7 were conducted in the united states (88%, 7/8) and 1 in finland (13%). most were conducted in child day care centers, elementary schools, or universities (88%, 7/8), and one was conducted in the household (13%, 1/8). outcomes included gi-related illnesses/symptoms and/or upper rt-related illnesses/symptoms examined as separate outcomes or in combination with other infectionrelated symptoms as part of a school absence-related definition of ''infectious-illness.'' of the 8 studies, 88% (7/8) reported significant results for at least one age group or outcome. the effect was stronger in younger compared with older age groups for studies providing age stratified data.the reduction in gi illness ranged from 0% to 59% for the 4 intervention studies that examined gi illnesses as separate outcomes. [209] [210] [211] 215 of these, all but one showed statistically significant reductions. 210 the study by uhari et al showed a significant reduction in gi illness only among children #3 years of age. 211 all but one of these studies was conducted in child care settings. 215 when evaluated separately, reductions in gi illness appeared more robust compared with the findings for upper rt illness.for upper rt illness, the reduction in infectious illness/symptoms ranged from 26% to 26%. only 2 of the 5 studies (44%) examining upper rt illness as a main outcome reported a statistically significant reduction. uhari et al reported a 13% reduction in rt illnesses among children #3years of age, but no significant effect in older children. 211 white et al reported a 20% reduction in upper rt illness among students using abhs in residence halls. 213 however, this study suffered from several methodologic shortcomings, including lack of control for clustered units, no randomization, no masking, and no monitoring of product use. all but one of the intervention studies included a hygiene education component, but, in 7 of these studies, this was only provided in the intervention arm. the level of education varied widely, ranging from basic information on when to use the abhs (ie, after sneezing and coughing, after use in the restroom, before lunch) to in-depth education programs 214 and biweekly instructional material designed to educate families on hand hygiene and infection transmission. 215 in all studies, abhs was promoted as a supplement to handwashing, or as an alternative to handwashing when soap was unavailable, and it is likely that the hygiene education would have had the effect of encouraging more frequent handwashing as well as use of abhs. although almost all studies indicated that hygiene education combined with promotion of abhs can reduce the risks of gi or rt illness, only 2 studies allowed any assessment of the independent effect of the abhs. of these 2 studies, both studies showed a significant reduction in illness-related absences (20% and 44%, respectively), but it is not clear whether the illnesses were predominantly gi or rt because these studies used a loose definition of absence-related illnesses. sandora et al 215 was the only study carried out in the household setting and, of all the studies, reported the highest reduction for gi illness. the trial involved 292 families with children enrolled in 26 child care centers. intervention families received a supply of abhs and biweekly hand hygiene educational materials for 5 months; control families received only materials promoting good nutrition. a total of 252 gi illnesses occurred during the study; 11% were secondary illnesses. the secondary gi illness rate was significantly lower (59%) in intervention families compared with control families (see table 18 ). a total of 1802 rt illnesses occurred during the study; 25% were secondary illnesses. although rt illness rates were not significantly different between groups, families with higher abhs usage had marginally lower rt illness rate than those with less usage (19% reduction). sandora et al 215 suggested that the difference may be due to heightened diligence associated with using abhs after a gi-related incident compared with an rt incident, such as sneezing.overall, based on relatively limited data available, the results in table 18 suggest that the impact of abhs promotion, as part of a hygiene education and promotion program in reducing the incidence of gi infections in young children, is similar to that observed for promotion of handwashing with soap. promotion of abhs in this manner also produced some reduction in the incidence of rt infections, which was less than that associated with promotion of handwashing alone. assessing whether there might be an added health benefit of using abhs above and beyond the effect of hygiene education is hampered by the fact that most studies used hygiene education and abhs in the intervention arm but did not provide an educational component to the control arm.several important methodologic issues were evident, although more recent studies have improved designs and conduct. in most studies, either parents or school personnel provided information on id among children in the study populations. in all but one study, 34 the parents, participants, or personnel monitoring and reporting infections were not masked as to their own or their child's intervention status. although masking of participants and interviewers to the intervention status is important, because it might influence reporting, it is often difficult to conduct masked hygiene interventions and may not be ethical. sandora et al determined that it was neither feasible nor ethical to mask subjects or interviewers because it is difficult to devise a formulation that could act as a ''placebo'' for abhs, and using a placebo abhs product might endanger the control group via inadequate hand hygiene. 215 in many of the abhs studies, especially the recent ones, efforts were made to control for potential confounding factors. however, many of the studies did not collect information on baseline hand hygiene practices (nor methods and frequency of cleaning/disinfecting soiled/contaminated environmental surfaces in homes) as well as abhs use. the studies also excluded participants who reported current abhs use in the home. furthermore, participants were asked to refrain from using abhs in settings outside the home. these are all important design strategies minimizing bias associated with noncompliance or differential usage. two of the 8 intervention studies failed to use systematic monitoring for hygiene practices, such as frequency of hand-sanitizing episodes, frequency of handwashing, or duration of handwashing. 212, 213 this is especially concerning because the study by sandora et al suggests that the quantity of abhs influences the risk of infection in a dose-response manner. 215 moreover, if frequency of handwashing and abhs use is not recorded, it is impossible to isolate the independent effects of abhs from that of handwashing on infection rates. in these studies of abhs use, surveillance measures included calculating use from monthly demand, total amount supplied, observation by research assistants, participant report, and reported use by primary caregivers in households. 186, 209, 212, 214, 215 overall, the microbiologic data, together with the intervention study data (both those involving abhs as well as those involving handwashing) as presented in this review, provide consistent evidence of a strong causal link between hygiene and the spread of infection in the home and community, and suggest that probably the single most important route for the spread of infection is the hands. if the data from intervention studies (summarized in table 19 ) are an accurate reflection of the true picture, it is suggested that, for up to 60% of gi illnesses, the hands are the ''sufficient,'' or a ''component'' (see earlier for definitions), cause of spread of infection. this correlates with microbiologic and other data reviewed in this report, which suggest that, although there is a tendency to assume that gi infections are mostly foodborne and result from inadequate cooking and inadequate storage of food, in reality, most gi infections in the home result from person-to-person spread or contamination of ready-to-eat foods within the home, much of which involves the hands as the sufficient or a component cause. for rt illnesses, the intervention study data (summarized in table 19 ) suggest that transmission via hands could be a sufficient or component cause of up to 50% of illnesses; whereas there has been a tendency to assume that the lower impact of hand hygiene on rt compared with gi infections is due to the fact that spread of rt pathogens is mainly airborne, the microbiologic and other data in this review correlate with the intervention data in suggesting that, for rt infections commonly circulating in the community, such as rhinovirus and rsv, the hands are the major route of spread.although up to 50% to 60% reduction in id risk was observed in some intervention studies, in other studies the reduction was much less. this variability could well be due to methodologic issues but could also be due to other factors within and between study communities. one possibility is that it relates to differences in the range of pathogens with differing modes of spread prevalent in different study groups, which means that hand hygiene has greater impact in some intervention groups than others. alternatively, the differences may reflect differing levels of hand hygiene compliance in different intervention groups. in some studies, the quality of the hygiene education, the manner in which the hygiene promotion was conducted, and the enthusiasm with which it was received may have given the intervention group a better understanding of what was required, with the result that they used better hygiene technique and were more likely to apply it at critical times. although there are no intervention study data to confirm this, the microbiologic data together with the qmra assessments suggest that even a relatively modest increase in log reduction on hands within a population could produce a significant increase in the health impact of a hand hygiene promotion campaign, which could, in turn, be achieved by addressing the issues in the next 2 sections.although panel tests carried out under controlled conditions showed that handwashing can reduce the numbers of bacteria and some viruses on the hands by up to 2-to 3-log within 30 seconds to 1 minute, in practice it is doubtful whether people wash their hands properly, even for the prescribed period of 15 seconds, to achieve this. at present, there is a paucity of data on the efficacy of handwashing in relation to how people actually wash their hands on a day-to-day basis, both in the duration of handwashing and handwashing technique; in most of the intervention studies described earlier no attempt was made to time handwashes or to determine residual levels of contamination on the hands after handwashing. microbiologic data suggest that, for some pathogens (eg, salmonella), mechanical removal by handwashing alone is inefficient. these data, together with the results of in vivo panel testing of the effectiveness of handwashing and of abhs, as described above, question the efficacy of handwashing in community-based groups and suggest that more work is needed to determine the efficacy of hand hygiene procedures under conditions normally encountered in the home and how hand hygiene procedures could be improved.for abhs, in vivo and in vitro testing suggest that these formulations are highly effective against bacterial pathogens and can produce a 3.5-log reduction on hands within 30 seconds and 4.0-to 5.0-log reduction after a 1-minute application against a wide range of species including salmonella. it is possible, however, that the potential for increased benefits against bacterial infections compared with handwashing may be offset by reduced efficacy against important nonenveloped viruses such as rotavirus, some strains of rhinovirus, and possibly also norovirus. it has been argued that the higher impact of abhs interventions against gi compared with rt infections is due to the fact that rt infections are predominantly viral. however, because the intervention data indicate that handwashing also supports a stronger reduction in gi diseases compared with rt diseases, this seems unlikely. some studies suggest that, to achieve satisfactory activity that includes all types of viruses, higher concentrations up to 80% ethanol should be advised. other studies suggest that the efficacy of abhs may be increased by increasing the volume of agent applied to the hands. 215 in formulating policies for hand hygiene, it would be convenient to be able to define what represents a ''safe'' residual level of contamination on the hands after hand hygiene, ie, sufficient to prevent infection transmission, but, because the infectious dose varies from one species to another and is dependant on the immune status of the recipient, this approach is untenable. the qmra approach, as outlined earlier in this review, however, demonstrates that strategies that produce an increase in the log reduction on hands from 2 to 3 to 4 are accompanied by a significant incremental reduction in the risk of infection in a given population and could thus be worthwhile. this suggests that the health impact from promoting hand hygiene could be increased by developing and promoting procedures for use in the home and community that increase the log reduction of contamination on the hands. this involves identifying products and procedures (both soap-based and waterless products or wipes) that achieve high levels of removal and/or ''kill'' (alone or in combination) of the full range of gram-negative and gram-positive bacteria and enveloped and nonenveloped viruses and that deliver hand hygiene under conditions that people are prepared to employ in their busy and mobile daily lives. it also suggests that, particularly for ''high-risk'' situations as outlined below, there is advantage to be gained by promoting handwashing followed by use of abhs to increase the log reduction.applying hand hygiene at the correct time: the need for hygiene educationthe data presented in this review suggest that the favorable health impact from promoting hand hygiene could be further increased by getting people to practice hand hygiene not just more frequently but also at the right time. a number of studies show the relatively poor understanding of the principles of hygiene that is present in the community. this may be one of the factors responsible for the higher risk reductions observed in intervention studies of gi compared with rt infections. for example, knowledge regarding the need for handwashing after coughing or sneezing may not be as pervasive as knowledge about handwashing after defecation, and it may be that people understand better when to wash their hands during food-associated activities but not, for example, while handling contaminated tissues. although some intervention studies described in this review involved a component of education, it was not possible to determine the extent to which hygiene education that enhanced people's understanding of infection transmission also enhanced health outcome.because visible soiling is an unreliable indicator of the presence of pathogens on the hands, people are unlikely to wash their hands at the correct time unless they have been taught to do so or have some awareness of the chain of infection transmission in the home, ie, they are aware of when their hands may be contaminated. whereas risks associated with food handling are largely confined to defined periods of time, for rt and skin infections (and person-to-person transmission of gi infection), the risk is ongoing and involves a large proportion of our ongoing daily activities. thus, whereas it is possible for hand hygiene advice associated with food hygiene to be rule based, this is not the case for other types of infections. in the event of a flu pandemic, the advice issued by the uk health protection agency 216 to ''wash hands frequently'' is unlikely to be effective unless people have some idea of the times when their hands are likely to be contaminated with flu virus.although current thinking about hygiene promotion tends toward a view that the most effective way to change behavior is by mass social marketing of single rule-based hygiene messages, 4 the data presented in this review suggest that the complexity and shifting nature of the id threat is such that a rule-based approach to hygiene is inadequate to meet current public health needs. the need is for an approach founded on awareness of the chain of infection transmission and how it differs for different groups of infections. hygiene education needs to be consistently incorporated as part of hand hygiene promotion programs if people are to properly understand the risks and adapt their behavior accordingly.based on the data presented in this review, we propose that, in promoting hand hygiene, significant improvements in health impact could be achieved by giving better guidance to people, first, on how to choose the best methods for hand hygiene (handwashing and/or use of abhs) based on the situation and showing them how to apply it properly and why this is important. secondly, it means stressing when it is important to apply hand hygiene, ie, what are the risk situations or critical control points at which hand hygiene needs to be applied.although the level of risk varies according to the occupants of the home (eg, presence of children, pets, ill people) and their immune status, based on the risk assessment approach as outlined earlier in this review, the critical control points or situations in which hand hygiene is indicated are as follows: d after using the toilet (or disposing of human or animal feces); d after changing a baby's diaper and disposing of the feces; d immediately after handling raw food (eg, chicken, raw meat); d before preparing and handling cooked/ready-to-eat food; d before eating food or feeding children; but also d after contact with contaminated surfaces (eg, rubbish bins, cleaning cloths, food contaminated surfaces); d after handling pets and domestic animals; d after wiping or blowing the nose or sneezing into the hands; d after handling soiled tissues (self or others', eg, children); d after contact with blood or body fluids (eg, vomit and others); d before and after dressing wounds; d before giving care to an ''at-risk'' person; and d after giving care to an infected person.in choosing the appropriate option for hand hygiene, there are 3 possibilities: either handwashing with soap, use of abhs (or other effective waterlessbased sanitizers), or handwashing followed by use of abhs. a possible framework for informing appropriate choice according to the particular situation is outlined in fig 4. this suggests that, in situations in the home and community that are ''standard risk'' (perhaps better described as situations not specifically regarded as ''high risk''), either handwashing or use of abhs may be chosen. within this, however, there are factors that advise, or in some cases dictate, choice, for example, handwashing is only an option when there is access to soap and water, whereas use of abhs is not an option when hands are heavily soiled (although people are likely to choose handwashing in this situation, prompted by the need to ''clean'' their hands). as discussed previously, there will always be situations in the home in which there is increased risk, either because there is a known source of infection or someone who is at increased risk of becoming infected. these situations are summarized in table 20 . these situations may relate to activities that are carried out routinely in the home, such as handling of raw meat and poultry, or involve household members such as pregnant women or young babies who are otherwise healthy but at increased risk of (or from) infection. they also relate to ''nonroutine'' situations such as a person in the home who is infected with a cold, or norovirus or other gi infections, or to situations in which there is someone who is at increased risk of infection as a result of underlying illness, immunosuppressive drug treatment, or needing catheter or wound care. although much of the ''health care'' carried out at home is done by trained caregivers, increasingly, there are situations in the home in which simple but risky actions are carried out by household members. in all of these ''increased risk'' situations, as outlined in table 20 , it is suggested that handwashing followed by use of an abhs should be encouraged.in persuading people to change behavior, one of the key factors is ''removing barriers to action.'' 217 lack of convenient access to a sink is a significant barrier to compliance, and time pressure is a barrier to getting people to wash their hands thoroughly. a key benefit of abhs is that they offer the means to apply hand hygiene in situations in which there is limited or no access to a soap and water. in home care situations, abhs offer an alternative to handwashing in situations in which other pressures mitigate against finding the time to visit the bathroom for handwashing, for example, when caring for a baby in the nursery or a sick person. they also offer a substitute for handwashing in ''out of home'' settings such as offices and public places, such as public transport or animal exhibits, at which access to soap and water is a particular problem and all of which offer frequent opportunities for hand transmission of infection. promoting use of abhs has the potential to get people to undertake hand hygiene more frequently and at critical times. in response to concerns about the possibility of a flu pandemic, the centers for disease control and prevention recommend the use of abhs for use as an alternative to handwashing. 218 in the event of a flu pandemic, it seems particularly important to encourage people to adopt good hand hygiene in public places. in health care settings, links between use of abhs and increased hand hygiene compliance and reduced infection rates has been observed. 219 in applying the framework outlined in fig 4, our intention is that this should not be regarded as an ''either handwashing or abhs'' situation; the fundamental aim should be to encourage more people to undertake hand hygiene procedures wherever possible at critical times.in view of the fact that hands are part of a complex system of infection transmission pathways, it must also be considered whether hand hygiene can, or should, be promoted in isolation. because people are reluctant to comply with handwashing, together with the microbiologic data showing the potential for transfer via hand and food contact surfaces and cloths to hands, which increase as the frequency occurrence of contamination of these surfaces increases, it would seem that, to maximize the health impact from hand hygiene promotion, it should be s56 vol. 35 no. 10 supplement 1 combined with promotion of hygiene in general, including hygienic cleaning of critical surfaces. if nothing else, this could raise awareness that hand contamination can arise from touching apparently clean surfaces. we are concerned that emphasis on handwashing alone without putting it within the context of other aspects of hygiene is encouraging the perception that handwashing is all that is required, ie, ''if you wash your hands you won't get sick.''the aim of this report has been to review the evidence base for hand hygiene and develop a practical framework from it for promoting an effective approach to hand hygiene in home and community settings. provision of detailed guidelines for hand hygiene is outside the scope of this review. for such guidelines the reader is referred to the ifh guidelines and training resource on home hygiene. as part of its work in promoting home hygiene, the ifh has produced ''guidelines for prevention of infection and cross infection in the domestic environment'' and ''recommendations for selection of suitable hygiene procedures for use in the domestic environment.'' 220, 221 these documents are based on the concept of a risk-based approach and give detailed guidance on hand hygiene in the context of all aspects of home hygiene including food hygiene, general hygiene, personal hygiene, care of pets, and others. most recently, the ifh has also produced a teaching/self-learning resource on home hygiene. 222 this is based on the ifh guidelines and recommendations but is designed to present home hygiene theory and practice in simple practical language that can be understood by those with relative little infection control training or background.infectious diseases circulating in the community remain a significant concern, both in developed and developing countries. the global burden of id accounts for over 13 million deaths annually but, whereas the majority of deaths occurs in the developing world, infection also causes approximately 4% of deaths in developed countries. 223 although mortality from id has declined in the developed world, trends in morbidity suggest a change in the pattern of id rather than declining rates. several demographic, environmental, and health care trends, as reviewed in this report, are combining to make it likely that the threat of id will increase in coming years, rather than decline. one such factor is the rising proportion of the population in the community who are more vulnerable to infection. an important part of current european and us health policy is commitment to shorter hospital stays. a key requirement is to ensure that the increased health provision at home is not accompanied by an increase in id risks; otherwise, the cost savings gained by care in the community are likely to be overridden by costs of rehospitalization. even for the ''healthy community,'' id represents a significant economic burden because of absence from work and school and added health care costs. secondary infections can produce complications, and some infections may be associated with the development of diseases such as cancer or other chronic conditions, which can manifest at a later date. those responsible for ensuring that the public are protected from infection in health care facilities are now realizing that their ability to manage the problem is hampered by spread of pathogens such as mrsa, c difficile, and norovirus in the community and the home, and the number of infected people or carriers who come into their facilities, and are looking for ways to address this by engaging the public to adopt more rigorous standards of hygiene.one of the things that is apparent from newly emerging data, and that is reflected in this review, is the extent to which common infections circulating in the community are hygiene related. this suggests, in turn, that hygiene promotion could have a significant benefit in terms of improved public health and well-being; in particular, the data highlight the extent to which viruses (norovirus, rotavirus, rhinovirus, influenza, and other viruses) are responsible for hygiene-related diseases now circulating in the community.the main conclusions from this review are as follows: d id circulating in the home and community is a serious public health problem in the developed as well as the developing world.d good hygiene practice is key to reducing the burden of id in the home and community. d hand hygiene is a key component of good hygiene practice in the home and community and can produce significant benefits in terms of reducing the incidence of infection, most particularly for gastrointestinal infections but also for respiratory tract and skin infections. d decontamination of hands can be carried out either by handwashing with soap or by the use of waterless hand sanitizers, which achieve a log reduction in bacterial and viral contamination on hands by the removal of contamination or by killing the organisms in situ. the health impact of hand hygiene within a given community can be increased by using products and procedures, either alone or in sequence, that maximize the log reduction of both bacteria and viruses on hands. d the impact of hand hygiene in reducing id risks could be increased by convincing people to apply hand hygiene procedures correctly (eg, wash their hands correctly) and at the correct time. d to optimize health benefits, promotion of hand hygiene must be accompanied by hygiene education and should also involve promotion of other aspects of hygiene, for example, surface and cloth hygiene.this report highlights a number of areas in which additional data are needed: d further studies are needed to characterize the frequency of, and factors associated with, id transmission in noninstitutional settings such as the home. d further studies are needed to assess the relative efficacy of hand hygiene procedures in reducing hand contamination (handwashing with soap and use of abhs, involving different ''contact/application/rinsing'' times, and others). this includes the following:(1) in vivo panel tests to determine the reduction in bacteria and viruses on hands under controlled conditions. committee european normalisation or astm tests now provide standard test models for comparing the efficacy of handwashing with the use of waterless hand sanitizer products, under defined conditions. they provide an economic approach (relative to intervention studies) that can be used, alone or in combination with qmra, to inform hygiene policy and/or the design of intervention studies.(2) field studies to determine log reduction in counts on hands in relation to how people actually wash their hands or apply abhs in their homes. d additional data are needed to understand how, when, and why people practice hand hygiene at home and how this relates to their understanding of id transmission and risks. d intervention studies are needed to determine the health impact of hand hygiene promotion with hygiene education, compared with hygiene promotion without education. this should also include understanding how hand hygiene combines with surface hygiene to influence health outcome. d intervention studies are needed to determine the potential for an increase in health impact from promoting use of abhs in conjunction with handwashing (ie, handwashing followed by use of abhs) or as a supplement to handwashing (in situations in which access to water is limited), compared with the promotion of handwashing alone.along with social distancing, handwashing has been repeatedly advised as a strategy for controlling the spread of sars-cov-2, the coronavirus behind the covid-19 pandemic. 1, 2 a new study in environmental health perspectives reports that billions of people lack access to the handwashing resources needed for protection against this and other viruses. 3 the most acute shortages are in sub-saharan africa, south asia, and the caribbean, according to study leader michael brauer, a professor at the institute for health metrics and evaluation at the university of washington and the university of british columbia's school of population and public health in vancouver.handwashing is known to disrupt the transmission of respiratory diseases. 4 soap molecules disrupt sars-cov-2's outer lipid membrane, killing the microbe; running water then flushes away the viral fragments. 5 for many people, handwashing is a routine activity that is taken for granted. "but that's often not the case for people in low-income countries," brauer says.even some populations in wealthier countries lack access to handwashing. for instance, almost 19% of the occupied dwellings on the navajo nation lack complete plumbing facilities, according to the latest data from the american community survey. 6 as of 24 june 2020, the navajo nation, which occupies more than 17 million acres across arizona, utah, and new mexico, had the highest covid-19 rates in the united states, with 347 deaths and approximately 4,137 cases per 100,000 people. 7 for the current study, brauer's team set out to estimate how many people in the world have access to handwashing facilities with soap and water. they reviewed surveys conducted between 1990 and 2019 at 1,062 locations in 88 countries. many of the 153 surveys they assessed were observational, meaning that investigators had visited households and seen handwashing stations for themselves.where observational data were lacking, the team predicted access to handwashing stations based on surveys that documented the presence of piped water. they also considered demographic surrogates that correlate with access to handwashing, such as per capita income and education levels. households were weighted according to the number of inhabitants to estimate access at the individual level.based on these analyses, the investigators estimated that approximately 2 billion people globally lacked handwashinghandwashing is a basic and critically important component of sanitation. lack of access to proper facilities contributed to hundreds of thousands of deaths in 2017 from diarrheal diseases and lower respiratory infections. 12 that means scaling up handwashing access to address covid-19 can have long-term benefits by preventing other diseases. image: © riccardo mayer/shutterstock. access in 2019, "which is a stunning number and a call to action," says stephen luby, a professor of infectious disease and geography at stanford university, who was not involved in the study. however, as high as it is, that number may actually be quite conservative-the joint monitoring program for water supply, sanitation and hygiene put the estimate at just over 3 billion people in 2017. 8 the brauer team's model, which also estimated long-term trends over the 30-year study period, did show expansion of access in some locations. this reflects progress toward improving sanitation and reducing childhood mortality, brauer says. yet, the study showed access is still limited overall, particularly among rural populations and informal urban slums in the developing world. modeling suggested that more than half the population in the provinces of addis ababa, ethiopia, and nairobi, kenya, lack access to handwashing facilities.should the covid-19 pandemic coincide with water shortages in such areas, the study authors wrote, "access will be further restricted and will disproportionately harm those who can least afford to pay for water." hand sanitizers may provide a temporary alternative, and evidence from prior epidemics shows they can slow viral transmission. 9 however, the potential toxicity and flammability of alcohol-based sanitizers, 10 plus the cost of these products, 11 have been cited as barriers to their use.soap and water offer more equitable and lasting protection. "before a vaccine for sars-cov-2 becomes available, and where there's too much crowding for social distancing, providing access to water and soap in slums and low-income communities can save lives," says luby.brauer says that approach could pay long-term dividends even after the covid-19 pandemic subsides. "we should think of the current crisis as an opportunity to address longstanding problems with limited access to handwashing that also impact on diarrheal infections and pneumonia," he says. "we can implement a patchwork of temporary solutions for now, such as bringing in water tanker trucks and making sure people have [isopropyl] alcohol and hand sanitizer. but our hope is that we will also implement strategies that are more sustainable." charles w. schmidt, ms, is an award-winning journalist in portland, me, whose work has appeared in scientific american, nature, science, discover magazine, undark, the washington post, and many other publications.coronavirus disease (also known as continues to spread throughout the world. in turkey, the first case was diagnosed on march 11, 2020, a date somewhat later than other european countries. as of 28 april, 114 653 people have been diagnosed as covid-19 positive and 2992 people have lost their lives. about 1621 patients have been treated in an intensive care unit (icu). the mortality rate due to covid-19 was 2.6% in the country (ministry of health, 2020). in turkey, which has a strong health system, most hospitals have been turned into pandemic hospitals, elective procedures have been postponed, and doctors have been reassigned to treat covid-19. the first case was detected late due to the strict supervision of people who came from abroad. a policy was quickly established for covid-19 treatment. the icu bed number was approximately 32 000, a figure deemed sufficient for the country's needs. for these reasons, there was no period when resources were exhausted or when health services could not be offered due to . even in istanbul, where the virus was most intense, the occupancy rate for icus was 59.5%, while the maximum bed occupancy rate was 50.2% by april 10 (habertürk, 2020) . moreover, in recent days, there has been a decrease in the number of new cases (bbc turkish, 2020) . of course, behind this success was not only the intrinsic strength of the health system but also the strict changes to everyday life necessitated by the pandemic.a scientific committee was set up to establish covid-19 precautions in turkey. schools and universities were closed on march 12, the day after the first case was reported. online education for students was quickly put in place. on march 13, transportation restrictions, including the closing of borders and halting of flights began and quarantine measures for people returning from other countries, were applied. two days later, public places such as restaurants, cafes, bars, libraries, and places of worship were closed. on march 21, 10 days after the initial case, a curfew was imposed on people over the age of 65 and those suffering from chronic illnesses. on april 3, a partial curfew was extended to cover those under the age of 20, and it became mandatory for all citizens to wear masks in public places. finally, on april 11, a general curfew was announced, covering everyone at weekends; this practice will continue for the foreseeable future (anadolu agency, 2020). what measures are taken beyond that are, as yet, unknown. however, it is an inescapable fact that such drastic change in people's lives will have a significant effect on the mental health of the general population.when the virus started in china, the public thought that it would be limited to china. as the virus spread to other countries, there were claims on social media that the virus would not come to turkey and that even if it did, there would be no transmission due to genetics (sabah, 2020). these misguided claims prevented people from preparing adequately for the effects of the virus. moreover, the rapid spread of the virus in europe began to cause anxiety and shopping for cleaning supplies and basic foodstuffs quickly increased. with the outbreak of the virus in the country, extreme scenes were witnessed in pharmacies and grocery stores as an air of panic took hold. protective face masks, medicines, food supplements, and cleaning supplies were all well stocked and stores never ran out of necessary supplies. again due to excessive speculation on social media, excessive anxiety took hold among the general public.before the outbreak, turkey had traditionally high standards of hygiene practices. the high tendency to hand wash among people was both cultural and religious in origin. the cultural behaviors of turks on cleaning date back to the anatolian seljuk and ottoman periods. the pursuit of cleanliness, which was prioritized by islam, led to the reputation of turkish baths (disli & ozcan, 2014) . besides, the historical curative and sanitizing effects of vinegar were introduced during periods of plague and epidemics (bulmuş, 2012) . the plague treatment included prescriptions using vinegar in ottomans. great attention was taken to the use of vinegar in cleaning traditionally; vinegar was declared a piece of cleaning equipment. everything from outside the house was kept in water with vinegar or was taken home after waiting for one day on the balcony as a precaution. as a disinfectant, cologne (kolonya), one of turkey's national symbols, was in great demand. european cologne was first used in the ottoman empire during the reign of ii. abdulhamid (1870-1909) had been a part of daily cultural life with its sanitizing and perfume features (yentürk & yentürk, 2001) . the cologne in every turkish home was served as a tradition to cool guests. since cologne contains 70% alcohol, an accepted virus-killing agent, it was stocked in every home (bbc travel, 2020) . with the recommendation of the world health organization that the use of masks should only be used to prevent the ill person from infecting others, masks have become an indispensable part of life in turkey. some people even began to sew their own masks. this problem was solved when the government began distributing free five masks per week to each person. it also became unacceptable for people to enter indoor spaces without a mask.the most encouraging part of this process was the public applause to support frontline health workers from balconies every evening at 21:00. this communal expression of support made healthcare workers extremely proud of their profession. while all other employees were given the message 'stay home', the applause was a great boost during this period when healthcare professionals had no choice but to work hard in demanding conditions. health workers also emphasized the importance of social isolation by sending posts urging the public to stay at home. over time, this practice has evolved such that 21:00 now marks a time of celebration and fun in every home.during the lockdown, people began to experience tension in their inter-personal relationships due to increased anxiety. anecdotally, a range of different behaviors have been reported as people try to adapt to the new conditions such as communication problems between spouses, tension between parents and children, increased irritability and anger outbursts, depressive and anxious mood, excessive use of social media, and binge eating. with a lack of opportunities to engage in social activities outside the home, families have been forced to spend more time enclosed leading to increased tension and acrimony in the home. on the other hand, the fear of parents of infecting their children with covid-19 has had negative effects on them, leading them to take extra precautions with their children. children were kept inside, often against their wishes, and were not able to communicate with their friends and relatives. children were no longer given access to their typical social support networks.after the closure of the schools, children could not envisage the full extent of the situation and saw it as a holiday from school and an opportunity to spend more time with their families. however, fears began to emerge that covid-19 could kill their parents or close relatives. in addition, parents behaved differently and more inconsistently than usual due to elevated stress levels invoking confusion among the children who expected more attention from them. mental health professionals, recognizing the fraught nature of the new conditions, developed materials for parents and their children and made them available free of charge. these psychoeducation materials were mostly made up of drawings, stories, and cartoons. furthermore, they broadcasted live on social media in an effort to prevent misinformation from less reliable sources, helping people to solve these problems as well as offering advice on how they should continue their lives under lockdown. increases in similar problems created a greater demand for online therapy. in order to avoid people having to attend hospital in person, telepsychiatry services were offered to people who required such intervention.the psychological toll on frontline healthcare workers, directly exposed to the burden of the pandemic, became even more imperative. on returning home after work, they could not allow their children give them a loving hug and had a difficult time explaining to them why they could not do so (medimagazin, 2020) . additionally, after encountering very sick patients, healthcare workers also experienced an acute stress response at home, easily becoming angry, emotional, and behaving erratically. sleeping and eating patterns also became significantly disturbed. the possibility of future post-traumatic stress disorder is also something that healthcare workers must contend with.the effect of the pandemic on children has also been acute: terrified of covid-19 infecting their family, and the possibility of their parents dying, children acted out and began exhibiting more oppositional behaviors. again, mental health professionals recognized the difficulties being faced in families, first offering their expertise and support to healthcare workers and their children. following this initiative, both psychiatrists and psychologists began to offer therapy free of charge, allowing healthcare professionals only to make a telephone appointment. the ministry of health has also developed unique software to allow mental health professionals to provide support to healthcare workers and their children (ministry of health health services general directorate, 2020). moreover, professional associations have developed a fairy tale reading project in order to support children. celebrities and relatives of children who were not physically in contact with their parents were asked to read and record fairy tales for the children of healthcare professionals. the children started to listen to these tales every evening before going to bed, so they could feel the support of the people they wanted to hug and embrace (turkey association for child and adolescent psychiatry, 2020).one of the biggest pandemics in the history of turkey was the cholera pandemic, first seen in 1822, and which continued in different cities from time to time until 1910 during the rule of the ottoman empire. in order to prevent the spread of cholera, the ottomans set up teams to oversee cleanliness in cities by keeping hygiene at the forefront. they distributed brochures to inform the public about the disease and the necessary precautions to prevent its spread. clerics (imams) preached about cholera to the community in mosques. provincial borders were closed and those wishing to enter cities were quarantined for at least three days (gökçe, 2001; yılmaz, 2017; bolaños, 2019) . in this period, when modern psychiatry was not yet developed, the cholera epidemic was brought to an end after the necessary precautions were taken and treatments were applied. however, sufficient information about the psychiatric sequelae arising from this pandemic was not recorded in the literature.in the current crisis, although taking similar measures to the ottomans, the faster and more effectively they are imposed has resulted in reducing the local spread of the virus. with the advent of globalization, not only has covid-19 spread faster than all previous diseases, but covid-19 anxiety has also infected the mental state of populations all over the world. although coronavirus-related diseases will end soon, it is predicted that serious psychiatric disorders will be a lasting legacy of the pandemic. modern psychiatry must address the psychiatry of pandemics as a matter of urgency.therapy services in child psychiatry and in adult psychiatry during the present crisis have been temporarily postponed, while inpatient and outpatient services continue with greatly reduced numbers. the reasons for this reduction were that many people avoided hospitals to reduce transmission and a number of mental health professionals were reassigned to work in outpatient covid-19 clinics and services. our colleagues, who experienced great panic at the beginning of the crisis due to the onerous responsibility brought on by the state of emergency, have been proud to serve covid-19 patients by adapting to the process over time and taking the necessary protection measures. at the end of this pandemic and beyond, mental health services will be in great demand. by giving priority to these services, it will be essential to provide psychiatric support to all of those in need, especially to healthcare professionals working on the frontline. for this to happen, it is essential to ensure the continuity of the government institutions and voluntary initiatives already established. despite the many negative effects of covid-19, it has led to a greater unity of purpose between healthcare professionals and the general public. given the risks to healthcare professionals' own health at this time, a huge debt of gratitude is owed to the healthcare professionals working on the front line during this hugely challenging period.imposed by the international monetary fund (imf), the world bank, and indirectly the paris club.these lending institutions advocated the elimination of subsidies to social programs, the slashing of civil servants' salaries, devaluation of the currency, liberalization of imports and exports, privatization of parastatals, and the introduction of co-payments in the provision of health care, thus forcing african leaders to embrace and impose on their people the western capitalist development model. in fact, as a result, sub-saharan africa has experienced a major nutrition crisis, which has continued even up to the second decade of the twenty-first century. some studies have shown that, compared to the rest of the world, sub-saharan africa was the only place where cereal production and the quantity of cereals per person did not increase; instead, the latter declined between 1970 and 1991 in mozambique by −3.1%, in rwanda by −1.8%, and in sudan by −2.8%. the devaluation of the currencies in africa, especially the french franc in africa in 1994, caused widespread dislocation. lesley doyal's study (1979: 102-103) concluded that, in tanganyika, malnutrition was the result of colonialism, which devastated agricultural land production for 30 years, displaced major populations that had been highly productive and "reduced the "capacity of the land to feed the rest of the population." the imf added insult to injury.it was under these economic and ideological manipulations of the west that the second generation of leaders inherited the reformed or revolutionized previous governance. the result has been the rampant corruption we witness today, with leaders who seem to be only half-heartedly committed to the health of the citizens, imposing an obvious mismatch of national priorities amidst flagrant elections rigging, open persecution, prosecution, and elimination of vocal opponents, and consistent constitutional manipulation to allow themselves to run indefinitely, while siphoning off, in the process, the already looted national treasury and the vast national resources. worse even than that, the new leaders allocated only 5% of the national financial resources to education and 3% to health, while favoring, in employment and education, their cronies and families and, often, the ethnic group(s) to which they belonged, to the detriment of everyone else in the country. meanwhile, while the poor continued to get poorer in the urban slums and villages, the nouveau-riches continued to get richer as parasites of the new capitalist state. international corporations and economic conglomerations, such as pharmaceuticals, succeeded in avoiding paying taxes and never transferring their technology and earned capital from the "milk cow-nations" they delighted to suck to achieve their profit goals. much of the current infrastructure is inherited from the colonial period, namely: dilapidated schools; decaying health centers and hospitals; unclean and eroding trails and impassable roads; narrow and dangerous bridges; and unplanned city streets, resulting in polluting traffic jams that choke the city "boulevards" and highways. one is served in restaurants created during the 1930s that continue to be used often intact, without repairs, while children are left to die from preventable deadly infectious diseases, malnutrition, and hunger.prince and marsland also criticize the present status of the health infrastructure by noting that today "the hospitals and clinics built in the 1960s and 1970s display peeling walls and leaking roofs, electricity and medical supplies are intermittent, and staff are overworked and often abused" (prince and marsland 2014: 4) . in nairobi, kenya, two-thirds of the population lives in slums, and the ratio of doctor to population is 1 to 10,000.here also, the poverty rate is such that four million people live on food hand-outs, while one-third of children under-5 years are stunted and 15% are underweight. in malawi, three-fourths of the people fit the definition of poor (living on $1.25 a day or less), with a doctor to population ratio of 1 to 50,000, while 50,000 malawians die from hiv/aids every day because antiretroviral treatment is not available to those who need it (our africa 2014). even more appalling, malawi, with a population of close to 16 million, has only four government hospitals-one in lilongwe, one in blantyre, one in zomba, and the other in mzuzu. no one better describes the challenges of the health system in africa than mariani-constantini, when writing:major challenges that need to be faced to improve health in sub-saharan africa include the geographic distances, which require logistic systems for sending appropriately annotated specimens from peripheral hospitals to centralized laboratories; the high temperatures (often above 45 degrees c.) which result in the difficult use of paraffin wax, stains, and chemicals; the generally inadequate access to electric services, with consequent frequent and extended outages; the dust and very poor maintenance, that compromise equipment and samples; the absence of or inadequacy of standard operative procedures. (mariani-constantine et al. 2010: 244) where do africa's vast proceeds from oil, gas, and diamonds, gold, copper, timber, cocoa, tea, coffee, sisal, tobacco, and other national resources go? for example, niger, made famous by the allegations from the bush administration that it was selling uranium to saddam hussein, has vast natural resources of uranium, gold, petroleum, and charcoal, but the country is unable to feed its small population of only 14 million. for those who follow the history of the continent and its leadership, the answer is self-evident: the resources are not primarily targeted to feed the people or end malnutrition and disease. resources are apparently so mishandled that they make no major dent in the people's absolute poverty rate or contribute significantly to the elimination of ignorance through a robust educational system at all levels, and thus dramatically improving the state of health and health care. the 2001 abuja declaration signed by all african heads of state and government to increase the national health budgets to at least 15% of gdp has not been met by an overwhelming majority of the african states, and the written agreements on the three millennium development goals (mdgs) related to health to be achieved by 2015 are, at best, lingering and dusting in many office drawers, while many health indices continue to fall to rates lower than those achieved by the first generation of post-independence african leaders.the goal of primary health care focusing on prevention rather than treatment subscribed to at alma-ata in 1978 is often simply ignored, and african medical schools continue to be interested in training urban physicians and nurses that will serve the cities, marginalizing in the process the majority of the africans who still live in the rural areas, while relying over 25-35% on international health budget hand-outs, such as those donated by usaid, pepfar, mepi, and humanitarian organizations. it is important also to note that the allocation of resources is highly skewed in favor of city hospitals where the elite live and work, a fiscal habit that has been detrimental to all lower level health facilities-district, village, or community-everywhere in africa. often, religious and private facilities have saved the day outside the urban sphere but these often discriminate against people on the basis of their ideology or social and religious preference. the mdgs are a right step toward good health and eradication of poverty, but strong will and determination do not seem to be there, even though the resources are available, notwithstanding statements to the contrary. consequently, by 2015, only a handful of states in africa had achieved two or three of the pledged goals. unfortunately, as studies by curry et al. (2012) and by others note, theories of leadership in africa so far have been "based primarily on high-income settings and not on lowincome countries in sub-saharan africa, especially in the health arena." it is high time that serious studies be conducted of each african leader before overall assessments are made, looking at their training, experience, and intellectual ability, what some scholars have called "biography," commitment to their people, use of national resources, probable persecution of opponents, manipulation of the constitution, their overt and covert activities abroad, and their vision of the future of the countries they lead or have led for decades, and how they select and prepare the younger generation to lead africa.regarding health, it appears that, there is scarcely any systematic administrative training for those who will serve as ministers of health or related jobs. most learn the skills on the job, imbued with no principles of accountability based on hard data, which are scanty at present, for enlightened and wise decision-making, as many countries in africa continue to show information gaps on annual health indices data requested by the who. on the point of information and data, so far, the best data have been collected by gambia, cote d'ivoire, nigeria, and tanzania, countries that are also exemplary in storing, analyzing, and using robust information. many of the individuals who assume roles of responsibility have hardly been mentored or are exposed to meaningful supervision, letting the "one-eyed men lead the blind." many in supervisory positions, as well, have little appreciation for investing in the future effectively and efficiently managing and enforcing the multisectoral prerequisites needed for an integrated approach to health underscored as important by anyone who understands or is sensitive to the nature of disease and its impact (curry et al. 2012: 4) .these unacceptable conditions are underscored by the fact that fewer than 10% of deaths are registered by some of the 54 countries in africa, and, of these, only one has a complete set of vital registration data. while many have never gathered complete data on mortality since 1990, "some never reported such data" if they had it and, in 2009, who further noted that 15 countries that responded to a survey in the african region had an 82% median of districts submitting epidemiological reports on time, and [only] 50% of the districts notified suspected disease outbreaks within two days" (who, african region health report 2013: 55, 111) . indeed, "integrated disease" surveillance of such illnesses as cholera, meningitis, yellow fever, hepatitis e, plague, dysentery, malaria, lassa fever, and leptospirosis, is conducted by only 39 of the 46 member states that agreed to do so. this is the reason the who advises taking at least "verbal autopsies" of deaths, particularly when it comes to relatives, as well as sentinel demographic surveillance, which involves "monitoring a representative group for the vital events of interest" (who, african region health report 2013: 111).these varied shortcomings certainly account for the weak health systems on the continent, where virtually, as stressed above, no data are either accurate or sufficient. tb, which is increasing in parts of africa, especially south africa, can be stopped if the leadership decides to put the resources that epidemiologists and health practitioners have been requesting. for example, as the who has clearly recommended how to for combat tb, the use of the directly observed therapy (dot) method is essential, as it is designed to assure adherence to medication particularly at the beginning of treatment. dot should be performed by a trained health care worker or other designated individual for the prescribed tb drugs and watching "…the patient swallow every dose." yet, as the who notes, "the [dot] strategy depends on government commitment, high-quality microscope for diagnosis, reliable supply of high-quality short-course anti-tuberculosis drugs administered under appropriate conditions, including direct observation of drug taking at least for the initial intensive phase of treatment as well as a system to monitor and evaluate case-finding and treatment outcomes" (who, african region health report 2013: 49). many of these requirements are not observed or available in several african countries. crucially, the true promoters of health in africa are those leaders and individuals of good will who see preventable poverty as a major obstacle to health in any state and call for "measures to tackle inequality and injustice such as corporate tax evasion [as] central to what is needed from the global community" (disease and economics 2007).incidentally, poverty can, indeed, be eradicated from the planet but this requires leadership commitment, community awareness, human sensitivity on the part of policy-makers, actual action by both governmental, nongovernmental, faith-based, and philanthropic organizations, allocation of appropriate and sufficient resources, basic education and training in health-related issues, that might prevent healthy conditions, such as family planning, and, above all, equal opportunity regardless of race, ethnicity, country or geographic origin. it irks to hear certain politicians claim that poverty is a result of laziness, drug use and excessive alcohol consumption habits, and other associated behavioral factors. the fact of the matter is, however, that not only are many poor people trapped in conditions beyond their control but most would like to have gainful employment to support their families, and, like everyone else, live a decent life, rather than depend on government hand-outs that carry with them embarrassing and humiliating stigma. some studies have shown, for example, that "stigma and discrimination associated with hiv/aids are the greatest barriers to preventing further infection" and that stigmatization of aids sufferers causes psychological problems for the patients, such as depression and loss of hope, and encourages silence and denial. it undermines prevention as those infected quietly continue to practice unsafe sex in the belief that behaving differently would raise suspicion about their status (unaids world aids campaign 2002 /2003 , cited by ebewo 2008 . in addition, poor people neither wish to rob the rich nor prevent them from enjoying the wealth that, for one reason or another, they have been able to accumulate.it is likewise a sign of insensitivity towards the plight of the poor when people in authority sometimes intimate that, since poverty is relative, those relegated to the misery of the urban slums, as is the case in many african cities and towns, usually engage in vibrant economic and social activities daily, proving that they eventually grow accustomed to their condition and, therefore, to poverty, and that it is, we, the privileged few, who project the feelings of unhappiness in them. individuals imbued with this type of thinking do not realize that slum activities, like selling used shoes eight hours a day every day just to make $2.00, are actually designed to help them leave a life of abject poverty and the often unbearable conditions they live in, particularly when they see right across the street their fellow citizens leading a life of opulence and glamour, regardless of the means they used to occupy the envious position they hold in society. politicians often forget that no human being can be resigned to the fate of a miserable life on this earth unless he or she does not see a way out or is mentally impaired. it is only when hopelessness and despair sink in that the poor might be inclined to take actions that society does not approve. since ill health and poverty are more often twin conditions, the comments on poverty apply as well to the ill health of a population. in the end, we have a choice to make on the nature of man: follow thomas hobbes and emmanuel kant or john locke.established in 2003, the accordia global health foundation, which resulted in the establishment of the infectious disease institute at kampala's makerere university in 2004, specializes in health leadership. it stresses the critical importance of six ingredients of leadership, of which many are either lacking or show systemic shortcomings in the african health care context: 1. leadership training opportunities 2. mentoring of new and older supervisors 3. investment in leading institutions such as medical schools and public health programs 4. leadership use of accurate data to make informed decisions 5. measuring and assessing health outcomes and 6. leveraging collaboration networks both at home and abroad to fill the gaps in the health sector.to this list the author wishes to add commitment to serving the people and the prioritization of goals and strategies arrived at following input from health educators, intellectuals from various disciplines and walks of life, and health practitioners, working in tandem with communities, their leaders, and known opinion makers. echoing the issue of reliance on foreign donors in the improvement of the health of the africans, the latter often impose a vertical approach to combating disease because they believe african leaders will squander the funds and the opportunities to effectively combat disease. in special reference to the state of africa's health systems and donor assistance, gofin and gofin (2011: 126) note that:in developing countries, there is fragmentation in the way healthcare system strengthening activities are conducted. there are usually various projects and donors working to improve delivery of care. however, each donor supports, for example, the national hiv/aids programs in different ways. this is done without coordination or accountability and for short periods of time. activities are usually interrupted before the system has been able to integrate them. (see also bevan 2014) however, even if this is so, africans must at all cost be masters of their house, as expressed by accordia (2004: 1-10): "those most affected by the infectious disease crisis, must be the fundamental drivers of the longterm response. if any system is to be sustainable and fully aligned with national and regional objectives, it must be african-owned and africanled." a good leader in africa ought to understand that ensuring that people, especially children, do not go hungry every day and have clean water and proper sanitation must be the overarching priority, while also remaining cognizant of the emerging chronic diseases and the need to raise awareness and influence behavioral change. in fact, as one analyst succinctly put it, "in developed countries in late nineteenth century and early twentieth century increase of the life expectancy had less to do with the leaps forward in medical science, and more to do with the arrival of better nutrition, clean water, and sanitation" (disease and economics 2007).care system in africaone of the themes permeating this volume, which explains partly the problems of the african health care system, is that corruption plays a major harmful role in africa, and not the lack of financial resources to fix it. writing on the failure of primary health care in nigeria, omar massoud has found, indeed, that things are not done well not because of the lack of resources and says (2012: 21):the ineffectiveness of local government in nigeria to provide basic services to local communities has been mainly attributed to the lack of sufficient financial resources. financial inadequacy, we believe, is not a key constraint or obstacle to effective service delivery. this is because although local governments do not receive as much, both in terms of absolute revenues per capita and in terms of the total share of public expenditures vis-à-vis the state and federal governments, their functional responsibilities are correspondingly limited.the major culprit in the debacle is lack of transparency, accountability, and integrity of the personnel responsible for health and the absence of a working relationship with the community and traditional neighborhood organizations to know what the needs might be and how they can be addressed. the corrupt ways at african hospitals, clinics, health centers, and other health facilities is widely known not only among the governmental and ministerial authorities but also by the people seeking treatment themselves, and is a subject of daily conversation. lack of accountability in the use and disappearance of the patrimonial resources and some of the practices by doctors and auxiliaries make a mockery of the system that spends millions of dollars without enforcement against abuses and with virtually no one being incarcerated when irregularities are found.the drawback over corruption, which means in most people's minds illegal or unethical appropriation of public or donor private funds, also called official thievery, or unauthorized use of public property, such as vehicles and gasoline, or the conscious contravening of regulations or laws for personal gain or convenience, is that accurate data on expenses are difficult to find and record, as they are often based on hearsay, suspicion, and innuendo, and lack the actual information on the scope and method of transaction, when it occurs. invariably, it is mired in secrecy, especially at the high levels of authority, where great amounts of funds are channeled to a person, a president, a government minister, or a group of individuals who swear secrecy. what is frequently easy to detect and record are the hundreds of daily petty corruptive practices one encounters on the road on the part of the police, a government office where lower and higher level officials are required to dispense an original official document, such as a visa, to citizens, quick and effective treatment of a patient unfairly ahead of others at a hospital, hiring at a government establishment, or payment of funds to get a favor, often dubbed bribery, even though the latter may not involve money but sex, false testimony, and other subtle demands. political corruption usually refers to paying people secretly to vote for a certain party or candidate, "rigging," or stealing an election through unfair and non-transparent practices that may alter the results of a political process. thus, the "invisible hand," as the shady transactions' agents are known, can be found in every sector of life.at times, however, kleptomaniacs of government and national property have been caught red handed. in africa, corruption is a daily practice and sometimes involves millions of dollars. there have been instances, for example, where some portion of the public budget, a percentage of international donations, or investment funds have gone to government officials or researchers-say 10% of $300 million-to facilitate approval by the local authorities. very rarely, though, have such thieves been denounced and imprisoned. transparency international defines corruption "as the abuse of public resources for private gain." studies have been conducted on corruption, especially in the developing world, and the opinion of the experts is not too disparate in their view of it as a detrimental practice to everyone involved. mavuto kalulu has provided a summary of the major findings of the studies conducted on the subject, which we briefly note here. mauro's 1995 study, for example, found that corruption slows and stifles economic growth by lowering national or private investment. in his research, mauro showed that "corruption has a negative and significant relationship with human capital, measured by the average schooling years in the population over age 25" (kalulu 2015) . while tanzi and davoodi (2001) claimed that corruption is detrimental to the quality of public investments, gupta et al. (2001) , in one of the few studies focusing on its impact on the quality of health care services, conclude that "child mortality rates in highly corrupt countries are about one-third higher than in the less corrupt countries" (kalulu 2014 ).yet, interestingly, even though, other studies have shown the negative impact of corruption on the poor and its immoral deprivation of other people's rights and livelihood, there are veiled expert defenders of corruption out there. the well known samuel huntington (1968) seems to defend corruption and bribery, as he sees it as a way of breaking the red tape barriers of highly centralized bureaucracies and making the delivery of services efficient and rapid. another scholar, f.t. liu (1985) defended the proposition that corruptive practices often reduce the time one spends on queues. finally, some view corruption as beneficial by stressing the key economic assumption that self-interest enhances prosperity because competition ensures that "a product is purchased by those who value it the most; thus firms that are willing to pay more in bribes are awarded contracts." this sounds like a twisted way of looking at unethical "transactions" (kalulu 2014: 511) , because one wrong, immoral, or unethical behavior cannot justify the ends, even if its results might benefit certain people, just like when the benevolent "bank bandit," who distributes all the money robbed from the banks to the poor.still, we agree that he needs to be incarcerated or proportionately punished. the corrupt practices in cameroon hospitals, for example, which are well known and have become partly responsible for lack of appropriate care for the cameroonian citizens, especially the poor and the illiterate, are highlighted by cameroonian scholar victor bayemi in his study of the two main hospitals, lanquintinie and deido, in doula, cameroon, where there was one doctor per 7,023 people, one nurse for every 1,784 people, and one pharmacy for 5,016 inhabitants some decades ago. in 1998 and 1999, consecutively, cameroon was classified by transparency international as being among the most corrupt countries in the world, with unbelievable inequities, where the poor do not have access to basic health services, and the care provided is one of the worse in quality (bayemi 2008: 34) . these conditions worsened after the government reduced doctors' salary. calling them "a tripolar corrupt organization, bayemi classifies health care facilities in douala into public hospitals, private hospitals, and informal health centers. corrupt practices, he says, can be found in every sector related to the hospitals, be it in radiology, testing laboratories, pharmacy, screening, medicine purchase, and consultations.at the hospitals, for example, the crooked doctors present any reason to charge extra for the treatment or consultation (e.g., dysfunctional equipment that needs repairing) and may demand further payment. desperate, the patient cannot but comply and pays the fee "under the table." if not, he may have to wait for days or, discouraged by the delay, simply give up and leave. in the lab and radiology, it is the same story: equipment is not working or a film or a reactor is needed, the doctor claims, and, at the end, the patient will have to pay (2008), even though the test is supposed to be free. at the pharmacy, the practice is for the pharmacist to sell the samples he is supposed to provide free to customers. these are designed for testing or advertisement. during consultations, some doctors falsify the results of the diagnosis and ask the patient to buy and write prescriptions that benefit them and not the patients; doctors might write prescriptions for the free medicine they have in their possession and make a profit out of it. in many cases, the doctors personally ask for a sum of money before they can treat the patient beyond what the patient must pay officially to the hospital.other times, the doctor does not ask whether the patent has paid the official fee and may simply ask for a certain amount, what schleifer and vishny have called "thievery with corruption" or "corruption with thievery" (bayemi 2008: 37-38) . frequently, the doctor receives the patient at his informal health center, which is usually his house, or someone else's residence, and might force him or her to pay the sum to the proprietor, because the latter does not have a license to open the "center." in other words, almost anywhere in africa, the doctor is expected to be at the public facility during business hours, but he often practices on weekends and evenings at his own private clinic, perhaps located in his home, "attending on a fee-for-service basis to make more money from his services" (spielberg and adams 2011: 14). as john ngosong morfaw puts it, "this means the public sector ends up subsidizing unofficially private practice" (morfaw 2008: 249) .often, the doctor works at the informal center when he is expected to be at the public hospital where he is officially employed. his house becomes a place where people come informally and pay him whatever amount of fee he asks for. here, he may be assisted by a nurse or even by a relative of the patient. he also works at his private office or at a private hospital. he may leave his public service for several hours to attend the patients at the private establishment. no matter what goes on, the person that is managing the business is the doctor. the doctor may also refer the patients to his private facility or to the informal center, and collects all the proceeds thereof. as proof of corruptive practices, at the public hospital, the extra compensation he forces the patients to pay is not recorded by the official treasurer. this results in confusion in the minds of the patients (and the treasurer), bayemi explains. all informal and formal office payments to the doctor carry no receipts. the doctor is always trying to find a way of making more money from the patients, making it appear legitimate, thus creating another (ethical) confusion between "corruption with thievery" and "thievery with corruption." obviously, the person that suffers from all the deceitful machinations is the patient, especially the poor, and the public hospital. the result is that the health facilities, which are supposed to be free or cheaper for the patients, become more expensive, forcing many to try to receive treatment at private hospitals and the informal centers. as a result, bayemi says:dans la mesure où la corruption suscite l'accroissement des prix des soins médicaux, elle empêche à l'hôpital public d'accomplir sa mission qui consiste à faciliter l'access de la majorité des patients de la population aux soins. de plus, cette corruption interfère sur la confiance des patients vis-à-vis des hôpitaux publics et la crédibilité du système d'offre public des soins. dans le but d'améliorer la santé des populations de douala, il est nécessaire d'engager une réflexion profonde pour combattre l'organisation hospitalière de la corruption a douala. (bayemi 2008: 42) in other words, the doctors play all kinds of schemes of thievery and corruption to make money out of vulnerable people, who have no way but to pay or leave, or go to the doctor's private or informal center, which often works in collusion with the pharmacies. the public hospital becomes, in a true sense, the recruiting ground for the doctor's private practice. can one find more despicable unethical behavior than the one witnessed at some of the hospitals in africa? one other consequence of the corrupt practices is people's distrust of the public hospitals. it is also common in cameroon hospitals that the doctor will hire hustlers or brokers who stay around the entrance to the hospital throughout the day and ask the patient which doctor they would like to see. with a fee paid to the broker, which is split with the physician, the patient is able to see the doctor quickly, bypassing other patients who might have been waiting for hours. people know this but no one has the courage to denounce the physician involved for fear of retaliation. those who refuse to pay may be waiting indefinitely.finally, we might say that, once trust in the leadership is lost, nothing significant can be accomplished. commenting on the leadership crisis in africa and using the recent ebola virus outbreak in west-central africa, remy adenoma wrote in the guardian in september 2014 that "trust is in short supply in africa" today, the reason why people refused to believe what the leaders, including their own presidents, were telling them about the epidemic, which they considered to be a hoax. in nigeria, for example, despite promises of an infusion of millions of dollars to treat the sick and pay the daily wages of the health care givers, nurses, and doctors, people took the leaders' words as a bunch of lies, as adenoma points out, given that "the government is still owing medical personnel overdue allowances it seems unwilling to pay, so people fear risking their lives with no back up" (adenoma 2014: 2). the mistrust and cynicism, he says, is not caused by the actions of the politicians alone but of virtually all strangers, citizens or not, who are said to rob and steal the property of some and kidnap others. policemen do not seem to care about enforcing the laws and are constantly seeking bribes to perform their duties, while many government officials embezzle state funds at all cost for themselves and their families. adenoma concludes by noting:the worst legacy of the current crop of crooked african rulers is not the poor infrastructure, the lack of proper healthcare or even corruption; it is the seed of doubt and mistrust that their actions have sown in people's minds. road and highways can be built in the space of a few years and ebola outbreak will most likely be curbed within a few months, but the deep mistrust and cynicism pervasive in many african societies will continue to impede progress on the continent for decades to come. (adenoma 2014: 3) adenoma is quick to point out, however, that corruption is not unique to africa; it occurs in the western world and other parts of the globe as well but not in the magnitude or the obvious and widely known level of corrupt behavior as on the african continent. people in other parts of the world know that, when there is a serious crisis, they can count on their government to protect them: not in africa, says adenoma. adenoma certainly has a point but cynicism and distrust, to this author, are not only based on corruption and lack of follow-up on the promises, conditions that have created a leadership crisis, especially in health in africa. more important is the apparent lack of commitment to the welfare of the people, especially in health; the lack of clear priorities that place citizens at center-stage; the lack of vision of the future and a sense of entitlement among our leaders; the lack of investment of resources; the prevailing sense of utter powerlessness among the african people; and the blatant misuse of the national treasury-as is the case in angola, equatorial guinea, gabon, nigeria, chad, and liberia. resources are siphoned daily on behalf of the leaders, their families, relatives, friends, fellow kin, and their crony supporters who may not even realize what is going on. unfortunately, when they assume political responsibility, leaders seem not to realize that their position is a sacred trust and a privilege and not an entitlement or a birth right. in his short but brilliant chapter "on the poverty of health politics in africa: are governments doing enough?" binna innocent hunan, writing from his own living experience on the continent, first refutes david bailey's insinuation that corruption in developing countries is "not necessarily antipathetic to the development of modern economic and social systems; that corruption serves in part at least a beneficial function in developing societies" (1966: 719). he then mercilessly concludes by laying bare the unclothed "emperors" of africa, calling their governance pathologic, one that breeds only pain for the african people. then he goes on to note that his chapter …situates the question of african ill-health in social terms and insists that this has arisen as a result of leadership proclivities to pursue parochial interests disguised as the collective good. consequently, policies have had to be tailored to suit leadership interests rather than focus on easing the pains of the downtrodden masses. it pontificates that orchestrated wars and official thievery can only contribute to the problems of african people mired in structural dependence. the need for positive in africa is strong: leadership which is not only seen, but expresses genuine concerns in acting to remove africa and its people from these crippling problems of war and conflict, power economics, de-industrialization, squalor, and disease. the new dawn may well begin to save africans of such odd epithets as "predatory, prebendal, parasitic…kleptocratic, venal [or] vampire state. (ihuna 2008: 312) ihuna views africa's leadership as laced with corruption and mismanagement, straddling economies in collapse and indebted, mired in wars that have decimated populations, where "poverty is entrenched through increasing denial of opportunities, as happens in the realm of educational attainment. with a high profile of unemployed among the employable youth suffering from economic crisis, africa cannot be saved from either rural or urban anarchy," as these "become ready tools for mischief and mayhem." claire wendland notes the same problems in malawi medical schools, even though they are not related directly to private practice, which anger the medical students who focus their conversations on the waste of funds resulting from corrupt practices, continuing to create a wave of unrest due to official corruption. these crooked financial practices, wendland noticed, "not only diverted resources away from the health sector but also could divert resources within the health sector toward certain favored constituencies or patients." there were cases including where an mp hoarded medications and had his relatives sell "the hospital's scarce resources in the public market, and even though complaints were formally leveled against him but the involved doctor [who was posted in the rural area as a district officer], was not punished" (wendland 2010: 141-141) . another expert notes that the hospitals and health facilities often do not have the workforce needed or the latter may be reserved just for the elite, as niang notes, where public control of the public structures does not exist, that is, there is no accountability to the people; resources reserved for the hospitals are constantly reduced (or reserved for the powerful and the wealthy); and investment in hygiene is never considered to be a priority (niang 2008: 29) . one should then rightly ask: "quo vadis, africa?" cameroon is just an example, but corrupt practices in the health sector are widespread in africa and successful because they focus mainly on the sick, the illiterate, the poor, the disadvantaged, the disabled, and ethnic minorities, who are the most vulnerable citizens in the country.we cannot end a discussion of global health without mentioning one of the fastest growing health care businesses in the world, medical tourism, which gained added significance during the mid-2000s. medical tourism has been described as "a new global economy in which technology is erasing geographical boundaries, and companies are taking advantage of the lower costs and greater efficiency they can find abroad" (thomas friedman 2005) . it means traveling across continents to get the best medical treatment possible, as perceived by the patients, at the most affordable price. the aging baby boomers and, therefore, the growing number of the elderly who are more prone to ill health, have been forced to travel to such places as india, singapore, thailand, turkey, and even to eastern european countries. the movement has also included people from the industrialized countries who are so proud, at least in public, of their own health care systems. they, too, are looking for treatment bargains in the developing world. unfortunately in africa, only south africa, with its tourist packages, has been able to attract this wave of medical tourists. in sum, medical tourists are not necessarily seeking the lowest cost but quality treatment of their ills along with short waiting periods, to satisfy those needs that are hard to meet at home, unavailable procedures, new and old health products, as well as privacy, opportunities for vacation, and relaxing spots away from home.in 2007, for example, some 270,000 americans sought medical treatment abroad. it is estimated that 90% of medical tourists go to the us, canada, great britain, western europe, australia, and the middle east. here and even in the developing countries, india being the best example, medical tourists are able to get transplants, dental surgery, rare and cheaper medications, more affordable insurance coverage, and procedures not allowed or unavailable in their countries (stolley and watson 2012: 10) . india is the most sought-after destination, since medical establishments there are viewed as technologically advanced and cheaper, and perform the most sophisticated operations with little interference from the government. however, despite the increase in the search for treatment abroad, the medical tourist movement raises several questions since it is an intrinsic part of globalization. the questions most relevant refer to its impact on the poor in the receiving countries and on the fact that, in the end, medical tourism favors the rich from the originating countries who are able to fly or drive and pay for the treatment sought. such conditions would, therefore, tend to increase the world's inequalities and health disparities. in addition, possibly problematic is the impact of this type of globalization on the local culture and the issues of privacy, liability, and ethics in health.overall, as illustrated by such experts as neil lunt and russell minion (2014) , medical tourism, even though it may alleviate the world's health misery, presents several problems of its own, which governments and health systems are grappling with. these include: who is actually travelling and how many and where are they going? what is actually the purpose of the trip, that is, what is the nature of the disease, physical, or mental disorder? how successful have the clinical treatments been over the years? have there been any follow-ups on adherence, resulting complications, "lapses of safety," side effects, infections? what is the quality of the health care provided? all these questions need further assessment and interdisciplinary studies. unfortunately, it has been difficult to gather data to evaluate this fast growing health industry, since most of the journeys and treatments are private. more questions: what have been the costs associated with it, which governments and health care institutions both in the originating and receiving countries benefit or lose? does medical tourism increase the quality of domestic health care? does it tend to increase or decrease access to health to the poor on both ends? is the phenomenon contributing to the diffusion of new technology for all or just for the rich? is there much regard for medical ethics? does this movement contribute to the commercialization of medicine? how does one take it seriously when medical "miracles" are being touted by both the patient and the receiving medical institution and the country? can medical tourism be monitored, assessed, and evaluated for quality of product out of the information provided by the patients or intermediaries? who insures and how are the medical tourists insured, and is there a major insurer in case things go wrong? only time will provide the answers to these questions. yet, if medical tourism is to become the health care business of the future, governments and health systems throughout the globe must be concerned and establish clear guidelines that are internationally approved (see lunt and mannion 2014: 155-157) . the answers are not yet known but they are important, especially when the international community, except the us, believes that health is the right of all people.the issue of brain drain in africa, noted earlier, is serious. in fact, notwithstanding the fact that 24% of the global disease burden occurs in africa, the continent's share of the workforce is only 3% and has the following infamous distinction: worldwide, of the 57 countries that have a severe shortage of the workforce, 36 are found here. worse, sub-saharan africa, home to some 900 million people, is only training some 6000 doctors yearly, similar to oecd countries where the population is only 60 million. better said, sub-saharan africa is "besieged by widespread shortages, mal-distribution, and poor working conditions" (omasiva 2014: 1). the most recent statistics show that between 25 and 50% of african-born physicians choose to practice abroad, particularly in the us, where the ratio between doctor and population is 1 to 500. experts estimate that one-fifth of physicians and one-tenth of nurses born and trained in africa migrate to the western world, the us, the uk, and canada. mozambique and angola are said to have more doctors abroad than at home (see our africa 2013) .the international organization for migration (iom) noted in 2005 that, annually, some 23,000 health professionals leave africa, and that, from 1993 to 2002, ghana lost 60 physicians, 410 pharmacists, 87 laboratory technicians, and 11,325 nurses; in 2002 alone, the number of health professionals leaving ghana included 70 doctors, 77 pharmacists, and 214 nurses (cooper and kirton 2013: 6) . listed as the 10 countries with most desperate workforce needs in africa are chad, burundi, ethiopia, tanzania, somalia, liberia, mozambique, sierra leone, malawi, and niger, where the ratio of doctor to population ranges between 1 to 30,000 and 1 to 600,000. the who estimates that, in africa, the threshold for adequate provision of basic primary health care is 23 health workers per 1000. tanzania, whose performance in health is better than many other countries in sub-saharan africa, had a workforce of 92,000 in 2009, but, to meet the health needs of its people, it needed a health labor force of 140,000, more than three times the size of its workforce (accordia global health foundation 2009: 1). the flight of the health workforce to the west and other parts of the world causes africa to lose billions of dollars a year, while simultaneously robbing the african populations of resources they need most to improve their health condition.the magnitude of the financial loss is illustrated by the cost of educating and training one student to become a medical doctor in kenya: approximately $65,997 from primary school to undergraduate medical studies. in 2012, kenya's total investment for one medical student reached about $517,931; kenya's total financial loss from the brain drain is estimated at $126 million a year (yonga 2012: 4) . the us, canada, and the uk have the lion's share of the african workforce exodus. in the us, this occurs despite its unwillingness to accept african immigrants compared to other populations of the world. the same applies to the uk, which, in the 1970s, passed strict laws on african physicians' immigration or further training requests for even those graduates coming from its own former colonies. lack of specialization in certain fields, which forces many physicians to leave their home for further training, constitutes other traps from opportunities in the west, even within african countries that have a good number of medical schools.in 2006, nigeria, for example, with a population of over 130 million, had only 35 trained pediatric physicians, "with one or two qualifying in this specialty each year" (muula 2006: 3) . dermatologists, injury specialists, immunology pathogenesis experts, maternal care providers, qualified mental health personnel, hiv virologists, diagnosis specialists, emergency medicine researchers, and administrators and managers in several fields, which have been given emphasis at some institutions, such as kwame nkrumah university in ghana, makerere university, and mbarara university in uganda, university of zimbabwe, university of durban, university of nairobi, university of malawi, and university of zambia, are not producing the number of doctors africa currently needs. for the preceding institutions, funding from the obama administration through what has been called the medical education partnership initiative (mepi), which at the same time resulted in decreased funding of the president's emergency program for aids relief (pepfar) in 2010, has allowed the pursuit of some needed specializations. mepi has also attracted funding by other international donors who are dedicated to global health, prompting some observers to note that the "gold age and scaling up on arv of global health has come to a close" (crane 2013: 173) .the good news, however, is that, according to the who, out of the 6.6 million people that receive antiretroviral treatment in low-and middleincome countries, more than five million live in sub-saharan africa. this means that "those taking arv's are now capable of having normal and relatively longer healthy life span in which their hiv infection may never progress to aids, even though "global health enthusiasm is still high at american and canadian universities" (crane 2013: 173) . mepi funds, totaling $130 million for five years beginning in 2011, were to be used for new medical school programs specifically targeted to the recipient country's needs, for acquisition of more top-of-the-line laboratories, hands-on experience programs using advanced technology, and the training of some 20,000 nurses who would receive their diplomas or degrees at their "work stations," rather than having to travel to the medical school, such as the university of nairobi, the capital city, to attend classes. the funds are provided with virtually no strings attached, allowing the universities to manage them for purposes they deem essential to the advancement of science and the country's workforce needs (christiansen 2012) . the brain drain and the scarcity of physicians and well trained allied service providers exert undue pressures on those who are faithful to their mission of caring for the sick. for caring doctors, therefore, the present shortage conditions do not afford them enough time to know their patients, explain the treatment they provide, and diagnose the nature of the illness properly. frustrated, they too may appear to throw in the towel. ample disturbing anecdotal evidence claims that most physicians get irritated when a potential patient, especially a woman suffering from breast pain or suspected female-related cancer, hints at the need for a second opinion. one often hears also that, when a patient complains of fever, for example, physicians are quick to dispense or prescribe malaria drugs or antibiotics; that when someone seeks treatment and comes in coughing, physicians or nurses tell him or her that he or she suffers from hiv/aids or tb and therefore prescribe anything that will make him feel good; and that, if a woman is admitted complaining of severe headaches, some doctors may ask her to undress completely! if she dares to question the reason, the physician will ask her whether or not she wishes to be diagnosed and treated. the defenseless woman ends up following the unethical orders of the crooked physician.patients' frustration and the sometimes rude or seemingly uncaring treatment people receive at the health center or the health clinic send many women to the village (or now urban) traditional healer and midwife. memory of the history of the coercive and repressive colonial biomedical physicians and administrators and their negative attitudes toward traditional medical practices in africa in the combat against infectious diseases and epidemics-often equating hospital personnel and missionary attitudes in the prevention and treatment of disease as one and the samecontinues to drive most africans to the psychological safety of the village health care setting. rubi robinson estimates that, to "deliver essential health services," africa needs to increase its health workforce by 140% and not lose any to the outside world, and that, right now, the continent must secure a minimum of one million health workers, including 700,000 physicians, to meet the mdgs and provide basic health services as pledged (robinson 2013: 13) . however, having many doctors should not be necessarily equated with better health, which is a major mistake sometimes made in africa, even among international donors. the same applies to the introduction of new technologies. it is a grave error to "conflate biomedical technologies with health: more doctors, more nurses, more hospitals, and more drugs mean better health. critical medical anthropologists commonly charge this error to doctors and health policymakers (many of them doctors as well) especially in the global south. a policy focus on health care-as opposed to health-minimizes the role of the economy and the state in the production of health and illness" (wendland 2010: 213) .of course, it is assumed that the workforce will receive the best training possible, given that best practices prove that "well-resourced healthcare workers are the best asset of any health system because of the technical skills, management abilities, and institutional capacity they are able to use to help populations effectively" (cooper and kirton 2013: 10) . most of the physician and the health care workforce losses have primarily been a result of frustration over the low salaries as well as the inadequacies of the infrastructure, and africa's professional personnel's inability to copy with the volume of patients who present at the crowded hospitals seeking treatment daily. the issue of low physicians' salary has often created a major friction between the medical associations and the government on the continent, as medical doctors argue that they are often on call 24 hours a day but are paid as low as $250-$600 a month like the other civil servants who may have never gone to school in the first place. the problem is that they compare their salaries to those of their colleagues in the west as noted earlier, forgetting, in the process, that they entered the profession well aware of the compensation system, and that most were entirely sponsored by the government for the completion of their degrees. otherwise, they would have never been members of the "glamorous profession," which john iliffe called "the elite of the elite" in africa (iliffe 1998: 84) , a club to which many other fellow citizens are not fortunate enough to belong. hippocrates was clear when he wrote that serving the people was a privilege and a call, as is the case of the priest and the teacher, rather than a business designed to make one wealthy. as iliffe adds quoting eliot freidson, physicians tend to forget that "the profession's privileged position is given by, not seized from, society, and it may be allowed to lapse or may even be taken away."the march 2012 doctors' strike in tanzania, mentioned earlier, which paralyzed the public hospitals for a week, demanding that monthly salaries be raised threefold immediately, was a clear example of the physicians' dissatisfaction with their services compensation by the government. they demanded that their pay be raised from $620 to $2200 a month, plus allowances and bonuses. the impact of the strike was devastatingas told by dar-es-salaam newspapers. unfortunately, no study has been conducted to ascertain how many patients may have died as a result of the strike, especially in dar-es-salaam. obviously, the issue of doctors' strikes has ethical and moral implications, since they have sworn to faithfully uphold the hippocratic oath, while the state upholds the view that health is a right of all citizens. furthermore, strikes contribute indirectly to death and cause unnecessary pain to patients. if the strike is just for salary increases, when the state believes that doctors are paid on a scale equal or even higher compared to most salaried civil service employees, then it is easy to side with the sick, who know that most of the doctors their received their degree through the use of taxpayers' money. people therefore do not understand why the strikes are allowed to take place. if these are held to improve the quality of health services, renovating buildings, guaranteeing hot water, electricity, sanitation and hygiene, and adequate functioning equipment, then one might understand the situation.but strikes like these must constitute the last resort and be reasonable in their demands. no other civil servants strike to demand that their pay be tripled or quadrupled! it stands to reason, therefore, that there must be an overwhelming reason to prove that, without a lethal strike, there is no other way to improve the situation and that, without a strike, the state would not respond.the doctors involved in the strike, who are usually practicing in government institutions, often hope that the private health facilities will temporarily provide the care the patients need. this is unrealistic as private clinics are few and are much more expensive than government hospitals and health clinics-the reason why citizens, except family members, never side with the striking physicians, who are seen by many as acting selfishly as guilds or unions that must get their demands at all cost. as one commentator put it, "before the strike, doctors must exhaust all possible alternatives to avoid the strike, and strikes should only be undertaken if it is the only option available. mass awareness campaigns on the service delivery framework are necessary during the doctor-government negotiation phase to avoid grave negativism from the public, should the strike be the only option to influence the government." at any rate, continues the commentator of the tanzanian 2012 doctors' strike, "both parties involved in the strike must ensure the continuity of health services to preserve the individual right to (quality) health service" (singular 2012: 7). this seems to be one element that has been missing in all doctors' strikes in africa. as a result, it is the innocent, powerless patients who end up being hurt. a slow down may be acceptable but not a total halt to services to the people whose health the physicians have sworn to protect day and night. as us president harry truman once said, "if you cannot stand the heat, get out of the kitchen!"over the past 20 years, developing countries have made sure that environmental pollution would be reduced to protect the health of their citizens. this push for an environment that does not constitute a direct or indirect cause of certain diseases, such as respiratory ailments and cancers, has been accepted by africans, at least in theory. in fact, when one travels across the continent and sees the prevailing polluted conditions in the cities, the roads, and the villages, one easily gets the impression that the leaders are sleeping behind the wheel. while smoke plagues the cities of africa from east to west and north to south, there seem to be no regulations on harmful gas emissions from vehicles, trucks, in particular, and motorcycles, and water and soil contaminated by chemical and industrial waste, some of which can be seen oozing above the ground and in the waters people rely on for survival. while kenyans have seen, on their own, the need to wear smoke hoods in the city of nairobi to protect their health from polluters, the state simply looks on at the environmental degradation. lead is generously used in gasoline and other materials, as if scientific warnings about the hazards this metal poses to children in particular mean nothing. environmentalists point out that, in africa, towns and houses are often built at former waste disposal sites. africa's unclean environment is worsened by indoor pollution in windowless village houses, as is the case with maasai dwellings, for example, which carry particulate levels 100 times higher than those accepted by the international community, coupled with poor ventilation and low lying smoke that can cause respiratory diseases and eye irritation, especially among children. furthermore, food safety, especially for items cooked along the dusty streets and in the stands of city markets almost all over sub-saharan africa, should constitute a major concern for the authorities. yet, only a few countries are making an effort to inspect the markets at some point in the food chain. the dangers of contamination and toxicity are real under such circumstances. for example, insufficiently prepared cassava (or manioc) is known to cause paralysis. yet, cassava is a major food staple in parts of africa that is not inspected. in kenya, ingestion of contaminated corn (maize) killed 125 out of 317 reported cases in 2004. it was apparently caused by an infectious disease locally called konzo. finally, we might note that 72% of the people in sub-saharan africa do not have waste disposal facilities (who, african region health report 2013), which is a serious health hazard. luckily, botswana, ghana, and tanzania are in the forefront among nations in africa that plan to adopt a policy of hazard analysis of critical food control points (hacp), an internationally accepted system of food safety management. food safety measures that apply to items sold in the streets and open markets and others being slowly introduced in botswana, ghana, tanzania, mozambique, burkina faso, kenya, congo, and guinea-bissau are an encouraging sign designed to protect the public. as the who notes, "hygiene arrangements among vendors of cheap ready-to-eat food are often very poor in most developing countries. adequate running water, toilets and washing facilities are rare, many vendors fail to disinfect surfaces or wash their hands, food is not usually protected from insects, and refrigeration is seldom available," all of which facilitate the transmission of campylobacter spp., salmonella spp., hepatitis a virus, and escherichia coli (african region health report 2013: 90). 1 a major weakness that must be overcome by african states and institutions, including all medical schools on the continent, is the realization that, without research undertaken by the african themselves who know their milieu more than anyone else in the world, innovation, development and implementation of new technologies is as important as other components of health and the wellbeing of the people (ecosoc 2009: 23). indeed, without data, hypotheses, and experimentation there will be no better health in the longterm, and the continent will be forever dependent on western researchers, even if they collaborate with them, as they will remain appendages in the process and embrace already-formulated theories and practices that fit the foreign researchers' culture and needs. african leaders are quick to point to lack of resources for social programs about which their leadership is challenged by citizens at home and abroad. we reproduce below the figures on oil and gas production in 19 african countries provided by the us department of energy, and ey estimates for 2010. the figures refute the excuses presented, especially if they are considered along with other resources africa has to offer. six or seven countries are the largest owners and producers of oil in africa-nigeria, equatorial guinea, libya, algeria, angola (oil), sudan (oil), and egypt (gas), but the prospects for a bright economic future that end or reduce poverty by half in such countries as ghana, tanzania, mozambique, uganda, sierra leone, mali, and kenya, where oil fields have been found or are suspected to exist, are not promising. the question is: how are these resources being used or will be used in the years to come for the benefit of all people, while ending, simultaneously, poverty as we know it? (table 3. oil and natural gas reserves: at the end of 2010, african oil and natural gas reserves were estimated at between 200 and 210 billion barrels a day (boe), with the oil & gas journal providing a slightly higher estimate than the us department of energy (doe) ( table 3 .2).the us department of energy notes that:the conventional forecasts see african oil supply growth continuing over the next 25 years, albeit more slowly than it has recently-with forecast ranges of growth over the period of between 0.5 million and 2. writing in the guardian in 2013, ben shepard called the oil and gas boom in africa the "resource curse," as is the case for uganda that has been trying to decide how it will manage the reserves just discovered in the country. shepard writes that: "sound legislation and ugandan specific frameworks are futile unless corruption is curtailed and there is a transparent public involvement," inclusive of civil society, in the management of future resource revenues. otherwise, waste, corruption, and environmental catastrophe, may ruin the chances of a bright future that could benefit the health of uganda's people. currently, 22 countries in africa are known to have oil reserves, including uganda, kenya, and mozambique. yet, as the daily graph shows, "oil has been a headache for most african countries and poor governance, consistent corruption, oil revenue going into private accounts outside their respective countries, coupled with major environmental damage and rampant poverty have all caused fractures in these countries" (useia 2013). in the case of equatorial guinea, which pumps 322,000 barrels a day, oil production accounts for 90% of its revenue and 98% of exports resulting in gdp per capita of $19,000. these conditions are only comparable to the oil potential boom in south sudan but complicated by political unrest. yet, more than 60% of equatoguineans, as is the case in angola, live on $1.00 a day. the oil in angola has resulted in a double-digit growth of the gdp, as the oil companies are pumping 1.9 million barrels a day. but, here, too, the benefits do not reach most of the populace, in a continent that is expected to experience a strong economic growth over the next few years. in fact, the world bank has predicted that "africa will grow at its pre-crisis rate of 5% over the period 2013-2015 (4.9% in 2013, gradually strengthening to 5.2% in 2015) ." naturally, the [2009] [2010] fall in oil prices that started in 2015 will negatively impact the rosy predictions. the generated funds could jumpstart africa and enable it to feed its people, take care of their health and educational needs, and engage in a massive infrastructure build up. the chances of this to happen, however, are slim, if the disappointing past experience under the second generation of african leadership is an indication. the who has listed the following obstacles to health and health care embedded in the health systems on the african continent: high maternal, infant, and child death rates, as already pointed out throughout this volume; increased injuries stemming from violent behavior, such as war, and vehicular crashes, particular in urban areas; poor and insufficient infrastructure; lack of consistent water and electricity supply; inadequate educational opportunities, which makes it difficult to access health care; long distances to health care facilities; high cost of medicine; lack of repairs for the upkeep of facilities; chronic absenteeism by an inadequately competent and committed workforce, including administrators, physicians, nurses, and midwives; low morale among the lower staff; scarcity of essential medicines; and poor practices in the acquisition and distribution of basic health supplies. reports are that, at one of the best hospitals in africa, mulago national referral hospital, boilers, sterilization equipment, and patients' oxygen supply instruments often malfunction, while sewage pipes ooze with waste on the premises (monitor 2014) .these conditions are often aggravated by corruption among the higher and lower echelon, all of which contribute to social inequalities that impact access to health, favoring the wealthy while paying little attention to the vast majority of the citizens, especially those living in the rural areas (economist intelligence unit, who 2009a, b: 1-32) . finally, the health budget is overwhelmingly skewed towards salaries and treatment, with very little left for services and prevention. mulago hospitals' budget, for example, is 33.2 billion ugandan shillings ($13 million), but 20 billion shillings go to salaries, and so is the case in many health systems in africa. this is what puzzles patients when doctors go on strike. estimates are that mulago, to function as a first class hospital in the country, needs an annual budget of 100 billion ugandan shillings, equivalent to $40 million. the university of minnesota medical school, which is affiliated with makerere university's mulago medical school, offers this ominous information and advice to its students going for practice or as interns at the oldest and best ugandan medical school:as you can see [in the pediatric wards], the beds are right next to each other. families sleep on the ground in between the beds. children sometimes have to share a bed, particularly if they need oxygen. on the wards, expect to see very sick patients along with massive teams of medical students, interns, residents, and staff rounding the bedside in a hierarchal structure similar to what you would see in the united states. rounds typically last several hours; a typical medicine team may care for as many as 70 patients concurrently; pediatric teams often care for even larger teams. you can expect to see some amazing pathology and physical findings, but given the patient load staff rarely have significant time to spend teaching students and residents. the lack of diagnostic resources can also be frustrating at times, as can language barriers…the hospital has suffered significant budget reductions and staff shortages for the last several years, however, and many ugandans now view the hospital as a place of last resort for poor patients lacking other options, or for those requiring very specialized services [even though, this is the hospital where the president gets his check-ups and treatment]. (university of minnesota medical school 2014) regarding hospital beds, one can ask how leaders tolerate putting two to four patients who might carry infectious diseases in the same bed, and sleep in their palaces with a clear conscience. this deadly practice is widely known all over africa but nothing is done to prevent what one could call, in epidemiological terms, the moral equivalent of a "sacrilege." the author can vouch for this occurrence at the beira municipal hospital in mozambique, the maternity wards at mwananyamala hospital in dar-es-salaam, and arusha's best known national hospital, mount meru, in tanzania. here, pregnant women at times, using the same single blanket, have to take shifts in using the beds, which are shared by more than one woman. at this national facility as well, two mothers and their new born babies share the same bed for days in a row, regardless as to whether the babies are sick, without a curtain separating the various beds in the ward! it is no wonder that the who stresses the point that studies have shown that 53% of children's deaths in africa occur due to underweight, malaria, pneumonia, and measles, while 25% are the result of malnutrition and diarrhea. among the under-five deaths, studies indicate that about 53% can be attributed to underweight and 36% to the effect of undernutrition for diarrhea, pneumonia, malaria, and measles. the who also notes that, even though there was a reduction of child mortality in such countries as lesotho, malawi, mozambique, and namibia, and underfive mortality fell in 10 countries of the african region, "... under-five death has since increased and during the 13-year period there has been no overall reduction in mortality in this [african] region" (who, african region health report 2013: 20) . no doubt nosocomial infections are a part of the problem, given that, even at cleaner hospitals in the west, especially in the us, the same occurrences are very common.we might as well end this chapter with the not very optimistic overall assessment of the health system in africa by the who, which notes:one of africa's major public health challenges is building and reinforcing health systems capable of delivering essential health care to the population. countries in the african region have weak and dysfunctional health systems [author's emphasis]. several key elements are required for health systems to function properly: adequate numbers of skilled health workers; basic infrastructure and equipment; essential medicines and supplies; and health financing systems. it is also important to establish health information systems, including registration, to measure the scale of a given health problem in order to gauge the appropriate response. (who, african regional health report 2013: xix) in almost every one of these health system requisites, sub-saharan africa's health systems are either dysfunctional or simply weak. it is hoped that this verdict from the who serves as an overdue wake up call for african leaders, ministries personnel, health practitioners, communities, intellectuals, politicians, and decision-makers because people are clamoring and demanding at least the most basic health services embodied in the concept of primary health care they all embraced in 1978 and 2000. in support of this assessment of the future of africa's health care, the economist intelligence unit (2012) stresses that:not only are the absolute levels of all indicators low, but progress on almost every indicator is slower than in any other region. maternal mortality in africa, for instance, decreased 27% over the past two decades, which is certainly a good outcome, but the global figure over the same period was 35% and in south-east asia it was 58% mortality in children under five is declining by 2.5% a year in africa, compared to 2.7% worldwide and 5.6% in the european region. maternal mortality in africa is declining at a rate of 1.7% a year, against 2.3% worldwide and 5% in south-east asia. (kpmg africa 2012: 2) the economist concludes its assessment by noting that "…africa will lag behind the rest of the world on health indicators for many years to come." it is important to consider the reason why this is so. by far the most important reason is the way health care is funded, which is "a patchwork of meager public spending, heavy reliance on foreign donors and a large dependence on out-of-pocket contributions and user fees that place the greatest burden on the poorest members of society" (kpmg africa 2012: 1). this chapter wishes to add to the reasons the mismanagement of the national resources for personal ends and lack of clear priorities, which should focus on food sustainability for all citizens, education for all, health for all as a right, and the rebuilding of the infrastructure, all stemming from and based on the goals and strategies of primary health care that stresses prevention over treatment.studies on substance abuse in africa became more common during the late 1990s and they are overwhelmingly focused on the prevalence of alcohol drinking and drug abuse. the issue of alcoholism and drug abuse in africa and elsewhere is often controversial because, whoever writes about it consciously or unconsciously views it from the religious, social, political, economic, psychosomatic, and physiological angle. this makes it difficult to present an argument defending or condemning it completely, that is, one that is acceptable to all. ironically, colonial administrators and concessionaire companies tended to consider africans to be intrinsically uncontrollable intoxicated people, while they themselves spent their evenings indulging in hard whisky, cognac, wine, or beer and losing control over their own actions and words. dancing at times for hours in their kaki short pants, white hats, long socks, or white trousers in the evening, they would wake up the next day or after the daily afternoon siesta with hangovers just before going to the office if they felt like going to work at all.the first colonially commissioned anthropologists, as noted in this work, viewed drinking among africans as a cultural and social phenomenon that linked them to the world of their ancestors, which cemented the role of the rites of passage, and often constituted a way of enjoying the gifts of life while surrounded by kin and guests. however, colonialists' stories of chronic drinking among africans were usually exaggerated. the missionaries looked at drinking as an evil tendency inherent in africans, which "the natives" could not resist. theirs were moral judgments based on religion, which africans had no obligation to follow, given that the holy missionaries themselves were not models either in alcohol consumption, which they claimed they did "in moderation, when necessary." echoing the hypocritical stand of the colonialists and many of their missionaries in africa, frederick lugard, twice governor of nigeria, considered using proceeds from liquor as "a scandal in the eyes of civilization when the administration of a british colony has become almost wholly dependent for revenue on the sale of intoxicating drink" (heap 2012: 143-144) .rarely did colonialists make the point that, like the europeans, most of the drinking was done at home or at social gatherings for relaxation, almost never during the work hours, and that women and children were not expected to indulge in it. most importantly, much of the drinking did not result in quarrels and violence as they claimed. if any, most of the violence was verbal rather than physical. excessive drinking was always condemned. invariably, also, the colonizers disregarded the fact that drinking was often a visible expression of the misery caused by the colonial system, conveniently forgetting that the production of alcohol was one of the few sources of cash that would allow them to pay taxes the colonial government had imposed on them. for others, such as the poor, it was the only way to enjoy some of the easy pleasures of life and forget, at least for a fleeting moment, their destitute condition. the same phenomenon was observed during the 1980s as a result of the global economic down turn. bryceson reminds us that, "alcoholically joyful, creative exchanges have been described as 'poor man's opera' for those who do not have the financial means to procure more expensive aesthetic experiences or exhilarating pastimes" (2002: 7). some of the factors that enhanced the drinking of alcohol, say the experts, was and still is, in africa, the attractive packaging and the slick advertisement of the bottles by the big corporations or mass beer brewers. despite the abundance of colonial alcoholic beverages, africans never stopped drinking their own traditional alcoholic creations while gladly embracing the imported new varieties, such as gin and rum. this was true both during the colonial period and in post-independence africa. as one colonial administrator accurately put it, "yet to some colonial commentators there was too much consumer choice: the african has his palm wine and corn beer. to him spirituous liquor is a superfluous and dangerous luxury. he does not want it; he needs it no more than a cat needs two tails" (heap 2002: 140) .within certain social circles, drinking certain types of alcoholic beverages was and is still seen as a symbol of success and wealth in life. indeed, as the cited author adds, "since independence, drinking clear bottled lager has been the hallmark of membership in the educated urban middle class." this writer recalls vividly how some assimilated africans in mozambique would drink their wine with their meal in the open veranda simply to show the passers-by how civilized they were, as they thus emulated the colonial master's drinking habits. the popularity of strong alcoholic beverages was made the easier as africans had become very adept in fermenting their own products at home. thus, sunday rest, funeral occasions, social gatherings, and the heavy advertising by companies have made whiskey, wine, even vodka, beer, gin, and other spirits popular with african males, particularly among those with enviable jobs, including many civil servants, presidents, and university professors. perhaps with some exaggeration, one health clinic in harare, zimbabwe, reported during the early 2000s that "66% of men and 48% of women attending ritual ceremonies, communal planting, and harvesting, and spirit media celebrations" were inebriated during each function.for the post-colonial governments of africa, passing stringent laws against drinking as europeans did without success, where village brewers, including women, would actually be arrested and incarcerated, would curtail their own love for lager and gin and reduce the amount of tax collections, which sustain part of the national budget. the alcoholic consumer citizens and constituencies made these spirits quite popular on the continent, which are often still associated with high social status. bryceson seems to be right when he writes that alcohol's "imputed value varies in form from culture to culture. in some cultures, institutional efforts have been made to deny or denigrate its perceived worth. nonetheless, its psychoactive qualities lend it added value above and beyond its thirstquenching utility and the cost of the labor and raw materials to make it" (2002: 4-5). there is no denial, however, that excessive drinking is harmful to any society and those who abuse it are most often scorned and ridiculed in public and are counseled against it.unfortunately, today, africa is no longer the innocent place where children and adults were shielded from the use and abuse of drugs, such as marijuana, the most used drug, followed by amphetamines, cocaine, and opium. on the link between drug use and health, the un office on drug and crime estimates that 3.5% africans ages 15 years and older had used marijuana at least once. the agency also predicted that by 2030, seven out of 10 deaths in africa will be caused by drug use and that, in the low income countries of sub-saharan africa, tobacco-related ill health and death in the form of cancer will increase (nain 2008: 13-14. there is also indisputable evidence that drugs in the form of marijuana, stimulants and all kinds of tranquilizers are heavily used in some countries, especially in cities along the coast, with the most popular being cocaine and heroin. these are also injected intravenously and are responsible for many hiv transmissions (alali 2014: 5) . alkali notes that the un estimates that 35,000 africans die every year from issues associated with substance abuse. south africa is the worst abuser of tobacco in sub-saharan africa. here, studies have shown that, during the 1990s, among 83.1% of those suffering from coronary heart diseases were heavy cigarette smokers (mickbin 1994) .apparently, tobacco use, which can lead to lung cancer, is declining in africa today, after 39 of the 46 african members signed the framework for tobacco products control act targeting school children. it appears that, as a result of the prohibition of its use by minors, tobacco smoking among the young is declining. thus, while in 1999, 18.5% of the youth revealed they had been smoking before the age of 10, by 2002, the number had been reduced to 16.2%, if one believes the figures. governments have used higher taxation on tobacco use to reduce smoking, while banning advertisement of cigarettes to minors and educating people on the perils to their health. of course, to the chronic diseases death toll in africa must be added the number of casualties and injuries caused by vehicles and motorcycles, as noted above. it is predicted that vehicular mortality, which now ranks as number 10 among the continent's deadly public health threats, will be among the top three causes of death and injury-and accidents are also associated with infections and disabilities that cripple the patient or the victim of a crash (cooke 2009: 3) . as the who estimates, by 2020, "road injuries will represent the third leading cause of disability in africa, as the per capita ratio of automobiles [and motorcycles] rises" (azevedo et al. 2014: 59) . besides dying from unprecedented vehicular crashes on the roads, 85% of the deadly world crashes occur in africa. many africans, particularly the poor, as studies in south africa have demonstrated, die daily from falls, fires, drowning, collapsing structures, seasonal flooding, intermittent droughts that result in famines, pipe accidents and explosions at refineries, as has been the case in nigeria, volcanoes when they erupt, gas emissions from gasoline refineries spewing toxins in the air, and earthquakes. trauma from accidental falls, burnings, and other types of wounds are the primary cause of the deaths of children from one year-olds to older ages (see niang 2008: 12) .as noted throughout this study, infectious diseases can be defined as those that are spread from one individual to another or from an animal to man, that is, by a vector or carrier, such as a mosquito, fly, louse, flea, helminth (worm), germ, or microbiological agent, such as a bacterium, virus, fungus, protozoa parasite, tick, or an arthropod, to humans. the carrier of the parasite or microorganism is known as the vector, which attaches itself to the host (man or animal), all occur in a definite environment, hence the so-called epidemic triangle-namely, the vector, the host, and the environment. usually, an infectious disease is acute, sudden, and symptomatic, even though it can also be chronic, such as hiv, and therefore taking longer to manifest itself in the host. a major outbreak of an endemic disease becomes epidemic when it reaches unusual proportions in terms of spread and impact, affecting individuals in a given population and a certain geographic location more severely than ever before, or pandemic when it affects communities throughout the world, as has been the case with hiv/ aids, h1n1, sars, and the spanish influenza of 1918-1919. if deadly, pandemics tend to decimate millions of people worldwide. while some infectious diseases, such as malaria, can be deadly, others, like polio, can leave the victim disabled or paralyzed, blind, physically and intellectually stunted, or it may simply incapacitate the host to the extent that he or she is unable to function as a normal human being.malaria, yellow fever, diarrhea, pneumonia, respiratory ailments, tb, and hiv/aids, are known as killer diseases, and account for almost half of children's deaths globally, even though they may also be fatal to adults. the annual cost associated with malaria treatment alone in africa is $12 billion on average, while it also slows the economic growth by 1.3% a year. during the past three centuries, infectious diseases have ravaged the african continent by killing millions of people annually. the discovery of vaccines, emphasis on hygiene and preventive measures, such as killing the vectors or keeping a safe distance from insects and rodents, have all made a difference. rodents are responsible for the terrible plagues that have hit the world, including africa, as discussed in this work. however, recent progress against infectious diseases has been so dramatic that a us surgeon-general declared in the late 1970s that infectious diseases were a thing of the past and urged the world to tackle chronic diseases, instead. whereas this may have been true in america and europe, in africa it was far from the truth.the world is now witnessing an era where chronic diseases, which are slower to inflict damage to the victim and are often asymptomatic at first, latent or inactive until the long incubation period elapses or some external or internal agent triggers their virulent course, becoming full-blown diseases, eventually appearing as deadly or malignant, benign, or simply debilitating. currently, most of africa is primarily affected by infectious or communicable diseases, but chronic or non-communicable diseases are advancing at an alarming speed, and have thus been called africa's second disease burden; and the cost to treat these diseases is astronomical. a few years ago, it was predicted that the cost of heart diseases and diabetes for the african continent would reach $1.184 billion by 2012, representing between 1% and 5% of gdp. we cannot emphasize enough the role the government can play in controlling chronic diseases, as it is the only major social and authoritative compact that can exert meaningful pressure on people to change their behavior and enlighten the citizens on a mass scale against the dangers of such habits as cigarette smoking, drug abuse, and careless sexual behavior. only the state has the resources to initiate and sustain disease prevention programs; and only the state is able to attract substantive international or global assistance in the fight against illness and pestilence.overall, africa's major success stories include decrease in malarial deaths by 33% since 2001 and child mortality by 30% since 1999, mainly due to "routine immunization." interestingly, malaria can be reduced by 50% with bed nets use, especially if these are already insecticide-treated, effectively repealing the mosquitoes for up to three years. unfortunately, people sell the nets to get a few pennies for themselves. in june 2014, for example, the ugandan government distributed free nets to two districts, but, instead of using them in the home, people began selling them within two weeks of the distribution to businessmen who lingered around to buy them for 3000 shillings, or $2.00. in turn, the buyers would sell one net for double or triple the price they paid. some use the net to cover football goal posts and others to catch black ants (daily mirror, june 25, 2014: 22) . the government threatened to prosecute those who sell the free bed nets as well as those who buy them. overall, so far, six african countries have reduced under-five mortality by two-thirds within the time recommended by the who; 16 have made no progress; only 13 achieved maternal mortality rates lower than 550 per 100,000; and 32 in sub-saharan africa showed death rates of either 550 per 100,000 or higher.unfortunately, even though africa bears 66% of the global hiv/aids burden, the who noted that only one-third of the population with advanced infection had received antiretroviral medicines by 2007. most prominent and most deadly among the infectious diseases ravaging africa are the "big three," hiv/aids, malaria, and tb, which have attracted most external funding. the focus on one or a few specific diseases, leaving the others as secondary, is known as a vertical approach, when contrasted to an approach that targets all diseases, infectious or chronic, at the same time, a process known as horizontal. views from experts differ as to whether or not populations should choose one approach over the other as a policy and a strategy to improve the health of the public. other infectious diseases include measles, smallpox and polio, (the latter two now eradicated from the continent, except perhaps for a few cases of polio in nigeria), sleeping sickness or trypanosomiasis, chagas or american trypanosomiasis, dengue hemorrhagic fever, fascioliasis, rabies, soil transmitted helminthic diseases, leprosy, bilharziasis or schistosomiasis, river blindness or onchocerciasis, dracunculiasis, trachoma, buruli ulcer, visceral leishmaniasis, ebola, and many others that do not garner continuous focused attention from government and international funders unless they turn epidemic.the fight against onchocerciasis has resulted in a major victory for international organizations, such the who, working to eradicate it especially from west africa. the onchocerciasis control program started in africa in 1974 using chemicals and biological larvicides to kill the black fly larvae. the campaign was so successful that 1.2 million square miles in west africa were freed from the fly, allowing some people to resettle, while preventing 40,000 new cases of blindness per year. the african program for onchocerciasis initiated by the who and other international organizations in 1995 has "treated 34 million people in 16 countries to date." but the majority of the people do not receive treatment for it. it is important to mention here that upper volta, now burkina faso, used to be one of the preferred habitats for the simulium damnosum fly which causes river blindness. as far as we know, there was no coordination between britain and france in their attempt to rid the two areas from the disease during the colonial period. unfortunately, sleeping sickness and cerebrospinal meningitis were the most threatening diseases in the area.in the case of trypanosmiasis, for example, the situation was exascerbated by lack of communication the situation was exacerbated by lack of communication among the colonial departments, and there was little knowledge among the british administrators and public health officials of what the french in upper volta were doing to contain or control sleeping sickness in their territory. in nigeria, concern about the serious ravages of trypanosomiasis came much later than in ghana, but, by that time, thousands of people had been either been disabled or killed by the disease. this was also true in chad, gambia, nigeria, cameroon, burkina faso, mali, and congo. eventually, drugs, insecticides, and forest clearance reduced its devastating effect considerably. sadly, in africa, these are common deadly diseases that often cause severe pain and suffering and even death or leave their victims disabled for life. as a result, some epidemiologists call them the "neglected tropical diseases" (mariani-constantini 2011: 245) . these neglected infectious diseases on the continent tend to affect children and the poor most, hitting a billion others worldwide, and "are mostly attributable to well known factors, notably, unsafe water, poor housing, and poor sanitation" (see also stein et al. 2007 ).to recapitulate this chapter's comments on the subject of infectious diseases, the following brief paragraphs may help the reader remember their etiology and impact on africa and its people. malaria is transmitted by the anopheles mosquito, which breeds all year round in hot and humid climate, and is common to most swampy areas of the continent; leishmaniasis is transmitted by sand flies living in scrubland; whereas river blindness is transmitted by black flies that thrive in fast river currents. the tsetse fly carries parasites that cause sleeping sickness, while ordinary flies are causes of an eye disease called trachoma. river snails penetrate the human skin in snail infested water and are responsible for a debilitating disease called bilharziasis or schistosomiasis, and children and women are most vulnerable to it as they tend to be more often in contact with rivers, lakes, and streams. schistosomiasis affects mostly children, as noted, and is not deadly, but adversely impacts "the quality of life of adults, and infects 160 million people in africa annually contributing to anemia among pregnant women" (39). since it affects mostly children, ages 5-14 years, studies have shown that "heavy infestations may impair the cognitive function of these children" (who, african region health report 2013: 39). rabies, which cannot be transmitted from human to human, comes from mad dogs, cats, and bats, and is deadly.yellow fever's vector is a mosquito called aedis aegypti. mosquitoes are also responsible for lymphatic filariasis, and hemorrhagic fever. in african urban areas, in particular, hepatitis, typhoid, and diarrhea, occur quite often. cholera, bacillary dysentery, and worm diseases are caused by roundworms, hookworms, and tapeworms, or helminths, which are soil-transmitted to humans. neglected infectious diseases contribute to severe pain, suffering, and lifelong disabilities and are responsible for enormous loss of individual and household productivity, businesses slowdown, and lowering a country's economic output, such as the gdp. despite the ubiquitous nature of the parasitic worms, they have been reduced by 96% globally since 1986. however, most of the remaining cases occur in 13 african countries, in which the final phase of its eradication has proven difficult. leprosy is another infectious disease that has almost been eradicated globally, except in africa, where 96% of the cases were contained 20 years ago, but the remaining 4% have been extremely problematic and resilient. currently, at least seven african countries are struggling with the incidence of leprosy, where the global goal was to reduce it to one case per 1000 people by 2003. nigeria is one of the countries that, along with botswana, mali, burkina faso, rwanda, zambia, niger, and tanzania, seems to have achieved the goal but the stigma of leprosy is still strong here. in mozambique, the prevalence rate for leprosy was 127,500 in 1991, but the number was reduced to 51,200 or 60% by 2003, with 800,000 cases been cured through use of effective drugs. fortunately, physicians have reported that it is not drug-resistant in endemic environments such as car, tanzania, angola, mozambique, and madagascar, where it is endemic but it has almost been eradicated (who, african region health report 2013: 42). africa has had remarkable success in eradicating or controlling the spread of some infectious diseases following independence during the 1960s and 1970s. however, a much more daunting task is left unfinished. this includes an unexpected increase of blindness from diseases and associated risks expected in the near future, from the current nine million cases of blindness to 15 million by 2020, of which 80% are totally preventable or curable. mental health is simply a disaster of epidemic proportions in sub-saharan africa as alluded to in this chapter. the un population program notes that, of the 800 million living in sub-saharan africa during the first decade of the twenty-first century, 50% suffer from one form or another of handicap but only 2% receive specific rehabilitation care. also, 90% of children with mental health disorders die before the age of five, and the majority of the affected are the poor people and the unemployed (niang 2008: 11) . unfortunately, researchers have not shown much interest in the problem of mental health on the continent. a study conducted by turshen in 1989 showed that the number of references in the literature is sparse and that none of them referred to the disease in women, who tend to be the most affected.measles, virtually eradicated in many parts of the globe by now, still hits 11 million children in africa annually, with consequences that contribute to deaths and a weakened immune system, a condition that is preventable through vaccine during the first years of life. mixed results on disease control or reduction in africa include the "big three": hiv/aids, malaria, and tb. in kenya, for example, despite the country's touted health care system in sub-saharan africa, still faces 80,000 deaths per year from aids, and 1.5 million people still live with hiv, even though the incidence was reduced to 6% in 2009, from 8% in 2001. the number of orphans, who lost one parent or both, has reached 1.2 million. malaria, on the other hand, affects eight million kenyans every year, and the so-called rift valley fever and chikungunya, a disease similar to dengue, continue to cause thousands of unnecessary deaths, notwithstanding the various effective treatments now available. the conditions are not much better in other african countries. despite the major effort made by the government and its enviable hospitals, south africa has a population of at least 5.5 million who live with hiv/aids, at the rate of one per 10 people, resulting in some three million related deaths since the discovery of hiv during the mid-1980s (smith 2013) .it is important to note here as well that the fight against hiv/aids is not over, even though several experimental vaccines are being conducted through clinical trials, especially in east africa. unfortunately, these have not been as promising. for africans, who have borne the brunt of the experiments, the disconcerting aspect of the development of hiv drugs and vaccines is that the hiv sub-type b is predominant in north america and europe and not africa, where the c sub-type is the most common, especially in sub-saharan africa. here, the rate is between 70 and 88% and more than 95% in south africa, says professor yasien sayed, expert in hiv at the university of witwatersrand, johannesburg, where he is focusing his studies on sub-type c. one of the reasons why pharmaceuticals target the b sub-type is that they feel that there is no market for c sub-type drugs, even though in two of the most populous countries in the world, india and china, the predominant types are a and c (whitehead 2013: 1) . this discrepancy makes the developing world feel that it is being used as a guinea pig for the benefit of white america and europe.this leads us to discuss briefly the controversy over where in the world hiv began. africans get defensive when the continent is blamed as being the original place of several diseases, a point that cannot be proven, as has happened with hiv/aids. the issue of the origins of hiv/aids is still being debated today, more than three decades after its discovery during the 1980s. a theory advanced and published in the journal of science in 2006 attributes the origins to southeastern cameroon, the result of a team study led by professor beatrice hahn of the university of alabama at birmingham and dr. paul sharp from the university of edinburgh. the project's aim was to search for the simian virus in chimpanzees feces collected "across a vast swath of southeastern cameroon." the team traced the carrier to an african porter employed by the french sometime between 1890 and 1900 or thereabouts. the researchers claimed that one hungry man went hunting and killed a blood infected chimpanzee. the blood subsequently infected the hunter, "probably through a cut during butchering." this tragedy occurred "amid massive infusion of new people and technology into a land where ancient ways still prevailed," as the "… european powers engaged in a feverish race for wealth and glory in blazed routes up muddy rivers and into dense forests that had been travelled only sporadically by humans before" (timberg and halperin 2012: 1-3) .it appears that the porters had cut a path right through the area where the chimps lived, enhancing the transmission of the virus to man. the team found in the chimps' feces the virus strain known as hiv-1 group m, which can be carried by simians, such as gorillas and monkeys. this was "a lightly developed southern region where relatively few people live even today, scientists say." the study' conclusions seemed to confirm what many scientists had known or speculated before, namely, that a blood sample from 1959 indicated that kinshasa, the capital of the drc, had been the virus habitat many decades prior to its discovery during the 1980s. in 2008, michael worobey, an evolutionary biologist working in a laboratory at the university of arizona, published his own findings in the journal nature after discovering a second sample of the virus "trapped in a wax-encased lymph node biopsy from 1960." he compared the genetic structure of the two samples and concluded that the hiv-1 group m was much older than thought at the time. he was convinced that he had proven that both samples had come from the same ancestor, sometime between 1884 and 1924. however, the most probable year seems to be 1908. the hiv-1 group m is said to have been hatched somewhere along the banks of sangha river, which flows toward central africa, an area where kinshasa is also located. timberg and halperin add that "this section of the sangha was not ideal for navigation because of its ribbons of sandbars and the dense vegetation along the banks" (timberg and halperin 2012: 2) , the reason why the virus did not spread as fast. this international team had set up 10 stations spread over a wide portion of southeastern cameroon, and found the hiv-1 group m virus samples in two of the stations, which were completely remote from any population, and were almost a perfect match of the hiv-1 group m, whose impact has been, since the 1980s, so devastating to mankind.adding to the theory about the alleged origins of hiv just discussed is the controversy over the transmission of the ebola virus and its possible links with the great apes in parts of west africa. as argued in this volume, the cohabitation of animals, including chimpanzees, and men goes back centuries, and it appears that west africa was aware that the big apes could transmit the disease to men, even prior to the most recent outbreaks. during the 1990s, hunters in the region are also said to have been aware of the disease, and recognized the phenomenon from the new outbreak but were not convinced that ebola had come from the chimps. in other areas, such as gabon, people were not only aware of the disease but knew that chimps could also suffer from it just as man could. thus, in their minds, the disease could come from either man or chimp. this a plausible reason why the epidemic broke out in gabon in 1997, hunters had detailed knowledge of the index case-a hunter who had found a dead gorilla in the forest and had brought it back to his village to share with others" (giles-vernick and rupp 2013: 128-130) .in africa, the mentally ill interest the authorities only when they disturb the public order. when that occurs, authorities send them either to an asylum, if there is one, or they incarcerate them. although this was a common practice in french colonial west africa (niang 2008: 12-13) , it is similar in other parts of sub-saharan africa. in senegal, the prevalence is 8%. however, unlike the developing world, 85% of it is not treated here. epilepsy goes virtually untreated in africa, whereas, in the industrialized world, the treatment rate is 80%. unfortunately, again, very little research has been done on these disorders in africa. the african sub-continent has virtually no mental health programs worth mentioning and no facilities that would pass a rigorous test, even though ghana is planning to introduce a robust program in the near future. until now, sudan and south sudan, for example, have not had a single psychiatry training institution or psychiatrists at work. families and ngos are expected to fill the gap, something that is not happening because, in part, the stigma, the cost, the difficulty of proper diagnosis, and the impact of abject poverty seen in african cities and rural areas are a deterrent. ignorance of the etiology of mental disorder and the means to provide effective control against it lead people to explain it as a result of social deviance and ancestors' curse. mental illness accounts for 5% of the disease burden on the continent and 19% of all disability in sub-saharan africa. says who: "the region has fewer mental health professionals than any other who region. for example, the medium number of psychiatrists per 100,000 is only 0.04" (who, african region health report 2013: 70-71) .the reader may be interested in knowing that, according to the who, current leading causes of death in africa are: hiv/aids: 12.4%; lower respiratory infections: 11.2%; diarrheal diseases: 8.6%; malaria: 8.2%; neonatal infections: 3.6%; birth asphyxia and birth trauma: 3.6%; premature and low birth weight: 3.0%; road traffic crashes: and 1.9% and protein energy malnutrition: 1.9% (the economist intelligence unit, african region 2011: 6). it takes sensitivity to ensure that all people are entitled to good nutrition and that, when instances of famine and hunger occur, human empathy must prevail and help trigger government action. a minor episode illustrates this point. when a major famine hit beira, mozambique, during the 1990s, one high level government official said in public in portuguese something like: "nao ha fome aqui na beira, porque todas as manhas eu vejo muita gente a cagar no mato do campo em frente deste palacio!" ("there is no famine here in beira, because every morning i see many people defecating in the bush in front of this palace!"). we must also mention that africa has become notorious for its car and motorcycle crashes, including some that involve hundreds of persons travelling in small and large buses and mini-vans that are filled to overcapacity.motorcycles in east africa, now used as taxis, have turned the most accident prone means of transportation on the road. the reasons for the crashes are well known: driver's fatigue, especially at night, speed, bad condition of roads, drinking, lack of vehicle repairs when needed, inadequate drivers' experience, and old vehicles some of which might be in operation for 20 years after their manufacture. restriction of hours at nights when buses can run, the use of helmets for motorcycles, laws on seat belt use, limitation in alcohol consumption for drivers, clear road signs, speed limits enforcement, and rumble strips have decreased the number of fatalities in many african cities and highways. ghana is a good example where lives have being saved. ghana's fatalities per 10,000 vehicles were about 30-40 times higher than those in countries with higher incomes. however, within a year (2000) (2001) of the introduction of the new laws, traffic collisions dropped by 35%, fatalities by 55%, and serious injuries by 76% (who, african region health report 2013: 77) . in uganda, where motorcycles are used as taxis called boda boda, carrying at times four people, including children and women, crashes kill and incapacitate hundreds of passengers annually. some doctors claim that 60% of the serious injuries and surgeries are a result of improper and dangerous motorcycle use caused by overcrowding in a small seat and the absence of laws calling for helmet wearing. unfortunately, virtually anyone can operate a motorcycle without a license, even though this is prohibited by law, and they frequently crash with cars. often, law enforcement agents simply look the other way and refuse to enforce the law. overall, in africa, road traffic deaths are 40% higher than in all low-and middle-income countries and 50% higher than the world average (who, african region health report 2013: 6).who notes that, with the coming of chronic diseases, africa is experiencing a double burden of disease. currently, estimates on chronic diseases in the form of diabetes in africa are that more than 10 million people suffer from it, with 85% of the cases likely going undetected. predictions are that this number will double to 20.3 million adult cases in sub-saharan africa by 2030, "more than hiv/aids in real terms" and surpassing the number of cases from infectious diseases (the economist intelligence unit 2009: 11). the problem with chronic diseases or degenerating illnesses, such as diabetes, cancer, asthma, and stroke, is that they creep in often asymptomatically, seem less severe at first, and may appear to recede at times (we are not sure of most of their etiology, which may be associated with risk factors that act independently or synergistically, and from undiscovered multiple sources); may have long latency and cause prolonged illnesses; and usually result in severe functional impairment, disability, or death. fortunately, we know the general and specific culprits of chronic diseases. many may be a result of lifestyles, as is the case with tobacco use, alcohol abuse, high cholesterol from fatty foods consumption, sugary and salty intake, inadequate diet, physical inactivity, obesity, stress, environmental occupation, air and water pollution, and even low socioeconomic status and its social and physical consequences (brownson and remington 1998). currently, scientists tell us that seven of the top 10 causes of death are attributable to chronic risk factors, are a major cause of disabilities, and will remain extremely costly for the individual and society.many of the chronic conditions are also a result of globalization and are impacted by individual and social lifestyles and the unscrupulous behavior of major global corporations that dump chemicals in the lakes, contaminate waters, leave industrial waste untreated, abandon carcinogenic sewage systems, pollute rivers and air, and fight the efforts of the environmental protection agencies that have been created to protect people's health. currently, sub-saharan african governments spend only about 20% of the small budget they allocate from the gdp to chronic diseases, while the remainder goes to infectious illnesses. despite the rise in non-communicable diseases, there is hope that further awareness of their impact in some areas of health is having a positive effect.finally, for any meaningful advance in health to occur in africa, africans must tackle the problem of official corruption, what others have called "the looting" of africa's treasury, and the problems of rapid urbanization seriously, which siphon billions of dollars annually, and prevent the workforce from responding adequately to the critical needs of the people of the continent. indeed, as omar massoud writes of nigeria, for the problems of slums, lack of access to basic services such as housing, clean water, primary health care, sanitation, and essential drugs, africans must enact policies specifically aimed at reducing "corruption through community driven checks and balances which ensure effective citizen participation." yet, "the local governments should have [as well] the skilled manpower to deal with the problems of urbanization" (2013: 1) . consequently, african leaders and their ministries of health have a major task to perform: use resources to ensure people are able to feed themselves, provide equal opportunities for all citizens to attain education, make the health of the people one of the top priorities, develop agriculture, improve the physical and social infrastructure, and adopt transparency in every major transaction, end political and economic corruption, and embrace demo-cratic governance. short of any of these goals, the future of health on the continent will continue to experience insolvable problems that will make africa the world's laughing stock.notethere has been a renewal of interest in public health since the turn of the century, in disease prevention, communicable diseases, health protection and health promotions. this is partly due to the realisation that continued investment in acute care brings diminishing returns and is simply not sustainable, and an increased focus on upstream interventions is required to keep the population healthier. it is also due to recognition that problems in the last century tackled by public health actions have provided ongoing benefits.the most recently published public health expenditure in australia report from the australian institute of health and welfare in 2011 suggested that australia spends 2.1% of the total health expenditure on public health [1] . questions will arise as to whether this is sufficient in the longer term.the role of public health is to contribute to the health of the public through assessment of health and health needs, policy formulation, and assurance of the availability of services. public health practitioners are constantly required to relearn old ways of tackling newer patterns of diseases, in order to face traditional and newer challenges that threaten the public's health.while they are not trained as public health physicians in the strictest sense, medical managers will often find that their work overlaps with public health practitioners. medical managers make their largest contributions through the development of health systems, which include personal health care, public health services, and other inter-sectoral initiatives. it is important that medical managers take a balanced approach in developing a health system, which contributes to a fair and healthy society.a broad range of skills is required to practice successfully as a medical manager who is involved in public and population health. in the same way as performing a root cause analysis, the process starts off with understanding and analysing the actual issues, questions and challenges, before too much effort is spent on solving the wrong problem. there are often conflicting priorities for improving the health of populations, and it is ever more important that solutions are not only viable, but cost effective too.in the end, decisions always need to be made, and these are usually difficult, but important, choices. by using evidence and quality data, decisions may eventually become more apparent. the subsequent implementation of any policies that arise from these decisions will require other interpersonal and organisational skills such as influencing, communicating and collaborating, which are key skills of a competent medical manager.it is impossible to describe all facets of public health in one textbook, let alone a chapter. this chapter then seeks to identify the challenges a medical manager would commonly come across in his or her daily practice, and aims to be a reminder that it is important to consider what is happening beyond the four walls of one's immediate organisation; that to be a good health service manager, one often needs to be a competent population health manager.a widely adopted definition is that public health "is the science and art of preventing disease, prolonging life, and promoting health through the organized efforts of society" [2] . roger detels in 2003 defined the goals of public health as: the biologic, physical, and mental well-being of all members of society regardless of gender, wealth, ethnicity, sexual orientation, country, or political views [3] . this is very similar to the world health organization's definition of health as: "a state of complete physical, mental and social wellbeing and not merely the absence of disease or infirmity" [4] .what is immediately obvious is that public health involves achieving health goals from not just an individual but also the collective efforts of society, and this is more than merely the elimination of disease.conceptually, public health can take a population health approach, in order to identify, measure and monitor community health needs through surveillance of disease and risk factors. in other words, it is concerned with threats to the overall health of a community based on population analysis. public health interventions are then aimed at prevention of diseases, or improving the overall health of society.in the last decade or so, there has been significant debate about the definition of population health. population health has been variously defined, including "the study of health and disease in a population as specified by geographical, cultural or political guidelines [5] ", or "the health outcomes of a group of individuals, including the distribution of such outcomes within the group [6] " (concept of health, informed by the study of its determinants and including subsequent interventions). while it is difficult to determine which is normatively right or wrong, in this chapter, the latter definition is used. examples of populations include regional and rural populations, sufferers of chronic disease, indigenous populations, or refugees.to understand public health and population health, it is important to understand some key demographics in australia. these demographics provide the basis for identifying health issues, developing health policies, as well as providing an insight into limitations of interventions.australia is a country with a population of approximately 25 million. the land size of the country is large however, and at 7.7 million square kilometres of land, it represents about 5% of the world's total land area. australia is subsequently one of the least densely populated countries on earth.with 89% of the population living in urban areas, australia is one of the most urbanised countries. most of the population is congregated in the eastern coastal capital cities, with the exception of perth on the west coast. migration policies are such that there has been a net influx of migrants, with the most significant reported countries of birth being the united kingdom, new zealand, china and india according to the australian bureau of statistics [7] (abs).australia has an indigenous population of over 500,000, located mainly in regional and rural areas of new south wales, queensland, and the northern territory. while the northern territory has an indigenous population of approximately 70,000, this represents about 30% of its total population. this indigenous population unfortunately suffers from significantly poorer health outcomes, and will be covered later in the chapter.according to the australian institute of health and welfare (aihw), average life expectancy of australians at birth in 2012 is 82.1 years, with boys born in 2011-2013 being 80.1 years, and 84.3 years for girls [8] . this puts australia's life expectancy at one of the highest levels in the world, which also has health policy and management implications as the population ages ( fig. 10.1 ).the structure of australia's population has changed significantly over the past few decades, and will continue to do so over the next 40 years. the relative portion of population aged 65 and over is growing, indicating a decrease in the proportion that signifies the traditional working age, between 15 and 64 years.previous depictions of the population pyramid with the younger population forming a large base and narrowing towards the top, representing the elderly, are thus changing, with the structure looking more cylindrical than before ( fig. 10 .2). this is significant for the health workforce, as it means that there will likely be a growing demand from diseases of the elderly, with relatively less workforce to support it.the social gradient of health is a phenomenon that suggests that in general, the higher the person's income and education, the healthier they are. daily smoking rates are a clear example, as the higher the socio-economic status (ses) group, the less likely it is for the person to be a daily smoker. in the lowest ses group, the rate in 2011-2012 was 23% as compared with 10% in the highest.difference in harmful levels of alcohol consumption is also evident, with 22% in the lowest ses groups compared to 17% in high ses groups. other examples include sufficient physical activity (34-52%), women and children overweight and obesity (64% and 48%, respectively, for women, 33% and 19% for children) [9] .there are other health measures and risk factors with known social gradients, which include life expectancy, self-assessed health status, oral health, end-stage kidney disease, and mortality and 5-year relative survival from all cancers.infrastructure for public health is provided by state and local government departments and agencies and is closely aligned to housing and environments policy and services also provided by government. public health provision is also supported by other agencies such as health service providers and academic health science institutions, where medical managers are often employed. having an understanding of the overall picture and issues across these sectors is important to provide context to the management of the individual person or individual organisation.one might ask why are the housing and environmental sectors involved in health care? this is because the concept of health is much more far-reaching than the usual health services that medical managers are accustomed to.it is not difficult to conceptualise that clean water, good sanitation, education or even employment contribute to better health for an individual. these are the social determinants of health, and it is important to understand that public health is intricately linked to them.the scenario below is an example of social factors affecting the daily management of a health service.a 42-year-old man with a mental health history is brought to the emergency department with suspected drug overdose and acute psychosis. he had recently been evicted from his home for repeated violent behaviour towards his neighbours and damaging the rented property. he has no known family and is unemployed.you can imagine that while the doctors and nurses can potentially treat the patient back to pre-event health status, it is clear that the social issues such as his accommodation and social supports need to be considered early on in the admission, because they impact on the longer terms outcomes for the patient. otherwise one might come across the familiar situation where the patient is medically fit for discharge, but the care team, however, will flag post-discharge concerns that should have been addressed earlier in the treatment process.failing to identify these issues may potentially lead to suboptimal utilisation of acute beds while they are being addressed, or discharging a patient who is at high risk of being readmitted. a health service manager may need to consider working closely with the housing sector in the situation above, to prevent downstream issues adversely impacting on the health service's operations.from a historically restrictive mandate of ensuring public sanitation, clean water and food supply, public health has evolved to include services for personal protection, such as immunisation or contraception, or health promotion (mainly health education such as physical activity or nutrition). legislation and social policies have been influenced by public health interventions, and this is evidenced in areas such as tobacco legislation or the need for seatbelts.it is thus noticeable the mandate of public health has expanded from providing the essential hygienic services, to disease prevention and personal protection, and now to a range of social engineering efforts. this clearly cannot be achieved by health service organisations alone, and requires the coordination of a range of different sectors.taking a trip down memory lane, it is easy to identify various public health interventions that have made significant impacts on populations over the years, and then discuss some of the recent efforts by governments.the oldest form of public health would likely be the provision of clean water and sanitation. the development of the smallpox vaccine also holds an important place in public health history. by the mid-twentieth century, the automotive industry has gifted us with seatbelts, and by 1970, victoria was the first place in the world that passed compulsory seat belt laws, lowering the incidence of injury or death for drivers and front seat passengers.more recently, efforts in public health can be witnessed in the following areas, which have received significant media attention.• fluoridation of drinking water • child immunisations • anti-smoking legislation • encouraging physical activity and obesity prevention each area has received its fair share of publicity as different interest groups lobby for different outcomes. any intervention, in particular legislative or policy changes, is usually perceived to negatively impact on certain groups, often industry.to understand the challenges that public health interventions face, one only has to look at the significant amounts of resources tobacco companies invested in fighting the recent legislation in australia requiring cigarettes to have plain packaging and unsightly health warnings on them [10] .as a medical manager you may be required to work with your colleagues to advocate for and champion important public and population health issues, possibly support the clinical case with an equally potent business or economic position.a medical manager is often confronted with challenges associated with communicable diseases. these range from routine in-hospital practices of infection prevention, to the involvement in planning and response to epidemic outbreaks at the health service level.in the last two decades, prominent emerging infectious diseases that spring to mind are the outbreaks of the severe acute respiratory syndrome (sars), influenza a virus subtype h5n1 "avian influenza", or the influenza a virus subtype h1n1 "swine flu" pandemic.these influenza outbreaks originating from asia were highly contagious and claimed many lives, especially in the at-risk populations such as the elderly or pregnant women. australia was not significantly affected by sars and h5n1 as compared to the rest of the world; however, the swine flu pandemic in 2009 saw over 37,000 reported cases in australia, claiming 191 lives. it was fortunate that comparatively the fatality rates in australia were low.more recently, the 2014 outbreak of ebola virus disease (evd) from west africa also caused significant consternation, as the disease reported very high mortality rates of between 30% and 70% amongst those infected. the personal protective equipment required for health care workers was significantly more comprehensive than normally required, including full body suits.in these situations, the medical manager often plays a significant leadership role in coordinating the responses within their health service, as well as being involved with emergency planning and preparation work such as training exercises. working parties are convened with representation from relevant parts of the organisation, usually including infection control and infectious disease specialists, intensive care and emergency physicians, nursing, occupational health and safety staff, and potentially media and communication representatives.escalation procedures will need to be in place to support staff on the ground, with considerations for separate triaging and treatment areas including negative pressure rooms, vaccinations for staff, and dogged use of personal protective equipment. it is important to have good communication channels with the state health department to ensure appropriate notification, escalation and mobilisation of resources. it is also pertinent to have a clear media strategy with the community as well, in order to ensure that fear is managed and simple prevention messages communicated.while not prevalent in australia, another communicable infectious disease that has been on the watch-list recently include the middle east respiratory syndrome coronavirus, which has spread through to parts of asia, with south korea the most adversely affected.a simple way of preventing infections is through good hygiene practices, and in health services, the most effective and simple way is to have good hand hygiene practices. policies, procedures and guidelines should be developed and in place to ensure staff are aware of what is expected of them, both for the protection of the patients and themselves.with preventing and controlling healthcare associated infections being one of the national safety and quality health service standards (standard 3), control measures applied in the hospital setting include establishing hospital infection control committees, providing isolation areas, use of personal protective equipment, regular cleaning and sterilising requirements, or restriction of activities, such as working while infectious. hand hygiene compliance requirements are more in the spotlight, and medical managers should be leading the charge for it by mobilising support and driving the agenda.related is the all-important function of antimicrobial stewardship. increasingly bacteria are developing resistance to antibiotics, and multiresistant organisms such as methicillin-resistant staphylococcus aureus (mrsa), vancomycin-resistant enterococci (vre), or the deadly carbapenem-resistant enterobacteriaceae (cre) are increasingly found in the community. while this has been attributed to overuse of antibiotics in the community, hospitals are often found lacking in adherence to antibiotic best practices. leading health services are now actively tackling this issue with antimicrobial stewardship programmes.although such programmes are usually managed by infectious diseases teams, it is important that the medical manager provides visible support for this. many doctors see the approval process of antibiotics as cumbersome, but compliance has been shown to be beneficial for the community in the longer term. standard 3 makes mention of the need for an antimicrobial stewardship programme, and in a similar way to mandatory hand hygiene compliance key performance indicators, medical managers could use this argument to facilitate adherence to the antimicrobial stewardship programme within their health service.staff vaccinations are also an important way to prevent the spread of infections to health care workers and in between patients. the vaccination process not only provides an active immunisation benefit to the individual, it also creates passive herd immunity benefits to the community, which provides relative protection of the population group by reducing or breaking the chains of transmission of an infectious agent because most of the population is resistant to the infection.often being in key leadership positions, medical managers play an important role in promoting the importance of immunisations.the concept of one health is worth noting, and that the movement to link physicians, veterinarians, and other scientific-health and environmentally related disciplines is gaining momentum. one health is particularly important when we consider communicable diseases, as there are more connections between human health, animal health and the environment than was initially perceived.examples of these include transmission of zoonotic diseases from animal to human beings like evd, or the indirect ingestion of antibiotics through animals that have been injected with antibiotics to increase growth and subsequent development of antibiotic resistance. with increasing globalisation, it is worth acknowledging that an environmental issue affecting livestock in central and south america, europe or asia could affect australians who have unwittingly consumed it.in medical school, students would have been taught the physiological harm that tobacco, alcohol and drugs cause to the individual, such as lung cancer, liver cirrhosis or brain damage. in fact, these substances can cause harm much further beyond the individual, as they often affect the relatives and friends around them, as well as causing a unique set of challenges for health care professionals.for decades now, governments have spent significant efforts trying to reduce smoking rates. this has led to the rates of daily smokers in adults essentially halving between 1993 and 2013, from 26.1% to 13.3% [11] .tobacco is not only hazardous to the smokers, but also to those around them through the inha-lation of second hand smoke. smoke-free environments are becoming increasingly popular and legislatively required, including restaurants, bars and all indoor areas. these policies are important from more than one perspective because they protect non-smokers to the exposure of tobacco smoke, reduce smoker's consumption of cigarettes, and even induce some smokers to quit [12] .australia's low smoking rate is the result of sustained, concerted and comprehensive public policy efforts from all levels of government and action from public health organisations. since 1973, when health warnings were first mandated on all cigarette packs, a combination of further restrictions and bans on advertising and smoking in restaurants and increases in taxes have been progressively introduced [13] . a look at the australian department of health's website will show that it has taken significant effort and time to achieve current rates (table 10 .1).it is important that this effort is sustained, as each year smoking kills an estimated 15,000 australians, and although over 75% of the cost of tobacco for the consumer is in taxes, the social and economic costs of $31.5 billion for australia outstrips tobacco sales of $3.4 billion by ninefold.there have been significant public health efforts in reducing the harm caused by alcohol, particularly associated with binge drinking, driving under its influence, and alcohol-related violence.alcohol as a public health issue is challenging, not least because drinking is largely seen as from australian government department of health, with permission; http://www.health.gov.au/internet/publications/ publishing.nsf/content/tobacco-control-toc~timeline a social activity, and the rates of alcohol-related problems tend to rise and fall with changes in the level of consumption of the population. thus controls on the availability of alcohol, including taxes, affect the level of consumption and subsequently rates of alcohol-related problems [14] . the development of the national alcohol strategy 2016-2021 is being undertaken currently, and it is common to see police conducting random breath testing weekends and public holidays in all states and territories. advertising campaigns aimed at both educating the general public and highlighting policing efforts are common. recently alcohol-related violence has also received significant media attention, as there have been a number of high-profile deaths caused by unprovoked single acts of violence.at the same time, sporting clubs are encouraged to promote a culture of safe drinking, and to reduce their affiliations with alcoholic beverage sponsors in an effort to change behaviour and attitudes around alcohol consumption [15] .most would have read of the recent challenges posed by crystalloid methamphetamines, colloquially termed by the media as the "ice epidemic". while the total rate of methamphetamine use has remained steady recently, the use of its crystalloid form, known as ice, has developed into a significant health issue. users of the drug are prone to experiencing hallucinations and can be particularly agitated and violent. communities in regional australia are twice as likely to use methamphetamine than those in major cities, along with smoking daily and drinking excessively [11] . this is particularly challenging for health care professionals in emergency departments who treat them following an overdose, as they not only have to treat the physiological sequelae but also the violence and aggression that often accompany them. within 3 years from 2010, ice has grown to be the illicit drug thought to be of most concern for the general community, and in 2013 became the second highest cause of death from illicit drugs [11] . however, it still lags behind heroin as the single largest cause of illicit drug deaths. the significant problems associated with the use of ice is not an issue that law enforcement agencies can police or arrest its way out of. it requires a coordinated effort from multiple sectors including health care, education, as well as law enforcement, in order to be able to stem its growing abuse and harm.occupational health deals with the interaction between health and work. it encompasses:• the prevention of occupationally related illness or injury resulting from exposure to workplace hazards • ensuring workers with pre-existing illnesses or disability are able to continue working without undue risk to their health or third parties • promoting general health and safe working practices in the workplace when one considers the total proportion of people who go to work, it is clear that even a small percentage of this large number can be an important public health consideration, and maintenance of their health is important to the well-being of their colleagues, family, employer and consumers.the medical manager's approach should include identifying hazards in the work setting, determining at-risk populations and assessing the risks associated with exposure to the risk, and then taking appropriate preventive actions such as elimination, substitution or containment of the hazard, and limiting exposure. it is also important to periodically evaluate the effectiveness of the preventive measures.promoting general health in the workplace include advice and information on alcohol intake, smoking, diet, physical activity or safe driving. health promotion activities in the workplace can include measures such as serving healthy food products in cafeterias, having a no-smoking policy, or providing subsidies to join sports and exercise facilities.chronic diseases have become the most common cause of death in high-income countries such as australia, overtaking communicable diseases, which are still the leading causes of death in lowincome countries [16] . indeed, 68% of global deaths were caused by non-communicable diseases (ncd) in 2012, an increase from 60% in 2000. communicable, maternal, neonatal, and nutritional conditions accounted for 23%, while injuries caused 9% of all deaths. in high-income countries, the proportion of deaths caused by ncd is even higher at 87%, as compared to 37% in low-income countries.in australia, eight out of the nine national health priority areas, which are diseases and conditions that australian governments have chosen for focused attention, are chronic in nature. the other priority area is injury prevention and control.chronic diseases impose an increasing burden to health care systems, and health services have needed to focus on the management of patients who suffer from chronic diseases through intense care coordination programmes such as the hospital admission risk program in victoria. important components of chronic disease management programmes are the proactive upstream care that improves quality of life, as well as reducing the risk of the patient's condition deteriorating to the extent where they require an acute admission.there are many variations of how this is provided to the patient, and innovative health services have incorporated approaches such as using mobile technology, graded escalation protocols, and inten-sive self-care education into their programmes. because the aim is to keep the patient well in the community, often the patients' gps play highly important roles in managing their conditions. a well-designed and executed chronic disease management programme achieves the following outcomes:1. a net financial benefit to the health care system through fewer acute admissions 2. improvement in the patient's quality of life 3. better management of disease markers 4. co-decision, improved buy-in and adherence to agreed therapies chronic disease management requires a population management approach [17] . the segmentation of population groups by many health systems are variations of the kaiser pyramid ( fig. 10.3 ).level 1 are those patients who make up 70-80%. intervention seeks to encourage patients to be activated. active participants in their own care, learn to live with their conditions and manage it. this aims to help them prevent complications and slow down deterioration.level 2 are patients who are considered to be high risk, and their condition has progressed to a stage where active care management is required. this usually involves a multidisciplinary team that provides high-quality evidence-based care to the individuals through following agreed protocols and pathways.the highly complex patients are designated level 3, where they have developed multiple co-morbidities, and their care becomes disproportionately complex for them as well as the health system. a case worker is often required to actively manage the patient's health and help navigate through multiple health, social and community systems.there are many who would argue that another level should be added to the kaiser pyramid, and this is at the level of health promotion for the general public, to prevent the whole of population even getting to level 1. these sort of primary preventions include aiming to increase physical activity, reduce smoking rates, having a healthy diet, or increasing uptake of immunisations.the components of disease management include:• population identification processes, including the increasing use of predictive modelling and pattern recognition • evidence-based practice guidelines • collaborative practice models that include physicians and support service providers • patient self-management education • process and outcomes measurement, evaluation and managementit is important to ensure that disease management programmes are put in place not just to manage costs considerations, but just as importantly quality of care, otherwise they will have a high risk of failing.australia, with its vast land and low population density, creates some interesting challenges that are quite unique to health care. there are often challenges that medical managers face, which are different from those encountered while working in metropolitan areas.it is recognised that the overall health status of populations in regional and rural australia is poorer than their metropolitan city counterparts. health outcomes, as seen with higher death rates, tend to be poorer outside major cities [18] . this is most likely due to a multitude of reasons, including higher concentration of the socio-economically disadvantaged, lack of infrastructure, challenges with access to timely medical care, and the difficulty of attracting high-quality health care staff to the region.according to aihw, compared to major city dwellers, people in outer regional and remote areas are more likely to:• be a daily smoker (22% compared with 15%) • be overweight or obese (70% compared with 60%) • be insufficiently active (60% compared with 54%) • drink alcohol at levels that place them at risk of harm over their lifetime (24% compared with 19%) • have high blood cholesterol (37% compared with 31%)there are clear differences that exist in health service usage between areas, for example, lower rates of some hospital surgical procedures or gp consultations, but higher rates of hospital admissions. there are differences in risk factors, such as the population in regional and remote areas being more likely to engage in harmful activities such as smoking or drinking alcohol in harmful or hazardous quantities. environmental risks also play a part, such as having more physically dangerous occupations, or factors associated with driving long distances or at speed. being in regional and rural areas means that health services are unlikely to be able to provide high complexity services such as neurosurgery or cardiac surgery due to a lack of scale. the decision for health services to provide these services is not taken lightly even if they could physically and financially afford to do so, as the low number of procedures means that the risk of poorer outcomes for patients is much higher. this invariably creates access difficulties for the communities, but could be mitigated to a certain degree by establishing strong partnerships with referral hospitals to facilitate access when required.a significant challenge medical managers face in regional and rural areas is the difficulty of recruiting specialist medical staff. often this can be costly, both in terms of one-off recruitment costs and remuneration. many health services still offer fee-for-service remuneration models, and medical managers need to be aware of the risks associated with such models, such as overservicing and performing unnecessary procedures, or trading safety for perceived efficiency.doctors who move to the region will also need to be supported in a variety of ways. initially this may be in the form of relocation assistance, but will also include ensuring that there is sufficient peer support, opportunities for ongoing professional development and ability to participate in clinical reviews and audits.while residents of more inaccessible areas of australia are generally disadvantaged in their access to goods and services, educational and employment opportunities and income, a unique characteristic of regional and rural populations is that they often have a very strong sense of belonging within the community, and if this community spirit can be harnessed, it can often contribute to the betterment of the region's health services.while historically it has been challenging to get accurate data to identify the extent of the problem, there has been significant progress in the availability and quality of statistical information on aboriginal and torres strait islander (atsi) peoples over the last decade in australia through the census. specific surveys of atsi peoples have been conducted regularly to address gaps in health and welfare information to allow for monitoring changes over time.what is clear, however, is that health and social outcomes for the indigenous population are much poorer than the rest of australia's populations.an indigenous boy born between 2010 and 2012 can expect to live more than 10 years less than a non-indigenous boy (69.1 years compared with 79.7 years), and an indigenous girl about 9 years less (73.7 years compared to 83.1). across all age groups, the indigenous population has higher death rates than non-indigenous australians.in addition to poorer life expectancy, there are other measures of health in which indigenous australians fare much worse when compared to the non-indigenous population. this is referred to as the health gap. some examples are listed below, where indigenous australians, after adjusting for differences in age structure [19] : while progress has been slow [20] , it is important to remember that the closing the gap strategy was only operationalised in july 2009, and the latest progress and priorities report (2015) only had data from 2012 to 2013 [21] . the magnitude of the goals will require time and a larger focus on access to appropriate primary health care services to detect, treat and manage treatable and preventable chronic conditions.while health is the final common outcome desired, its achievement is contingent on the good functioning of many other processes and sectors. historically, there has been an implicit assumption that through the implementation of narrow diseasespecific interventions, broader health systems will be strengthened more generally. however, evidence of benefit for these selective health system interventions have been mixed [22] . systems that are weak and fragmented may be further compromised by the over-concentration of resources in specific vertical programmes, leaving other areas under-resourced.in australia, the fragmentation of the health system with different governments funding different health programmes can lead to duplication of work processes, service disruptions in existing programmes, and distraction from core work activities.it is also important to recognise the importance of sound governance, leadership and political will in order to improve the health of communities, whether from a national, state, or organisational perspective. governments and organisations need to bridge the gaps between policies and their implementation, and address deeper sources of policy failure that can undermine health development.enlightened policy-making brings coherence to the delivery of health services and outcomes. it is important that the health of populations features as the principal concern of all health managers. through inter-sectoral engagement, a platform must be created for coordination and consensus building across mutually reliant sectors. such engagement will need to address multi-sectoral issues such as social determinants of health, macroeconomic policy, or health-related human rights.many medical managers may not consciously realise that they work in public health, directly or indirectly. however, irrespective of whether one works in the public health unit of their local health department, or a private hospital, the work they are involved in often has a direct impact on public and population health. while governments have spent considerable efforts improving public health, legislation will always have a significant lag time behind accepted knowledge and quality initiatives, and it is essential that medical managers have an understanding of the challenges of contemporary public health issues, so that the solutions to problems that they implement take a more systemic approach, and benefits not only their health service but also the wider community.• public and population health concerns itself with preventing disease, prolonging life, and promoting health through the organised efforts of society. vulnerable populations often require a more specific focus. • medical managers need to be aware of what challenges the general public are at risk of, and the public and population health policies implemented in response to them. these policies affect health services and health care systems, and medical managers often play a significant role in moulding these policies and implementing them effectively. • australia has an ageing population, with associated increases in chronic diseases. it also has an ageing health workforce with implications for the supply of care in the future. • historical public health interventions include public sanitation, clean water and food supplies, and immunisation programmes. recent efforts can be seen through tobacco and seatbelt legislation. • the spread of communicable diseases can overwhelm health services quickly and the management requires a structured approach with good command procedures and clear communication channels in place. medical managers also play a critical role in ensuring best practice infection control processes developed in health services including antimicrobial stewardship programmes, increasing hand hygiene compliance rates, and encouraging staff vaccinations. • there has been significant effort by governments to reduce smoking rates, mainly through taxation and legislation, and improvements are starting to be seen. attempts to promote a safe drinking culture are still ongoing, but one of the largest challenges the health system is facing is the abuse of illicit drugs, and in particular methamphetamines recently. it will require a coordinated approach from relevant sectors to change this tide. • chronic diseases pose a significant burden to australia and other developed countries. it requires novel ways of managing these patients, including use of risk stratification, predictive analytics, encouraging self-care and case management. • regional and rural populations have a different set of challenges compared to metropolitan populations due health conditions associated with lower socio-economic status and access to general and specialist care. • the indigenous population in australia have much poorer health outcomes than their non-indigenous counterparts. this has much to do with social determinants of health, and lack of access to early identification and interventions.diarrhea is the most important disease of neonatal calves and results in the greatest economic loss due to disease in this age group in both dairy and beef calves [25] . earlier studies conducted by the us department of agriculture found that enteric pathogens are associated with the death of up to 25% of the us calf crop annually [43] . more recently, a retrospective survey of dairy producers found that 52% (standard error [se] ± 2.6%) of total death losses in preweaned heifers were caused by diarrhea [65] . in beef calves, the percentage of calves from birth to 21 days of age dying from diarrhea was 5.5% (se ± 1.3%) [10] . neonatal calf diarrhea is a complex, multifactorial condition with numerous factors, including pathogen exposure, strain variation, environmental conditions, management conditions, nutritional state, and immune status all interacting to cause loss in preweaned beef and dairy calves. most, if not all, of these factors are related to biosecurity in beef and dairy calf-raising practices. many are under management control, and most are not specific to a single infectious agent. biosecurity is not a new concept in animal agriculture; rather, it is largely a redefinition of earlier ideas and practices historically considered to be good animal husbandry. this observation is evident when one notices in early veterinary textbooks the calls for cleanliness, disinfection, and isolation of herd replacements and sick animals [4] .the two major thrusts of infectious disease biosecurity are (1) reducing the likelihood of introduction of an infectious agent into a group (external biosecurity) and (2) reducing the likelihood of its transmission when present (internal or within-herd biosecurity, or biocontainment). when approaching the control and prevention of neonatal enteric infections, knowledge of several general infectious disease epidemiology principles is useful. essential information for designing a herd-specific control program for any infectious disease includes (1) the reservoir, (2) the modes of transmission and the agent characteristics related to each, (3) the incubation period, and (4) the period of communicability. the minimum incubation period (along with the infectious dose and the age of the calf) is critical because, for example, it establishes the maximum length of time a susceptible calf can be present in a critical calving facility before it could begin to contaminate the area if it were infected at birth. the most important reservoir for these enteric agents is previously or currently infected cattle, which is critical for producers to recognize when they are considering purchasing animals and when they are managing contact between different age groups within a herd.most of these agents transmit predominately by the fecal-oral route from the feces of infected animals to the mouths of susceptible animals, and do so efficiently. immediate transmission occurs when infected animals are housed with susceptible animals in conditions that allow nose-to-nose contact or inhalation of aerosols produced by coughing, urinating, or defecating.indirect contact transmission requires that the infectious agent survive in the environment. most agents of neonatal calf diarrhea survive well in nearly all environmental conditions, remaining in the environment where they can be transmitted indirectly by contact with contaminated feces, fomites such as equipment, or mechanical vectors such as flies. for enteric agents transmitted by indirect contact, key factors include the number of organisms shed in the feces and their survival characteristics in the environment compared with the infectious dose required to initiate infection in susceptible hosts. information on the environmental survival characteristics of an indirectly transmitted agent is needed to determine how long that agent is likely to remain at an infectious dose once the area is contaminated with it. all of this is critical information for determining how to manage livestock flow through an existing set of facilities and to otherwise minimize disease transmission through management practices. the relationship between infecting agents and the environment is complex, involving factors such as the physical characteristics of the substrate material (e.g., feces, water, milk, manure slurry, dust), temperature, ph, water activity, and competing microorganisms. as a consequence, these relationships are not well defined for many combinations encountered in the farm environment.with the rare exception, it is likely that most infectious enteric agents of cattle co-evolved with their bovine hosts long before their domestication thousands of years ago [51, 52] . if an agent was able to survive under the free-range conditions of the wild bovine, it is likely that transmission occurs relatively easily in the environment of the intensively managed domesticated bovine of today. indeed, these agents are shed by infected animals in numbers several logarithms higher per gram of feces than the total number required to infect the typical susceptible calf. additionally, these agents have been shown to be extraordinarily flexible with regard to their genetic make-up and through survival of the fittest can rapidly take advantage of new environments and management systems. consequently, intervention strategies devoted to a single control point may be successful in the short run but are likely to prove unsuccessful over the long run.an important concept that is often overlooked, particularly in the midst of clinical disease outbreaks, is the ''iceberg principle.'' this concept is in effect both within and between herds. between herds, clinical disease is normally seen in only a minority of herds, in which its occurrence implies significant, suboptimal management conditions. within herds, generally only a small proportion of affected animals are clinically affected, with most being subclinically infected. for most diseases, both infectious and noninfectious, the ratio between clinical cases and subclinical cases is typically 1 : 5 to 1 : 20. in some circumstances, a herd can be widely infected with an agent, yet few if any clinical cases occur. consideration of the iceberg principle helps prioritize efforts because in most outbreaks, attention is typically but erroneously focused only on individual animals displaying clinical signs. to wit, if isolation and sanitation practices are to be an important component of a disease control strategy, the iceberg principle suggests that to be effective, such measures must be applied to all exposed animals and not just those that exhibit clinical signs.appropriate cleaning and disinfection procedures are critical to breaking fecal-oral transmission cycles of enteric agents that contaminate housing, feeding, or treatment equipment or other vectors and fomites. because personal hygiene is crucial to stopping the transmission of these agents in the human hospital environment, it is also a critical component in the intense livestock production environment as well. this personal hygiene includes frequent, effective hand washing of sufficient duration with soap followed by an alcohol-based hand disinfectant [50] , cleaning and disinfecting boots, and washing work clothes with bleach followed by hot air drying. cleaning and disinfection procedures are not without pitfalls, however, and adherence to a sound protocol covering all of the infectious agents of concern is critical for long-term success. procedures that do not affect a resistant agent such as cryptosporidia oocysts or rotavirus may spread it from areas of high concentration across previously uncontaminated surfaces, where it can then contaminate materials such as water and feed at sufficient levels to provide an infectious dose. the most important first step is thorough cleaning to remove organic material (e.g., feces, milk film) before applying disinfectant [46] . vigorous cleaning (scraping, scrubbing, flushing) cannot be replaced by applying disinfectants in larger quantities or with higher pressure. for any protocol or in nature, destruction of microorganisms initially follows a first-order logarithmic decay process and then slows [74] . in relation to the amount of time required to destroy one half of the initial population, approximately three time periods are required for a one-logarithmic (90%) reduction, six for a two-logarithmic (99%) reduction, nine for a three-logarithmic (99.9%) reduction, and so on. in addition to contact time, the concentration, temperature, ph, water content, water hardness, and amount of organic material present are critical variables determining the success of chemical disinfection. importantly, the relationships between these factors are not straightforward [54] . for example, halving the concentration of formaldehyde requires a 2-fold increase in contact time to obtain similar microbial destruction, whereas halving the concentration of phenolics requires a 64fold increase in contact time. a 10°c rise in temperature increases the activity of alcohols 30-fold, yet increases the activity of formaldehyde only 1.5fold. iodophors are highly active at low ph but are inactive at an alkaline ph. in general, effectively applied live steam inactivates the broadest range of microorganisms.sodium hypochlorite (bleach, naocl) at a sufficient concentration, contact time, and temperature combination is effective against the bacterial and viral agents of neonatal enteric disease [87] , but at practical levels is not effective against cryptosporidium oocysts. it is readily available as 5.25% (household bleach) and 12.75% solutions, and it is cost effective and environmentally safe. because it begins dissipating on dilution, however, the centers for disease control recommends that diluted solutions should be used within 24 hours and that they should be stored in opaque containers. sodium hypochlorite is rapidly inactivated by the presence of any appreciable organic material; for example, 1% albumin reduces its effectiveness by six logs, and increasing concentration or contact time does not recover this loss. bacteria in biofilms are 150 to 3000 times more resistant. in solution, hypochlorus acid is the active form of the free chlorine. it is most available at a ph level of 6, dropping to 80% of the free chlorine at ph 7 and to 25% at ph 8, suggesting that the ph of disinfectant solutions should be monitored regularly as part of disinfection protocols. below ph 6, it is more corrosive to metals, and more chlorine gas is released. testing kits can be used to monitor free chlorine as part of disinfection protocols; however, because these kits measure both hypochlorus acid and hypochlorite ion (nonactive form), ph must also be considered. recommended concentrations for use in human environments range from 500 ppm (1:100 dilution of 5.25% household bleach) and 10-minute contact time at room temperature to 5000 ppm (1:10 dilution of 5.25% bleach) and 1-minute contact time at room temperature, the higher concentrations being used in more critical areas. for viruses in veterinary hospitals and kennels, a recommended dilution of household bleach is 1:32, which results in a 0.175% sodium hypochlorite solution and a 10-minute contact time at room temperature [93] at ph 6 to 7.the characteristics of environmental surfaces targeted for disinfection in the farm environment also influence the success or failure of various procedures [62] . for example, unfinished plywood retains 15-fold more microorganisms than varnished plywood, which supports 15-fold more microorganisms than plastic surfaces. on smooth, ideal surfaces physical removal of visible contamination by thorough washing with soap and water removes 99% of the microbial load (two logs). on typical housing surfaces, however, washing only removes 90% (one log). proper disinfection removes an additional 6% to 7%, and terminal fumigation removes 1% to 2%. disinfection after washing is an important step, particularly if the surface remains damp, because remaining bacteria can proliferate in the minimal nutrients leaching from wet wood and because washing can disperse an infectious agent from limited areas of high concentration broadly across other surfaces. the application of high-pressure sprays can aerosolize organisms, allowing dissemination to distant sites and posing a risk to operators if zoonotic organisms are present.the most frequently recognized agents causing neonatal calf diarrhea include escherichia coli (e. coli) spp., rotavirus, coronavirus, cryptosporidia, coccidia, and salmonella spp [1, 85, 96, 102] . with the exception of salmonella spp. and specific strains of e. coli, these organisms are ubiquitous and holoendemic, being present within the gastrointestinal tract of some if not most healthy, mature cattle, albeit in low concentrations and without clinical signs of infection. because most all cattle are exposed to these agents at some point in their life if not continuously, they must therefore develop active immunity against these organisms. undoubtedly, most animals develop active immunity to these organisms after infection by natural exposure to low infective doses shed by subclinically infected herd mates. ideally, such infections result in the stimulation of immunity without the development of adverse or serious clinical disease. alternatively, active immunity can also be developed by successful immunization with antigenically similar strains.mixed infections with these agents are a common phenomenon during calfhood. management practices that minimize the risk of clinical disease by one organism generally reduce the risk of clinical disease by others. in a study of 59 calves younger than 3 weeks old from 12 beef and dairy herds with calf-scour problems, moon and coworkers [61] found that ''most infections were mixed and diarrheal calves from the same herd frequently had different infections.'' in a survey of 490 preweaned calves from 45 calf-scour outbreaks, reynolds et al [85] found that 29% of the clinical infections were mixed. similarly, snodgrass and coworkers [96] found that 21% of diarrheic calves less than 1 month old on 32 beef and dairy farms had mixed infections. finally, in a study of 218 diarrheic calves less than 1 month old from 65 dairy herds, 25% of calves had mixed infections consisting primarily of rotavirus and cryptosporidium parvum [33] . in most of these surveys, the most prevalent agent in diarrheic calves is rotavirus, the second being c. parvum at approximately half the prevalence of rotavirus. in surveys that included clinically normal herd mates, similar profiles of infectious agents were also found in the feces of these animals but at lower prevalences. these findings suggest that enteric pathogens of calves function more as secondary opportunists than as highly virulent primary pathogens. the occurrence of clinical disease therefore suggests that weaknesses are present in calf management and husbandry on those premises. because nearly all of these pathogens are already present on most operations, control of enteric disease must therefore be focused on the interfaces between individual animals and groups of animals rather than on preventing their arrival on the operation, the traditional focus of most biosecurity efforts.numerous other pathogens have been implicated in neonatal diarrhea, including campylobacter spp., clostridium spp., parvovirus, breda virus, and bovine viral diarrhea virus; however, their importance in field outbreaks of diarrhea is currently unknown. regardless, practices that are sufficient to control the common enteric agents likely will also control the lesser-known agents as well.subsets of salmonella enterica serovars, such as s. typhimurium and s. dublin, are important causes of diarrhea in dairy and veal calves, whereas infections in single-suckle beef calves are infrequent. the pathophysiology of enteric salmonella infections is complex, involving inflammation and necrosis, increased fluid secretion and decreased absorption and digestion. in addition to enteric manifestations of disease, infected calves are frequently septicemic, which results in more severe clinical signs. bacteremia is common in calves less than 1 month of age and is often manifested systemically as polyarthritis, meningitis, or uveitis. in addition to shedding the agent in their feces, calves developing septicemia often shed the agent in their urine and oronasal secretions even before the onset of clinical signs. the lack of awareness about the potential for shedding from the oronasal area is particularly dangerous because this source leads to spread through contamination of feeding and treatment utensils and hands, severely compromising internal biosecurity programs. hardman and coworkers [38] found that in natural outbreaks of individually penned calves, approximately 60% of transmission was by direct contact, whereas 40% was by indirect routes, including aerosols, fomites, and vectors. this finding suggests that emphasis should be placed more broadly on controlling all means of transmission, including aerosols [105] .salmonella spp. are hardy organisms that are well adapted to surviving in the environment [31] . they are able to proliferate rapidly at high ambient temperatures in waste milk, colostrum, and moist feeds. in the absence of direct sunlight or predation by other microorganisms, salmonella spp. can survive in wet or dry substrates or on surfaces for years, particularly if they are protected by biological films such as dried saliva, milk, or fat. biological films also protect organisms from the action of chemical disinfectants. in an experiment that simulated a barn floor under defecating cows, salmonella spp. were shown to survive for 5.5 years [72] . these researchers also found s. typhimurium in an empty slurry pit that had not been used for 4 years. because salmonella spp. that infect cattle can infect and proliferate in the intestinal tracts of most other animals in a farm environment (including other livestock, humans, domestic pets, rodents, and birds), these other species may also be involved in disease transmission. for example, allowing cats access to stored feeds has been identified as a risk factor for salmonella outbreaks [26] . serotypes that frequently infect cattle are typically introduced into a herd by subclinical or incubating carrier animals and only occasionally in feedstuffs. many of the other serotypes imported onto farms in purchased feedstuffs appear unable to establish viable transmission cycles between cattle, instead causing only sporadic infections.of special note is that salmonella spp. and c. parvum infections in livestock present significant zoonotic disease risks to in-contact people and in turn to their contacts, particularly young children, the elderly, and the immunocompromised. because of these significant health risks, indirect and direct contact between susceptible individuals and livestock potentially infected with these agents should be minimized. hands should be washed well, using soap and warm water and scrubbing for 15 seconds followed by an alcohol-based antiseptic hand rub [50] before eating or returning to the household. inhalation of potentially contaminated dusts or aerosols, particularly those generated by cleaning procedures such as high-pressure washing, should be minimized. to reduce the likelihood of introducing these agents into the household and their transmission to susceptible humans or domestic pets, equipment, outer garments, and footwear exposed to potentially infected animals and their discharges should not be brought into the household.as a major bacterial component of feces from warm-blooded animals, e. coli are ubiquitous in the environment of neonatal beef and dairy calves. all e. coli types can cause colisepticemia, but relatively few can cause enteric disease. enteric e. coli infections are classified into several forms, including enterotoxigenic, enteropathogenic, enteroinvasive, enterohemorrhagic, and enteroadherent [53] . enterotoxigenic e. coli are the most common form associated with disease in calves. the ability of enterotoxigenic e. coli to cause severe herd outbreaks of diarrhea in calves results from the expression of virulence factors, including adhesins (pili, fimbria) and enterotoxins. adhesins (e.g., k99, f41, k88) are surface molecules that enable the bacteria to attach to specific receptors located on the intestinal epithelium of calves less than 3 days old. once attached to intestinal cells via adhesins, bacterial expression of enterotoxins triggers intestinal fluid secretion in excess of absorptive capacity. in addition to enteric diseases caused by e. coli, systemic invasion by certain strains can result in septic shock and low-grade diarrhea. diarrhea observed in these calves is generally thought to be due to endotoxemia secondary to bacteremia rather than production of enterotoxins.although not as hardy as salmonella spp., e. coli survive well on typical farm environmental surfaces and in feces and dust protected from moisture and direct sunlight [8, 58] . in experimentally inoculated cow manure or fresh slurry under common farm environmental conditions, both organisms decrease by one log in 1 to 3 weeks [42] . depending on the surface characteristics, the numbers of organisms decline at about 0.25 log per day. generally, the rate of decline is slower at lower humidity, but proliferation can occur on surfaces under saturated conditions with minimal organic nutrients (0.5 mg/l). exposure to ultraviolet components in direct sunlight rapidly kills the organism [24] .rotavirus is a double-stranded, nonenveloped rna virus. rotaviruses are the most common cause of bovine neonatal diarrhea, the incidence of infection often approaching 100% in herds, and up to one half of infections resulting in clinical disease. infection usually occurs between 4 and 14 days of age, although younger and older calves can be affected [66] . because the median infectious dose for rotaviral infections in other species is 10 infectious particles or less [36, 103] , the infectious dose for neonatal calves is likely similar. viral invasion of small intestinal villus epithelium occurs through the luminal surface, resulting in cell destruction and shedding of damaged cells into the intestinal lumen. as a consequence of this infection route, the incubation period is short, and large numbers of virus particles are produced rapidly. within 48 hours of initial infection, the virus can reach 1 · 10 10 (ten billion) virus particles per gram of feces. villous atrophy and cellular damage result in maldigestion and malabsorption. maldigestion results from the loss of hydrolytic enzymes produced by mature villous cells. failure to hydrolyze milk lactose results in lactose transit into the large intestine, where it acts osmotically, pulling water into the intestinal lumen. in addition to decreased enzyme activity, sodium and water transport processes are impaired, resulting in malabsorption. some rotavirus strains are pneumotropic, replicating in the respiratory tract and transmitting via inhalation and by the fecal-oral route. rotavirus is carried in adult cattle through nonclinical infection with intermittent fecal shedding [47] . shedding increases coincident with later stages of gestation and for up to 4 weeks postpartum. in some management situations, this maternal shedding may account for most virus exposures to neonatal calves [28] .being a nonenveloped rna virus, rotavirus is relatively stable in the environment, being infectious in feces for up to 6 months at 25°c. in smears of human feces, human rotavirus was more stable at lower temperatures and at humidity extremes [59] . infectious particles declined by 1 log in 29 days at 4°c and 93% relative humidity, in 16 days at 4°c and 13% relative humidity, in 2.2 days at 20°c and 55% relative humidity, and in 1.5 days at 37°c and 13% relative humidity. some research suggests that bovine rotavirus may be more resistant than human rotavirus. virus stability in water varies with water quality and temperature, ranging from being very stable in clean water at 4°c to falling 2 logs in 10 days in typical river water at 20°c [84] . as temperatures above 60°c are lethal to the virus [68] , standard milk pasteurization procedures are effective against it. rotavirus is susceptible to sufficient concentrations of sodium hypochlorite (1750 ppm) but is relatively resistant to many common disinfectants, such as chlorhexidine, under the same exposure conditions. because as a nonenveloped virus it is not affected by soaps, washing with soap alone may actually spread the virus around on the washed surface [23] .coronavirus is an enveloped single-stranded rna virus and is not as stable in the environment as rotavirus [27] . serologic studies have demonstrated that the prevalence of serum antibodies to coronavirus approaches 100% in adult beef and dairy cattle. calves are typically infected by coronavirus between 4 and 30 days of life [66] . although they may not be the same virus strains, evidence is mounting that a respiratory form as well as the enteric form occurs [97] . similar to rotavirus, infection results in damage to intestinal villous epithelium; however, infection by coronavirus often results in more severe disease manifestations because the degree of villous atrophy is greater and both the large and small intestines are affected. as described for rotavirus, coronavirus is carried in adult cattle through nonclinical infection and is shed in fecal matter. because of their envelope, these viruses retain infectiousness better at lower rather than higher relative humidity [24] and are considerably more sensitive to soaps and common disinfectants than are nonenveloped viruses. this virus is more active in the colder climates and has been reported to cause winter dysentery in adult cattle [16, 27] . control of coronavirus (and rotavirus) infections in calves relies on continual presence of a protective antibody within the gut lumen, which can be achieved by allowing neonates to ingest colostrum or milk containing these specific antibodies from their dams (lactogenic immunity) [19] .cryptosporidium parvum is a common cause of neonatal calf diarrhea between 7 and 21 days of age, rarely causing diarrhea at less than 7 or more than 28 days of age [22] . similar to rotavirus and coronavirus infection, the incidence of infection with cryptosporidia often approaches 100% in the first month of life, infection often occurs concurrently with rotavirus and coronavirus infections, and a respiratory form may occur. unlike most other enteric protozoa, cryptosporidium are immediately infectious when passed and can infect other susceptible hosts through direct contact. because cryptosporidium can autoinfect the original host, the infectious dose can be exceedingly small. for example, the median infectious dose for humans is only 87 oocysts [29] , and some researchers suggest it is even lower for neonatal calves. cryptosporidia infect and invade enterocytes in the distal small intestine, causing villous atrophy and fusion that result in malabsorption and maldigestion. infected calves may shed 10 5 to 10 7 oocysts per gram of feces beginning with the onset of clinical signs. importantly, fecal shedding can continue days after clinical signs subside. in california beef cow-calf herds, atwill et al [7] found that higher stocking densities, longer calving periods, and wetter seasons were associated with higher fecal shedding prevalences in calves. research findings on the adult carrier state are conflicting, because some have found that adult carrier animals are common [92] , whereas others have found that few if any asymptomatic adult cattle apparently shed cryptosporidium parvum in appreciable numbers [6, 55] . undoubtedly, infected calves are likely the most important reservoir for continuing the fecal-oral cycle on most farms because of the large numbers of oocysts that they excrete in close proximity to susceptible calves [22] .in the environment, cryptosporidia are extremely resistant to most veterinary disinfectants except 5% ammonia, 6% hydrogen peroxide, or 10% formalin [14, 86, 107] . they survive well in water, requiring 4 to 11 weeks to decline by 1 log [15] . because the oocysts adhere in large numbers to the plastic and rubber surfaces of common calf-feeding and treatment equipment such as nipples, bottles, and buckets (e.r. atwill, dvm, phd, 2001, personal communication), common sanitation procedures are not likely to prevent fomite transmission by these items. a portion of the oocysts still retain their infectivity after mild freezing [30] . on the other hand, complete drying in thin, naturally infected fecal smears on wood kills the oocysts within 1 to 4 days [2] . finally, because moist heating at 45°c for 20 minutes kills the oocysts [3] , standard pasteurization procedures (e.g., 63°c for 30 minutes, 72°c for 15 seconds) are effective.eimeria bovis and e. zurnii are the species of coccidia most commonly associated with calf diarrhea. with a prepatent period of approximately 17 days, calves exposed to an infectious dose shortly after birth can present with bloody diarrhea and anemia by the third week of life. diagnosis is easiest in calves with acute infections because many shed large numbers of oocysts in the feces. chronically infected calves may only shed small to moderate numbers of oocysts in the stool, however, making diagnosis more difficult.a large number of risk factors are potentially associated with the development of neonatal calf diarrhea. these factors can be categorized into those that are related to either (1) the calf, (2) the infectious agent, or (3) the environment of the calf. recognizing the presence of specific risk factors on the premises followed by interpreting the relative significance of each factor is required for the implementation and coordination of specific biosecurity practices to mitigate the problem of enteric disease on that farm. although pence et al [70] do not provide any information on validation, they do provide a risk assessment-scoring sheet for neonatal diarrhea in beef herds. on most operations, the presence and importance of these risk factors change over time, sometimes quite suddenly, as sources of animals, husbandry practices, and, to a lesser degree, physical facilities often change with turnover of employees and in response to changes in economic conditions.the presence of developmental, congenital, or heritable abnormalities in a calf can be a risk factor depending on the character, location, and degree of the defect. certainly any abnormality that prevents a calf from functioning normally (e.g., ambulating or obtaining adequate nutrition) can increase the chance of a severe enteric infection.failure of passive transfer of maternal immunity through colostrum ingestion is a major risk factor for development of neonatal diarrhea [21, 56] . in the 1992 us department of agriculture national dairy heifer evaluation project, wells et al [108] found that feeding a sufficient amount of colostrum soon enough after birth prevented 31% of the dairy heifer mortality that occurred in the first 21 days of life. colostrum provides the necessary components of immunity during the time when a calf is immunonaive yet exposed to pathogens in its environment. consumption of colostral immunoglobulin from resident cows in a herd is likely to provide immunologic protection specific to the strains of pathogens found within that herd. importantly, even if colostral immunoglobulin specificity is appropriate for specific pathogens, maximum protection is ultimately dependent on the ingestion and absorption of an adequate mass of immunoglobulin by the calf. immunoglobulin concentration varies from breed to breed, however, as well as from cow to cow within a breed. such differences are well illustrated by the fact that the average concentration of immunoglobulin in beef cow colostrum is 2 to 3 times greater than that of dairy cow colostrum [73, 106] . as expected, the most important factor involved in failure of passive transfer in dairy calves is low immunoglobulin-concentration colostrum, whereas in beef calves delayed suckling is a leading cause [12] . for dairy cows, colostrum that is not from first milking, from cows that leaked milk, or from cows that weighed more than 20 lb should not be used for passive transfer [73] . in certain situations, beef calves may be provided alternate sources of colostrum, including colostrum obtained from nearby dairies. again, it is imperative to appreciate that because the average immunoglobulin concentration of dairy cow colostrum is low compared with beef cow colostrum, an adequate volume (4 l) of appropriately selected dairy cow colostrum must be fed. in addition, one must also consider the risk of introducing novel pathogens when supplementing calves with an off-farm source of nonpasteurized colostrum. unless properly pasteurized, dairy colostrum purchased for administration to beef calves in place of their dam's colostrum may be contaminated with infectious doses of undesirable infectious agents such as mycobacterium avium subsp. paratuberculosis as well as the enteric agents of concern described in this article.the nutritional status of the dam (particularly during late gestation, when the fetus is active metabolically and growing exponentially) is often of concern in relation to the immune status and health of the calf after birth [21] . the effect of nutrition and other factors such as dystocia on passive transfer in dairy cattle was recently reviewed by quigley and drewry [75] . there is little evidence of a direct link between gestational cow nutrition and immunoglobulin concentration of the calves [71] . the weak calf syndrome, however, has been reported in beef cattle when prepartum cows consuming diets deficient in protein or energy (proteinenergy malnutrition), either because of improper feeding practices or other factors such as severe weather events, in late gestation subsequently calve in environments in which the temperature is below the thermoneutral zone of the calf [67, 69] . therefore, it is only logical to recommend that producers provide feeds adequate in quantity and quality to meet national research council requirements for beef cattle and dairy cattle during gestation and lactation.in comparison with beef calves, dairy calves are often fed milk replacer diets because the cost is lower than that of cows' milk. the composition and quality of milk replacers varies considerably, however, much to the detriment of very young calves with limited digestive capabilities. some milk replacers contain heat-denatured, milk-origin proteins, poorly digestible vegetable-origin proteins, or nonlactose carbohydrate sources that the intestinal enzymes of neonatal calves cannot digest. consumption of such products frequently results in inadequate nutrition, poor growth rates, and high morbidity and mortality due to enteric diseases [83] . often the feeding recommendations for even high-quality milk replacers are designed for 60lb calves, rather than the average 90-lb holstein calf, placing the larger calves into a negative energy and protein balance until their starter consumption increases sufficiently. nutrition of the neonatal calf is an active area of research, much of which has been summarized by davis and drackley [21] , and changes in nutritional guidelines often reduce the risk of neonatal disease. in addition, excellent reviews on the relationship between neonatal digestive physiology and the different ingredients contained in milk replacers are available [37, 82] .if nonsaleable milk is fed, it should be pasteurized before feeding to reduce the likelihood of transmitting these and other infectious enteric agents. a recent study found that raw milk and mixed milk replacer often contain high numbers of bacteria, ranging from 10 3 colony-forming units (cfus)/ml for mixed milk replacer to more than 10 6 cfus/ml for hospital milk [94] . another study found that calves fed pasteurized waste milk perform better in terms of weight gain, mortality, morbidity, and health costs than those fed the same milk raw, even in the absence of the specific enteric agents of concern discussed in this article [45] . pasteurization controls their milk-borne transmission as well.finally, the source of calves is a risk factor for enteric diseases when calves have been commingled from several sources or origins. certainly, calves purchased from sale yards are more likely to have been exposed to higher concentrations and to a wider variety of pathogens compared with single-source calves or calves on pasture. frequently, calves are purchased from market sources to graft onto cows that have lost their own offspring. such purchased calves often introduce new strains of infectious agents that then spread through the herd in an outbreak fashion, making the situation considerably worse. in addition to increased exposure to pathogens, calves transiting through sale yards are likely to be under more severe physiologic stress and more likely to have had failure of passive transfer [106] . a study of beef cow-calf herds found that purchasing such calves at less than 4 weeks of age increased the likelihood of a high-mortality diarrhea outbreak over four-fold [91] .the primary risk factors associated with infectious agents that cause enteric infections include specific virulence factors, the size of the inoculum or pathogen load, and whether single or multiple infections exist.as mentioned previously, virulence factors associated with bacteria include structural elements such as pili that allow bacteria to attach to the host, as well as bacterial products that augment bacterial cell growth, enhance host cell damage, or negate the immune response of the host. both exotoxins and endotoxins can have adverse effects. other virulence factors of enteric bacteria include those that enhance bacterial ability to resist antimicrobial agents through expression of drug resistance plasmids or integrons.virulence factors associated with enteric viruses or protozoa are less well described. different strains or serotypes of viruses have been identified; however, most strains of a particular virus appear to act similarly. the challenge load of enteric bacteria, protozoa, and viruses from periparturient cattle is high because of the aforementioned physiologic immunosuppression [28] .when considering biosecurity or biocontainment, it is critical to realize that the size of the inoculum or the pathogen concentration (exposure dose) is a major factor in determining the degree of clinical disease and the rapidity of its onset rather than whether exposure occurs. this is especially true when considering the ubiquitous agents involved in bovine neonatal diarrhea, because none are extraordinarily virulent in their own right. it is logical to conclude that a large enough exposure dose, such as that likely to occur during outbreaks, will undoubtedly overwhelm even the best passive transfer of immunity and lead to an expanding outbreak in previously unaffected calves.risk factors for neonatal diarrhea associated with the environment of the calf are likely to be the most amenable to the implementation of specific biosecurity measures. specific risk factors include the atmospheric conditions (temperature, humidity, wind chill, ventilation, air quality, and so forth); housing (individual calf hutches, enclosed group pens, dispersal on pasture); the physical environment (calving area, bedding, other animals, cleaning protocols, and so forth); stocking density; general hygiene and hygiene related to feeding practices; and miscellaneous stresses due to handling, surgery transportation, and the like.many of these potential risk factors are under management control. because of the difficulty of executing rigorously designed large-scale studies with sufficient herd numbers to evaluate all potential risk factors, reasoning from biological plausibility is often the only basis for developing interventions when sufficient evidence is not available. although some findings are conflicting, a limited number of field studies of different size and rigor do provide guidance for some of these risk factors. for example, bendali et al [11] found that cleaning of the calving area immediately before calving was associated with an increased risk of neonatal diarrhea in beef calves compared with not cleaning it, whereas cleaning it after calving was associated with a decreased risk. they also found that greater cow cleanliness was associated with decreased risk. based on data from the 1997 us department of agriculture national beef cow-calf study, sanderson and dargatz [88] reported that although 41% of birth-to-weaning mortality was attributable to dystocia, 11% was due to confined calving. in the 1992 us department of agriculture national dairy heifer evaluation project, wells et al [108] found that separating heifers from their dams within the first 24 hours after birth prevented 16% of the dairy heifer mortality that occurred during the first 21 days of life. quigely et al [76] found that calves administered sufficient amounts of colostrum and housed in individual calf hutches shed fewer enteric pathogens in their feces than calves left to nurse their dam and housed in an enclosed space with mechanical ventilation. schumann et al [91] found that increased risk of neonatal diarrhea in beef calves was associated with wintering cows and primigravida heifers together, providing limited shelter to nursing pairs, and an increased percentage of poorly drained ground in the nursing area. although the occurrence of diarrhea was not affected, sivula et al [95] found that increased gain was associated with all-in, all-out group management of weaned dairy calves.sufficient ventilation is important to the health of housed calves [5, 104] . besides being critical for removal of transpired water vapor and reducing humidity, sufficient ventilation in enclosed housing also removes infectious aerosols. reducing humidity can also reduce the survival time of aerosolized and surface-borne infectious agents. although more important for respiratory disease, these factors in turn have an effect on the risk of enteric disease. because salmonellosis, cryptosporidiosis, rotavirus, and coronavirus agents can be transmitted by aerosols, procedures that produce aerosols (pressure washing, housing flush systems) considerably increase the risk of transmission [9] . for example, mohammed et al [60] found that dairy calves raised outside or in mechanically ventilated buildings were five-fold less likely to shed cryptosporidia parvum oocysts than those raised in nonventilated barns.within the calf's environment, other animal species may function as mechanical or biological vectors of enteric infectious agents, particularly if they are present in large numbers and no control efforts are in effect. these species include domestic pets, humans, and vermin such as insects, rodents, and birds.one of the most overlooked vectors that presents a significant disease transmission risk is the nuisance fly, particularly the house fly, musca domestica [35] . during summer months before severe frosts, fly populations typically increase to high numbers around concentrated livestock operations such as dairies and calf-raising operations. liquids such as diarrhea and milk or materials containing soluble components such as dried molasses and solid feces are attractive to nuisance flies. because the larvae require greater than 90% humidity to develop, dampened organic calf bedding materials such as straw and sawdust provide an ideal substrate [89, 90] . the ability of these insects to transmit enteric pathogens from feces is well documented [18, 49] . specific physical characteristics of flies, including mouth parts, body hairs and spines, and sticky foot pads can carry infectious agents in large numbers. some pathogens pass through the fly digestive tract and remain viable in its feces. when feeding, the fly frequently moistens surfaces by regurgitating a ''vomit drop'' from its crop that contains residue, including infectious agents, from its previous meal. ''fly spots'' are either such vomit drops or feces, both of which contain high numbers of infectious agents. studies have determined that flies are attracted to diarrheic feces, that they can transmit cryptosporidia in numbers higher than the minimal infectious dose for healthy humans, and that they can harbor this agent for 3 weeks after exposure [34] . methods for controlling fly populations at different points in their life cycle have been reviewed [99] ; however, it is important to point out that control methods based on chemical means alone are usually inadequate because flies readily develop resistance to such chemicals.rodents are also a frequently overlooked source of enteric pathogens in the farm environment. they have been implicated in the transmission of salmonellosis in dairy [98] and beef herds [44] and even in poultry flocks [20, 41] . because the feces from infected mice typically contain up to 1 · 10 4 salmonella per pellet [20] , a single pellet may exceed the infectious dose for a susceptible calf. current work suggests that rodents are a significant nonlivestock reservoir of cryptosporidium, because approximately one third of rodents of any age, even in nonlivestock ecosystems, shed c. parvum at an average of 1 · 10 3 oocysts per fecal pellet [77, 101] . importantly, significant rodent populations can be present long before their signs (e.g., rodent droppings and runways) are obvious or noticeable. raccoons have also been reported to harbor s. typhimurium [64] .a rational approach to management of neonatal gastrointestinal diseases of calves was first conveyed by dr. otto radostits years ago [79] [80] [81] and again more recently [78] . the main tenets include management strategies directed at decreasing exposure of calves to the pathogens, increasing nonspecific and specific immunity of calves, and decreasing stresses on the calves. others have recently summarized this approach as well [39, 40, 70] .although this system provides an essential foundation for addressing biosecurity for neonatal gastrointestinal diseases, further refinement suggests the following four-point approach:1. mitigate exposure of calves to pathogens through environmental control, monitoring, and isolation. 2. mitigate disease severity in calves through enhancement of calf health and immunity. 3. mitigate disease severity in calves through management of stressors placed on calves. 4. monitor disease status within the herd through appropriate record keeping and analysis.mitigate exposure of calves to pathogens through environmental control, monitoring, and isolationthose calves that are known to be particularly susceptible, either because of age or other reasons, should be isolated from each other and the rest of the herd as much as possible. once infected, particularly if infected clinically, such calves essentially act as biological amplifiers, amplifying a small but sufficient infectious dose into a much higher level of environmental contamination in their immediate surroundings and providing a high risk for transmission through direct contact. because this increased environmental load likely exceeds the infectious dose threshold of individuals that were resistant to the prior environmental level, more individuals become infected, the infections are more severe because of the markedly higher dose, the environmental level increases even more, and an outbreak is underway. evidence of such a cascade is provided in one study of herds in which calves that were born after the median calving date were twice as likely to develop diarrhea than those born before it [17] . once started, such a cascade is much more difficult to stop as compared with preventing its initiation in the first place. evidence that members of larger groups are at increased risk of diarrhea is contained in a study of michigan dairies, which found that the incidence of calf diarrhea was approximately proportional to herd size [32] . this finding suggests that group sizes should be minimized as much as feasible, some researchers suggesting that the ideal group size is 50 [70] .all the common agents causing neonatal calf diarrhea are often present to some degree in the calves' environment. all of the agents are primarily transmitted by fecal-oral contact, so the collective strategy for minimizing exposure of calves to pathogens should be focused on decreasing exposure to fecal contamination. realizing that every ranch or farm has its own peculiarities regarding facilities and equipment, the following comments and suggestions should be read as general statements. specific modifications should be individually designed to fit each production system.regarding dairy or beef herds calving in confined areas such as barns, the following biosecurity measures should be practiced to minimize pathogen exposure.1. remove late-gestation cows from areas heavily contaminated with feces, such as winter feed grounds, 1 month before calving to reduce hair coat carriage of enteric infectious agents shed by carrier cattle. 2. separate cows requiring more intensive monitoring and thus, closer confinement, such as first-calf heifers or particularly valuable stock from those that do not. 3. avoid moving cows into calving areas until immediately before delivery, or as late as practical. 4. ensure that calving pens are sanitized and well bedded before and between successive calvings. 5. clean the perineum and particularly the udder of cows before delivery. 6. harvest colostrum from clean, sanitized udders into clean containers.refrigerate it immediately or freeze in volumes no larger than a gallon if not administered to a calf promptly. do not pool between dams. 7. remove dairy calves immediately after birth and raise them in separate individual pens isolated from other calves and stock until they are older than 4 weeks. 8. remove beef cow/calf pairs to a separate nursery area after bonding has occurred (approximately 24 hours after birth).during the liquid-feeding phase from birth until weaning, dairy calves should be housed in individual pens or hutches to avoid contact with one another, and they should be isolated from other livestock, their airspace, and their effluent. ideally, individual housing should be designed to prevent suckling and licking behaviors as well as fecal cross-contamination, so that transmission of enteric pathogens is minimized. the specifics regarding the construction and area requirements for dairy calves have been reviewed [57] . calves should continue to be housed individually until 7 to 10 days after weaning. this separation allows calves to lose their suckling urge, avoids the stress at weaning of changing social structure and interactions, facilitates monitoring of feed intake during the weaning transition, and allows more accurate observations of fecal characteristics and general health [63] .biosecurity of dairy or beef herds calving at pasture is approached with the following strategy.1. group primigravid heifers separately from cows during at least the last trimester of gestation. 2. use designated calving grounds and calve heifers separately from cows. such areas should not have been used by animals since the prioryear's calving season and should have been groomed shortly after the close of the calving season. it should be well drained and situated away from bottomlands, which tend to collect contaminants, particularly in any standing water. 3. minimize the population density of cows as much as practical and reduce group size (<50 animals). suggested areas per cow range from 1000 to 2000 square feet [79] . 4. remove beef cow/calf pairs to a separate nursery area after bonding but within 24 hours of calving. exercise one-way flow regarding animal movement. 5. rotate feeding areas during the calving season to avoid fecal contamination and pathogen build-up.calves demonstrating signs of lethargy or diarrhea should be removed from the group as soon as possible and placed into an isolation area. recall the iceberg principle and consider its group of cows and calves and their area ''contaminated,'' placing subsequently calving cows and new calves into a separate clean area. treatments should be instituted based on physical signs and, if possible, laboratory data. diagnostic procedures such as fecal cultures, fecal flotation, and viral identification strategies can be performed. these tests are especially important when infection with salmonella spp. is a major rule out for diarrhea. identification of rotavirus and coronavirus infection and cryptosporidiosis are arguably less essential for diagnostic purposes because in most outbreaks of acute undifferentiated diarrhea, calves frequently shed one, two, or all three of the agents simultaneously. detection of an infectious agent in a herd known through laboratory testing to be previously free of it, however, indicates that there has been a breach of herd biosecurity. recovering calves should be quarantined away from other animals until after the shedding of pathogens has decreased to minimal levels or for at least 3 weeks. aside from salmonella spp., the neonatal enteric pathogens with the longest shedding time are rotavirus and coronavirus, which some individuals may shed intermittently for life.purchased animals should be placed in separate quarantine areas before mixing with existing herd animals, especially if animals are purchased from public auctions, because the likelihood that these animals have been exposed to high doses of multiple pathogens is great. explosive outbreaks of calf scours in beef herds are often associated with the prior purchase of a dairy calf from a sale yard to replace a calf lost because of dystocia or some other reason. a quarantine period of 21 days should be adequate to allow clinical identification of animals that are incubating any infection due to these enteric agents at the time of purchase. quarantine of older animals for a similar period is justified because of the likelihood of increased shedding of enteric pathogens during periods of stress. diagnostic procedures such as bacterial culture, viral detection by electron microscopy, and fecal flotation for parasite eggs can also be considered. although it is unlikely that these tests will give a significant advantage compared with clinical observation and isolation, they can determine the etiologic agents involved. use of such tests in older animals is less beneficial, because with the exception of salmonella spp., many infected older animals shed low levels of enteric viruses. because of the potential for false-negative results, testing may lead to a false sense of security, and management practices that are more important for establishing biosecurity may not be established and maintained.the flow of personnel and livestock flow are important components of within-herd biosecurity [39, 40, 70, 100] . the critical first step is to establish infection control protocols, preferably with input from those who will be responsible for executing them. routine training and monitoring of personnel to ensure that they understand infection control protocols and that they are properly executing them are critical to biosecurity success. because some aspects of these protocols involve significant additional effort, an understanding of why the additional effort is necessary will likely result in better adherence. personnel and equipment flow as well as livestock flow and its effluent flow should be one-way, away from the youngest, most susceptible calves toward older, more resistant animals. on farms with sufficient personnel and equipment, tasks should be divided up between those personnel who remain ''clean'' for such tasks as mixing and delivering liquid feed and those who are potentially contaminated by performing tasks such as picking up empty milk bottles, treating sick calves, and so on. personnel who are potentially contaminated through working with older or sick calves and their equipment should not return to areas with susceptible calves until they have changed their outer clothes and used appropriate procedures to thoroughly disinfect their hands, boots, and equipment. some have recommended that calves that leave young, susceptible groups, such as for hospitalization, should not return to that group for at least 3 weeks [100] .strict control of farm visitors must be maintained because many pathogens can be carried by humans or inanimate objects such as automobiles, tractors, livestock handling equipment, or livestock feeding equipment. for both their own and the animals' health, visitors should be discouraged from coming into contact with them or their effluent. if animal contact is necessary, visiting individuals should be provided with the means to wash their hands and footwear before and after contact. barrier clothing should also be worn to prevent cross-contamination of separate facilities.mitigate disease severity in calves through enhancement of calf health and immunity neonatal diarrhea is a multifactorial disease process. infection alone is not sufficient to cause disease because although almost all calves are infected shortly after birth, most do not develop clinical disease. as mentioned previously, the single strongest factor influencing the risk of death caused by neonatal calf diarrhea is the passive immune status of the calf.the concept of failure of passive transfer has largely been used to describe situations in which the neonate does not absorb adequate levels of colostral immunoglobulins. this concept is undoubtedly attributable to the fact that immunoglobulins are such a large constituent of colostrum and they have been thoroughly studied. it is clear, however, that colostrum is a complex fluid that in addition to immunoglobulins contains various immune cells, immunoactive substances such as cytokines, and nutritional elements. consequently, the risk of a calf contracting an enteric pathogen is a complex equation in which serum immunoglobulin concentrations are an important factor, albeit a single one.low immunoglobulin-concentration colostrum with the resultant ingestion of an inadequate mass of immunoglobulin is the primary cause of failure of passive transfer in dairy calves. in a study of 900 first-milking colostrums from holstein cows, only 29% contained sufficient igg1 concentration to provide an appropriate mass of igg in a 2-l volume [73] . it is currently recommended that dairy calves be fed 4 liters of dairy colostrum in the first 12 hours of life to obviate the risk of failure of passive transfer caused by a lack of adequate immunoglobulin mass. to ensure intake soon enough, esophageal feeders are often used to administer these volumes.in contrast with dairy calves, failure of passive transfer in beef calves is less likely to be due to low colostral igg1 concentration, but rather to a failure to physically ingest and subsequently absorb the colostral immunoglobulins. beef calves should be provided with adequate shelter during and after calving to avoid environmental stresses that lessen the calves' drive to rise and nurse. ideally, calving should be monitored to ensure adequate mothering, which is especially important with first-calf heifers. calves that do not rise and successfully nurse their dam within 1 to 2 hours should be assisted with nursing, or alternatively, force-fed either their dam's colostrum or frozen dairy cow colostrum. if dairy cow colostrum is used, its low average immunoglobulin concentration must be mitigated by feeding 4 liters within the first 12 hours of life. the producer must be aware that such colostrum may also be contaminated with enteric and other infectious agents (e.g., mycobacterium avium subsp. paratuberculosis).mitigate disease severity in calves through management of stressors placed on calves stress is defined as any adverse stimulus, event, or condition, either internal or external, that disturbs an animal's physical or neurogenic homeostasis. although there are likely numerous biological consequences of stress, a well-documented response involves the rapid and immediate increase in corticotropin secretion by the anterior pituitary gland, followed by greatly increased secretion of cortisol by the adrenal gland. some of the beneficial effects of increased cortisol secretion include mobilization of labile proteins and fats from cellular stores for cellular energy needs, as well as numerous anti-inflammatory effects that aid in the resolution of inflammation. one of the more notable consequences of increased cortisol secretion, however, involves its extensive effects leading to immune suppression. in general, cortisol-induced atrophy of lymphoid tissues throughout the body leads to a significant decrease in both cellular and humoral immunity. it is this broad-ranging immune suppression that can lead to an increased incidence and severity of disease.common stresses incurred by neonatal calves include dystocia, crowding, exposure to environmental extremes such as heat, cold, or wet conditions, excessive or inappropriate handling, and exposure to pathogens [48] . even the process of a normal parturition is a stressful condition as the fetal animal undergoes transition from intrauterine to extrauterine life. fetal plasma cortisol levels double within minutes after uncomplicated parturition but typically decrease within the first days of life. the natural increase in plasma cortisol is necessary for normal pulmonary, intestinal, and brain development; pulmonary surfactant production; and preparation of liver glycogen stores for energy needs. calves with dystocia are likely to have temporarily increased plasma cortisol levels and other significant laboratory abnormalities, including metabolic and respiratory acidosis and hypoglycemia [13] . current studies indicate that the increased incidence of failure of passive transfer in calves with dystocia is not caused by a failure to absorb colostral immunoglobulins, but rather is due to the severe metabolic derangements that make these calves less likely to nurse in a timely fashion [106] . alleviation of the stress of dystocia, therefore, should be directed toward correcting metabolic derangements and ensuring appropriate colostral intake.exposure to environmental extremes is likely to affect calves adversely by inhibiting normal nursing behavior and producing prolonged elevations in serum cortisol levels. both of these factors clearly have an adverse effect on the calves' immune status, so newborn calves should be placed in sheltered environments that are free from wind and moisture and extremes of heat or cold. providing calves with dry bedding is a critical factor in preventing problems associated with cold temperatures [69] ; however, these shelters must be managed appropriately to minimize the concentration of enteric pathogens within them.crowding and mishandling of calves should be minimized to lessen the effect of neurogenic stress. although limited research in this area has been undertaken in calves, it is logical to assume that calves would react similarly to other mammals in such stressful situations, with resultant increased plasma cortisol levels and subsequent immune suppression. finally, it is logical to presume that minimizing crowding will likely not only decrease the neurogenic stress of calves but also will unquestionably decrease exposure to enteric pathogens.with either confined or pasture calving, it is important to keep adequate records. records are useful for determining the timing of animal movement and for identifying the epidemiologic factors associated with sick animals as well as recording what diagnostic tests were performed, when and what treatments were administered, and their results. particularly on larger operations, complete records maintained in a computerized database are crucial for initially determining what risk factors are associated with a neonatal diarrhea problem and then for monitoring the success of interventions.biosecurity, as it relates to neonatal gastrointestinal disease, should be approached as a fluid concept. adequate records markedly enhance a producer's and a veterinarian's ability to regularly evaluate and revise neonatal disease control and prevention protocols in response to changing conditions, actual risks, and new knowledge and tools for dealing with neonatal enteric disease.infectious diarrhea is an important cause of neonatal calf morbidity and mortality that results in significant economic losses in the beef and dairy industries. although numerous risk factors related to the occurrence of neonatal diarrhea have been identified, they can all be categorized into those that are related to the calf, the pathogens involved, or the environment of the calf. the immune status of calves, specifically the level of passively acquired immunity through colostrum, is the major risk factor related to the calf and the occurrence of diarrhea. although numerous pathogens have been implicated in the occurrence of neonatal diarrhea, only a relatively limited number are commonly involved. most should be viewed as secondary opportunists rather than primary pathogens, because none are extraordinarily virulent, and with the exception of salmonella spp., most are present within the gastrointestinal tract of many healthy, mature cattle. important risk factors related to pathogens involved in neonatal calf diarrhea involve the size of the inoculum and the occurrence of multiple infections. finally, when considering the environment and housing conditions in which beef and dairy calves may reside, it is clear that tremendous variations exist. despite these variations, the risk factors associated with the environment of the calf are also those that are the most amenable to the implementation of general environmental control and monitoring strategies as well as specific biosecurity measures.two thousand years ago-well before government regulations for disinfectants, sterilants, and sanitizers existed-the bible, various eastern religious writings, and sacred tomes extolled the virtues of personal hygiene, dietary considerations, and "what to do when all else fails" blueprints for remaining healthy. even greek literature contains precise standard operating procedures (sops) to rid inanimate objects of microbial pathogens: in the odyssey, homer refers to 'fumigating' odysseus' house by burning sulfur; aristotle advised, "bury your dung."the entire scientific pursuit of microbiology was of course unknown at the time, and not until the 1400s did the invention of the microscope allow people to see the world of microbes. it was robert koch's germ theory of disease during the 1880s that established the role of microbes as the cause of disease 1 .although they were often effective, early attempts at disinfection were not always pragmatic. sir joseph lister flooded the skin of patients undergoing surgery with carbolic acid, causing skin burns but preventing the development of nosocomial illnesses. even though the use of fire was recognized as a means to 'disinfect' inanimate objects, it was not always practical to burn down a building to kill the microbes it contained.the ability to rid the laboratory or animal facility of potentially harmful microorganisms is no less important today. in this article we discuss the various types of liquid disinfectants that can be used on surfaces such as floors and tabletops, and clarify how these products are registered in the united states.a disinfectant is an agent that will destroy or eliminate from inanimate objects all pathogens except bacterial endospores. a sterilant will destroy or eliminate pathogens, including bacterial endospores, from inanimate objects. disinfectants include products that are virucidal, bactericidal, and fungicidal. sterilants are biocidal, because by definition they will kill all living organisms, both pathogenic and nonpathogenic. the term 'germicide' is synonymous with 'disinfectant' .microorganisms have different levels of resistance to chemical disinfection. resistance varies with the type of organism. for instance, bacterial spores are very difficult to kill, whereas the hiv virus is rather easy to eradicate on hard surfaces. infectious prions (e.g., the causative agent in bovine spongiform encephalopathy (bse), or mad cow disease) are not included in this group because the prion is technically not a cellular microorganism but rather a protein. at this time there are no documented chemical or physical agents that will inactivate these infectious proteins. similarly, there is no registered germicide that can with certainty kill pinworm eggs, although a simple ammonia solution will kill the ova of other parasites (e.g., cryptosporidium parvum 2 ). effectiveness should inactivate or kill all organisms located at that level and on the lower levels of resistance. apart from prions and parasite ova, bacterial spores are the life form that is most difficult to kill, so the food and drug administration (fda) uses biological indicators that contain bacterial spores to prove sterilizing efficacy. notice that this list does not contain protozoan cysts. pinworm eggs are very persistent in the laboratory animal facility, and are usually able to tolerate chemical germicides. to rid a facility of the cysts, it is advisable to consider 'cooking' them with steam heat. like an egg, they will harden and become inactive when heated.in the us, the environmental protection agency (epa) registers commercially manufactured disinfectants under regulations set forth in the federal insecticide, fungicide, and rodenticide act (fifra) as amended 3 . chemical disinfectants are referred to as "pesticides" in these federal acts.the first fifra, enacted in 1947, was essentially a 'truth-in-advertising' law, because its goal was to protect the public from false or exaggerated claims made for certain products that were sold across state lines. in 1972, the government extensively modified the fifra so that it now requires a manufacturer to submit not only an application but also a label clearly stating all claims, test data from an epa-certified laboratory supporting these claims, toxicology data, a "confidential statement of formula", and precise "use directions". the "confidential statement of formula" will include specific ranges for every ingredient included in the product as well as a description of that ingredient's function in the formulation. the confidential statement must also list chemical abstracts service (cas) numbers and approved raw material vendors. a pesticide label must include a list of active ingredients with their amounts, storage, and disposal information. the label must also have precautionary statements, first-aid instructions, the manufacturer's complete address, and an epa registration number. if a product does not have an epa registration number, then it should not be used for disinfection in an animal-care area.in 1982, the government once again amended the fifra to clarify terminology. before this clarification, a "sporicide" and a sterilant were two separate classifications. a "sporicide" could have one failure out of 60 replicates in a sporicidal assay, and the "sterilant" could have no failures in the same assay. these new regulations considered sporicides and sterilants as the same.the fda classifies differently products that disinfect surfaces and those used to sterilize medical devices. the fda registers products that are liquid sterilants, and the epa registers products that are disinfectants. epa-registered disinfectants may not be used as terminal sterilants on any surface or instrument that is introduced directly into the human body or that comes in contact with normally sterile areas of the body or the bloodstream.a sterilant (sporicide) is capable of destroying all forms of microbial life. sterilants are the most potent and are effective against all forms of vegetative bacteria, bacterial spores, fungi, fungal spores, and viruses. an fda-registered liquid chemical sterilant will completely eradicate all of the microorganisms listed in table 1 .a high-level disinfectant should eradicate all microbes except for bacterial spores. an intermediate-level disinfectant should eradicate enveloped viruses and all the lessresistant microbes. a low-level disinfectant must kill only three species of bacteria: salmonella choleraesuis, staphylococcus aureus, and pseudomonas aeruginosa. incredibly, there is also a category of disinfectants below that of a low-level disinfectant. these products, called "hospital disinfectants", must only kill s. choleraesuis and s. aureus.iodine compounds are disinfectants that can kill many kinds of microorganisms, including both enveloped and nonenveloped viruses. iodines appear to work by penetrating the cell wall of the organisms, causing a disruption of the cell metabolism and function. secondarily, free iodine may bond in solution with the cell proteins to form salts 4 . iodine compounds are poor cleaners, requiring the use of another chemical to clean the surface. in addition, iodines are relatively unstable in terms of contact time and light exposure, and can permanently stain surfaces if not used properly. extensively used during the 1960s, iodines imparted a permanent brown discoloration to floors and walls. perhaps most importantly of all, iodophors are only active within tight brackets of concentration. increasing the concentration may actually reduce the available iodine in the aqueous solution 5 . additionally, microorganisms, specifically pseudomonas cepacia, have been cultured from full-strength povidone-iodine products 6 .phenolic compounds are broad-spectrum disinfectants that can kill both enveloped and nonenveloped viruses as well as mycobacteria. phenolics appear to kill microorganisms by penetrating the cell wall and acting as cell poisons, or by denaturing the cell's proteins 4 . these compounds are extremely corrosive and require exceptional precautions in handling. phenolics are extremely hazardous to cats, cause skin depigmentation, and have posed human health problems 4,7 . in the past, the phenol coefficient has been the standard against which all other disinfectants were judged. this standardization included comparing germicidal chemicals and provided an index to the concentration of other products. the errors inherent in converting phenol coefficient numbers to effective dilutions of products for practical disinfection are so great that the procedure must be considered unsatisfactory, particularly for nonphenolic compounds. currently, the association of official analytical chemists (aoac) use dilution test remains the standard for determining the efficacy of disinfectants; however, the government has provided funding to establish alternative assays, each with an exact number of microorganisms per challenge. these assays should soon be adopted. chlorine compounds sodium hypochlorite. sodium hypochlorite (the active ingredient in bleach) is perhaps the best example of a chlorine compound used as a disinfectant. if used within some rather stringent parameters, bleach is a very effective and relatively inexpensive virucidal product. the mode of action of chlorine compounds is not fully understood. chlorine compounds may actually cause cell death by a two-step process, reacting with the cell protoplasm after forcing entry through the cell wall, or perhaps by inhibiting the cell enzyme reactions and denaturing the cell proteins 4, 7 .people have used bleach as a disinfectant since the early 1800s (ref. concerns about the efficacy of sodium hypochlorite have involved the percentage of active chlorine required to provide antimicrobial properties. reports from the field have shown that prepared bleach solutions rapidly lose potency under ambient laboratory conditions. an organic soil load reduces sodium hypochlorite's effectiveness as a disinfectant, necessitating a precleaning step before disinfection. bleach has an inherent corrosive effect on certain metals, concrete, and clothing, and can pose problems for animals and personnel.among these problems is bleach's reactivity with acids, releasing chlorine gas, which is highly toxic. it also reacts with organic soils (e.g., feces) to produce potentially carcinogenic compounds. one resulting compound, trihalomethane, can be released as a toxic gas. therefore, supervisors must carefully consider the use of bleach and ensure when making up a bleach-water solution to maintain adequate chlorine concentrations (i.e., 100 p.p.m.). sodium hypochlorite is highly reactive and degrades rather quickly. thus, as fig.1 shows, bleach rapidly loses its effectiveness as sodium hypochlorite degrades. the quality assurance laboratory of pharmacal research laboratories conducted a test that simulated normal laboratory storage conditions. we stored a simple solution of 18.0% sodium hypochlorite in an opaque bottle that was capped and left on a countertop in the laboratory to simulate a bleach bottle stored on the shelf at room temperature. the overhead lights were turned on in the morning and off at night 5 days a week, allowing for ∼9 h of illumination per day. we locked the laboratory and left it vacant during the weekends. for a 70-day period we analyzed daily samples from the bottle and recorded the percentage of active sodium hypochlorite in the sample. our results showed an initial decelerating curve of degradation of the percentage of active sodium hypochlorite. at 5 days, the solution measured 15.68% sodium hypochlorite; at 20 days it was 13.72%. at 35 days, the percentage was 12.74% with the rate of degradation substantially decreased. the shelf life of commercially available sodium hypochlorite mixtures (bleach) will depend on the storage facility, temperature controls, light controls, etc. facility managers should label and check the product regularly using available chlorine detection strips or test kits.chlorine dioxide. chlorine dioxide is available as a high-level disinfectant that has wide applicability not only in the animalcare field but also in the manufacturing and paper industries. health officials used chlorine dioxide to remove the anthrax contamination in the hart senate building in 2001. manufacturers use it in toothpaste, for instance, as well as in paper and pulp manufacturing. it is necessary to mix the product on site, and its shelf-life is inherently short and of mixed product efficacy.chlorine dioxide is a free radical and a powerful oxidant that kills microbes by reacting with bacterial and viral amino acids. chlorine dioxide requires a very short contact time but does not have inherent cleaning ability, necessitating a precleaning step. all chlorine dioxide products currently available have inherent acidity and corrosive properties. chlorine dioxide's entry into the animal-care area has allowed supervisors to use one product rather than two or three different disinfectants to carry out the same process in a short period. one should not confuse chlorine dioxide with chlorine gas; they are two completely different chemicals.of the many disinfecting compounds currently available, the quaternary ammonium compounds are the most widely used in animal facilities. there are five possible modes of action for quaternary ammonium products: denaturing cell proteins, influencing cell metabolic reactions, affecting cell permeability, stimulating cell glycolysis reaction, and affecting cell membrane enzyme activity 7, 10 . they are relatively cost effective, easy to use, and, if handled properly, safer for animals and people than the other currently available disinfectants. these compounds are generally not tuberculocidal. the newest quaternary ammonium compounds generally meet most of the cleaning-disinfecting requirements. the first generation of quaternary ammonium compounds became available in 1935. dilution with hard water or with the wrong type of soap or detergent can inactivate these earlier generation quaternary ammonium compounds. therefore, it is extremely important to obtain a quaternary disinfectant that has been properly compounded with compatible nonionic detergents, which will not affect its disinfecting properties. the newest generation quaternary ammonium compounds are generally blends of alkyl dimethyl benzyl ammonium chloride (adbac) quaternary ammonium compounds, rather than the old single-chain compounds. a good quaternary ammonium compound should remain active as a virucidal, fungicidal and bactericidal agent when subjected to the aoac use dilution test, in 400 p.p.m. hard water plus 5% organic serum. the epa registration number on the label certifies only that the product is a disinfectant, not that it is a cleaning product. while quaternary ammoniums have inherent cleaning abilities, the addition of a cleaning agent increases the ability of the product both to clean and to disinfect.the newer generation of quaternary ammonium compounds will kill some nonenveloped viruses as well as enveloped viruses.a member of the aldehyde group that includes formaldehyde, glutaraldehyde has limited use in the animal-care facility. glutaraldehydes work by alkylating amino acids to alter rna, dna and protein synthesis 4, 7 . the necessary contact time required for high-level disinfection is quite long, and there are several questions concerning the safety of these products for people and animals. glutaraldehyde is tuberculocidal. the tendency of glutaraldehydebased sterilants to induce contact dermatitis has led health care facilities to limit its use in recent years because of liability issues 4, 9 .alcohol products denature cell proteins to cause cell death. however, they can quickly become ineffective in protein-rich environments. because of their volatile characteristics, the use of alcohol products as primary disinfectants has declined. contact time for alcohol products can range up to several hours, which can be difficult considering their highly evaporative nature. also, alcohols can damage rubber and plastic components 4 .the search for the 'perfect' disinfectant may lead to peroxygen products such as hydrogen peroxide, which is a sterilant at the appropriate concentrations. peroxygen compounds act as rapid oxidizers to cause cell death or inactivation. once known as oxidized water or peroxymonosulfates, peroxygen compounds have come to the laboratory animal care field as part of a search for products that are environmentally friendly and relatively low in toxicity for use around animals. many of the peroxygen products leave no residuals and have excellent germicidal activities. peroxygen products came to the forefront when foot-andmouth disease appeared in the united kingdom in 2000. these products are very strong oxidizers, and their germicidal activity occurs quickly, that is, only a short contact time eradicates microbes. peracetic acid is a peroxygen product. hydrogen peroxide when used in the vapor phase is a sterilant.a germicide's epa registration number is a 'stamp of authenticity' for the product. under fifra, the epa issues registration numbers for chemical disinfectants after reviewing the product's claims of efficacy. these claims result from testing in strict compliance with the requirements set by the epa, which thoroughly reviews the data submitted about the product. the epa will issue a registration number specific to the particular product only if all the necessary data have been submitted to support the claims. once the epa issues a number, the manufacturer may not alter the product's chemical composition unless it provides the epa with test data proving the product still retains the capabilities to support the original claims.the aoac use dilution test is an extensive evaluation of germicides that employs hard water with organic serum added, in an attempt to simulate 'real-world' , worst-casescenario challenges. this test assesses claims that a given germicide will kill vegetative bacteria.testing a product for its ability to deactivate spores is more extensive. after inoculation of penicylinders (porcelain cylinders) and surgical loops with specific microorganisms, one vacuum-dries them, making the pathogen even more resistant to penetration and killing by the disinfectant. then one exposes the cylinders or loops to the specific product in the proposed use dilution. after a specified period, which follows the manufacturer's claims for kill time, the testers are removed and placed in a culture medium. the literature that the manufacturer submits to the epa will include the recommended exposure time for the product to achieve a complete kill. the sporicidal test involves either b. subtilis or c. sporogenes. analysts examine the resulting growth for the specific microorganism. they repeat this process extensively, and the chemical being tested must prevent growth in 60 of 60 tests for a total of 12 sets of tests involving 360 penicylinders and 360 surgical loops, and three lots of each productcritics have questioned the efficacy of these tests in recent years. inconsistencies are common within a testing lab and between various laboratories 11 . scientists have cultured the microorganisms in laboratories for generations, and the cultures may not react, as would a 'wild-type' culture freshly isolated from the field. the tests specify a minimum, but not a maximum number of microorganisms per assay, and this can of course drastically affect the test results. the result has been perhaps a false sense of security about the effectiveness of particular products. since 1991, the epa has been reevaluating the specific claims of many germicides. some products that had been listed as "sterilants" before 1991 were reclassified as "high-level disinfectants" after these reevaluations (see www.epa.gov/pesticides).when evaluating disinfectants for animal-care facilities, the first concern should be finding the epa registration number. claims for disinfectants that are unregistered may not be substantiated. for instance, household bleach is a common product found in many laboratory animal facilities. only a few manufacturers of household bleach have epa-registered numbers for their products. the other companies are manufacturing a product that will clean and brighten your clothes, but may not disinfect your facility. in fact, the percentage of active ingredients in these products may be too low for effective sanitizing.within the field of laboratory animal science, the same registration numbers can appear on different chemical vendors' products. the vendor from whom you are purchasing the product may not hold the master registration number. companies can subregister the formulation from the company holding the master label. therefore, a registration number or part of a registration number may be used on products with different names. the epa must approve any subregistration, and the subregistrant designs its own label after having received epa approval. these labels cannot add any claims that the master label does not have and must be submitted to the holder of the master registration for approval.an epa registration number can look like this: 1234-56. this number tells us that the company holding the master registration has an establishment number of 1234, and the 56 identifies the product. a registration number of 1234-56-789 indicates that the product is subregistered. the first set of numbers (1234) is the establishment number for the holder of the master registration, the 56 identifies the product, and the 789 is the subregistrant's establishment number.a product's epa registration number allows the user to obtain any necessary information on the product by consulting the list of registered pesticides in the united states. from there, one can determine who holds the master registration, whether it is subregistered, contact addresses and phone numbers, and all active ingredients and their percentages.coronaviruses are a large family of viruses that can cause a range of illnesses from common cold all the way up to more severe diseases such as the middle east respiratory syndrome (mers) and the severe acute respiratory syndrome (sars), which are known to cause severe respiratory and intestinal illnesses. ed individuals from china at first, and then "exploded into a global pandemic of about 8,000 cases and 774 deaths over a period of several months" [1] .according to the center for disease and control prevention, "229e, nl63, oc43, and hku1 are the most common human coronaviruses out of the seven viruses identified" [2] . covid-19, first identified in china, is a new strain of coronaviruses that has not been previously identified in humans but was linked to animal sources. the virus is believed to be transmitted from animals to humans at first, and then from humans to humans through airborne droplets of infected patients' fluids, which has led the virus to infect and kill thousands of people and to raise international concern.the global distribution of covid-19 is expanding day by day (fig. 1 ) as per the world health organization situation report [3] . according to the data updated on february 18, 2020, the total number of confirmed cases has reached 72,528 with 1,870 deaths from china only.the who risk assessment for acute public health events and disease transmission classified the risk of co-vid-19 transmission as very high, high and high in china, at a regional level, and at a global level, respectively [3] . the european center for disease prevention and control has also reported high covid-19 transmission and potential outbreak impacts.the incubation period is estimated to be between 2 and 15 days, and transmission from asymptomatic cases has been reported [4] . more covid-19 cases are expected in the upcoming days due to the increase in screening and detection methods, and the biggest threat to be considered here is the mobility of these infected individuals.in order to understand the disease characteristics and outcomes, huang et al. [5] collected and analyzed data from 41 covid-19 confirmed patients. according to them, many of the early cases identified were linked to the huanan seafood and animal market in wuhan as 27 of the patients reported market exposure, which suggests that a likely source of the new virus might have been an animal.a centers for disease control and prevention report explained that "there is still unclear clinical picture about covid-19 as some of the infected patients will show no or mild symptoms such as shortness of breath, cough and fever, while others will start developing more serious complications like pneumonia and kidney failure" [6] . huang et al. [5] also pointed out the similarities between the clinical presentation of covid-19 and sars as both diseases caused clusters of fatal pneumonia: "although the whole spectrum and pathophysiology of the new disease is still unknown, the current evidence suggests that there is a high likelihood for patients to have intensive care unit admission or end up dying." li et al. [7] addressed the epidemiological characteristics of covid-19 cases by collecting and analyzing data from the first 425 laboratory-confirmed cases in wuhan. the results showed that "most of the infected cases were elderly, males and with reported exposure to huanan seafood market or to another person with respiratory symptoms. in addition, most of those who died from the virus had underlying medical conditions such as cardiovascular diseases or diabetes" [7] . the study's findings provide an overall useful look at the characteristics of covid-19 patients; however, they cannot eliminate the fact that some reported cases were females, young individuals and with no previous contact or exposure, which should also be addressed and considered in future studies.once a suspected case is identified, whether it is symptomatic or asymptomatic, immediate isolation and multiple tests are required to detect covid-19. the who recommends clinical assessment for the signs and symptoms, laboratory testing, nasopharyngeal and oropharyngeal swabs and radiological examination to confirm the results and other associated complications [8] . many researchers who traced confirmed cases reported the use of real-time reverse-transcriptase polymerase chain reaction test, serological testing, and metagenomics sequencing analysis [9] [10] [11] .transmission dynamics for covid-19 were assessed in different studies. the initial assessment indicates that the source of this third zoonotic human coronavirus was the seafood and animal market in wuhan city (china), as they were selling live animals, specifically bats, where the virus was living and then crossed into a human being [7] [8] [9] [10] [11] [12] [13] . although the studies confirmed the relationship between the animal market exposure and the infection, li et al. [7] pointed out the importance of considering humanto-human transmission as positive cases were confirmed from other geographical areas who have not been exposed to the seafood market.the investigation of human-to-human transmission started later as transmission cases were reported from individuals within the same family members, and from healthcare workers who were in direct contact with suspected or confirmed cases. an article by phan et al. [14] explains the possible human-to-human virus transmission as one family cluster of covid-19 was being reported. the 65-year-old man with underlying health conditions had flown with his wife from wuhan to hanoi after the outbreak. the man became ill with fever and fatigue 4 days after traveling and was tested positive for co-vid-19 after hospital admission. his son who lives in another city and with no history of traveling to these regions was found to be positive as well, and the investigation showed that he met his parents after they had traveled and stayed with them for 3 days. this article explains the time frame of events very precisely and the possible transmission of the virus from the father to the son after the contact. although the son has got the infection, the man's wife and the 28 individuals contacted by the family during their travels were found to be healthy and tested negative to the virus, which requires further explanations and studies to investigate the possible risk factors and the modes of transmission. furthermore, sequencing of strains from the father and son is needed to confirm the transmission between the two.another study by chan et al. [15] gave information about the risk of infection from close personal contact and estimated the disease incubation period by tracing the travel history of 5 family members who made a visit to wuhan city from december 29th until january 4th. the study's clinical, epidemiological, laboratory and radiological findings confirmed covid-19 infection in the 5 members, in addition to the sixths member who did not visit the city but was found to be infected as well, suggesting a human-to-human transmission.the basic reproduction number (r0) for the disease transmission was calculated. according to the european center for disease prevention and control [6] and li et al. [7] , r0 for covid-19 is estimated to be 2.2 (95% ci 1.4-3.9), which is more than 1, indicating infection transmission to the population and estimating that each co-vid-19 patient is transmitting the virus to 2.2 individuals. another study by tang et al. [4] estimated the basic reproduction number using multiple methods and "reported large-scale outbreak with r0 equal to 6.47 (95% ci 5.71-7.23) indicating higher transmission of covid-19." this high reproduction number supports the beliefs of disease transmission between 3 and 4 generations. as for the modes of transmission, the centers for disease con- trol and prevention explain that covid-19 can spread by close contact from an infected person to another through respiratory droplets during coughing or sneezing. transmission by touching contaminated surfaces or objects, and then touching the eyes or nose is still unclear and requires the collection of further data [16] .the director-general of the world health organization, doctor tedros ghebreyesus, announced on january 23rd that "the emerging covid-19 is an emergency in china only and not considered as public health emergency of international concern (pheic)" [17] . until that date, what was known about the disease is that it causes severe respiratory illness symptoms, and that more than 500 cases have been confirmed in china and other countries like south korea, japan, the usa, and thailand.due to the previous experience in facing the sars pandemic, the chinese government did a great job by meeting the international standards in terms of the isolation of suspected cases, diagnosis and treatment and educational campaigns. but despite this fact, the virus continued to spread due to the mobility of infected cases, and lancet explained that there were concerns due to the daily increase in the number of cases and the many gaps faced as a result of the incomplete and rapidly changing epidemic [17] .gralinski and menachery [12] illustrated the emergence and outbreak of covid-19 in their study showing the timeline for the key covid-19 events from december 31st, when the cluster of pneumonia cases was reported, until january 23rd. these events include isolating the virus, releasing the genomes, reporting positive cases among travelers from wuhan, as well as reporting the new cases and deaths in china and globally.on thursday, january 30th, the world health organization declared covid-19 as a global public health emergency of international concern, which indicates the international spread of the disease requiring a coordinated global response [18] .the local government in wuhan has made many attempts to contain the virus. firstly, they imposed a nationwide ban on wildlife trade in markets, restaurants and e-commerce platforms. secondly, they closed the seafood and animal market in wuhan in order to collect environmental specimens and to perform environmental sanitation and disinfection. in addition, china's national health commission announced on january 23rd "the suspension of public transportation, with closure of airports, railway stations and highways in the city" to prevent further disease transmission [19] .after cases have been reported from the european union and european economic area (eu/eea) countries, and due to the high level of movement between china and these countries, the european center for disease prevention and control emphasized the importance to have an entry and exit screening for travelers, including symptoms and thermal screenings as a method to detect and isolate positive cases [20] . even though this method can reduce the global spread to other countries, it might not be very efficient, as some infected patients are not showing any symptoms, and others are having symptoms similar to those of the coronavirus, but are actually caused by the common influenza virus.the centers for disease control and prevention have responded to the outbreak by "establishing a covid-19 incident management system, activating its emergency operations center to provide ongoing support and responses, issuing updated travel guidance for china to prevent nonessential trips to china, publishing guidance for healthcare workers on the clinical care of covid-19 patients, and posting a guidance for appropriate assessment and management of patients exposed to covid-19" [21] .in order to prevent infection to the population and healthcare workers, the centers for disease control and prevention encourage following simple everyday preventive actions such as to avoid close contact with sick people, to avoid touching the eyes, nose, and mouth with unwashed hands, to wear a face mask and to frequently wash the hands with soap and water or with alcohol-based hand sanitizers [22] . health promotion campaigns are encouraged in china and globally as part of educating the people to reduce the risk of infection transmission. by educating the people, it is less likely they will get the infection, thus reducing the risk of transmitting the disease to others.up to date, there is no vaccine to prevent covid-19 and the work on treatment is ongoing [22, 23] . after the person gets infected, the treatment and recovery will be dependent upon the severity of the symptoms and associated complications. by comparing the number of deaths to the total number of cases, we can see that most of the infected cases are recovering, which is quite promising. china is performing an ongoing clinical trial in order to find a treatment for covid-19. one of the anti-viral drugs being tested is chloroquine, which has a promising profile against co-vid-19 as "patients treated with this drug demonstrated a better drop in fever, improvement of lung ct images, and required a shorter time to recover compared to parallel groups" [24] .another anti-viral drug investigated by gilead sciences is remdesivir. the drug is believed to have potential activity against covid-19 as "it has demonstrated in vitro and in vivo activity in animal models against mers and sars coronaviruses." gilead initiated two clinical trials on positive covid-19 patients with mild and severe clinical manifestations separately. patient enrolment started in february and it is anticipated for the results to be received in april [25] .the third and last anti-viral drug tested in a 70-patient clinical trial in shenzhen, guangdong province, is favilavir, which demonstrated efficacy in treating covid-19, and with minor side effects. this drug was the first to get the approval to treat covid-19 from the national medical products administration of china [26] .the work on vaccination is ongoing and many researches and vaccine development plans have been announced from pharmaceutical companies and agencies [27] . ramaiah and arumugaswami [28] reported a "detailed analysis of covid-19 genome evolution and potential universal epitopes for subunit vaccine development." the study recommended continuous surveillance of coronavirus strains in live animal markets in order to have a better understanding of the viral adaptation to the human host, and to develop practical solutions to prevent the emergence of more novel pathogenic coronavirus strains.human-to-human transmission is occurring, meaning that more covid-19 cases are expected to be reported in the future, which can potentially cause disruptions of global public health systems and economic losses [29] . although sustained human-to-human transmission is expected in china, this transmission cannot be quantified with the current epidemiological data available. prevention measures are implemented globally, and investigations are ongoing to find the source of the disease and to understand more about the virus's characteristics, illness severity, and transmission routes. major gaps are presented as the majority of what we know about the virus is based on similar coronaviruses, but the work on treatment is promising. in order to have a better understanding of the new virus, countries should work on providing reliable data through openness and data sharing, as well as conducting further researches on the reported cases. in addition, countries should keep working on improving the preventive measures implemented to reduce the number of infected patients and transmissions at the same time.in september 2014, an editorial in businessweek proposed that the ebola crisis could only be contained by deploying military forces. the authors painted a grim picture of ebola in africa:the situation is desperate. hospitals have become quarantine zones for the dead and soon-to-be-dead…liberia’s government is incapable of managing a response; even elected officials have fled the nation. doctors and nurses have either perished from ebola or have left the country due to a lack of support and concern for their safety. amid the collapse of health-care infrastructure, it is only a matter of time before total chaos descends. the number of infected people is spiraling out of control…the ebola crisis is a natural disaster, like a tsunami or earthquake. but unlike natural disasters with limited global consequences, ebola is perpetual with far-reaching implications. (brozak and noronha 2014) this depiction of unending, nature-induced disaster shapes how social institutions approach and react to pandemics. the apocalyptic language used to describe the disease paves the way for pleas to solve the crisis and respond to a disaster. in 2014, the united nations security council declared unanimously that ebola was a threat to international peace and security, and the united states pledged military support to establish a “command and control center” (un news centre 2014). governments instituted quarantine as part of a militant effort to contain the spread of the virus. the outbreak of ebola evoked a global desire to contain, command, and control (3 cs) the virus in order to mitigate a new type of global human disaster.achieving these 3 cs demands broad scientific knowledge and social power. the failure to solve disease problems through scientific fixes leads to managing human behaviors in ways that propose to optimize the effects of the technological interventions. at the core of the political response to infectious disease lies a pervasive belief that the spread of germs can be contained and the risk of infection can be mitigated by intervening in the cycles of microbial life. disease scientists primarily have worked to develop and prescribe “solutions” to disease outbreaks, including technological medical interventions that seem to overcome human political barriers and predictive modeling of disease behaviors that can be used to plan social interventions. vaccines, antibiotics, and other drug therapies overlie the sociocultural dimensions of contagion and cultivate the idea that individuals are culpable for disease prevention using techno-scientific fixes. the consequences of the belief that microbial nature can be managed exclusively for human health extend broadly into the human social life, creating a wicked socio-scientific problem.today, the fear of germs permeates public debates over vaccination and public schools, global travel and airline safety, immigration and border security, and the regulation of science laboratories. in these debates, as well as in abundant social acts to control infection, people present disease as a problem for science and technology to solve. in part, this is because scientists made the modern microbe. virus and bacteria are unseen in the environment, but science-derived technologies like the microscope render them visible. microscopes showed the world to be covered with miniscule organisms, generating in humans a desire to understand how those microbes interact with the world around them and affect their lives in particular.microbes complicated our knowledge of the world, but even as scientists work to understand and explain the complexity, society demands that they simultaneously control it. the rise of the science and profession of microbiology bestowed authority upon trained individuals to explain what is seen through the lens, including how these organisms cause disease. because people can see microbes using simple microscopic technology, they legitimize the need for knowledge and the authority of scientists to generate it. governments and social institutions vest the scientists who peer at microbes with power to interpret the workings of this invisible world for an audience who have quite narrow concerns about the organisms, centering on their own health, comfort, and survival.moreover, the work of scientists binds humans to microbes in a biological system that is simultaneously human and nonhuman, and where ever-blurry line renders the differences indistinct. microbiologists transformed the scale by which life was known and demanded that the notion of nonhuman nature expand to include microscopic organisms. they also showed that these forms of nature could be located within the human body itself, disrupting boundaries between human and nonhuman, and nature and culture. this dissolution of boundaries challenged a human political system predicated on humans as a distinct species outside of nature. finally, this knowledge of microbes significantly changed how humans understood their own lives and the interactions that introduce death into human life. as a result, not only was the modern microbe brought into existence by science and technology, but the modern human was remade through this knowledge, particularly in terms of risk and the relationship between humans and the world around them.in the nineteenth century, the germ theory of disease presented microbes as the cause of human illness, supplanting notions that diseases manifest individual moral failing or were contracted through miasmas or “bad air.” this transformative theory located the origins of disease in living creatures that could be brought from the environment into the human body to cause harm. managing disease was less a moral question and more a concern of how to avoid disease-bearing organisms. the germ theory of disease made it possible to mitigate disease by managing unclean spaces, and empowered people to act upon their environment to manage their individual health. by transforming a moral shortcoming into a failure to act, the germ theory reallocated the responsibility for disease control to individuals and public action.germ theory also delocalized disease, expanding the scale of threat to include the world broadly, even as a further scientific study showed that specialized environments enable microbes to flourish. if associating microbes with humans transformed human identities, connecting microbes to environments gave humans a new form of responsibility for managing the world around them. this management applied to individual homes as well as communities, towns, and cities.from the moment the microscope lens rendered microbes, industries of science and technology set about eliminating the disease by sanitizing the environment. communities drained swamps as a measure of disease control and as part of broader river management plans. civic sanitation systems offered another technological fix, separating humans from disease-bearing waste. tomes (1990) argued that the late-nineteenth-century cult of domesticity created the moral imperative for homemakers to maintain high standards of cleanliness, primarily by consuming goods such as ceramic toilets, water filters, and chemical disinfectants. such consumer products and public health works seemed to bring disease solutions within the grasp of any individual who could afford to consume or community who had capital to build. even as harmful associations between disease and the impoverished, immigrant, and “unclean” segments of society strengthened, the promise of disease-free living through consumption and cleanliness swept through society, made possible by pinpointing unseen microbes as the originators of disease.locating the source of infectious disease in pathogens outside the human body raised questions of how the body itself might resist infection. the proposal that humans have an “immune system” further defined the body as separate from and in opposition to its environment. immunologists theorized that taking action upon the body itself could create immunity from disease. in the late eighteenth century, edward jenner, a scientist working with poxviruses (like smallpox and chickenpox), observed that people seemed to have varying levels of resistance to disease, possibly due to prior exposure to viruses. he injected healthy humans with fluids from cowpox lesions into dairymaids’ hands, and then exposed them to the smallpox virus, a disease that ravaged human society in that era. his test subjects experienced increased immunity to smallpox. this new vaccine technology promised another way to combat disease, by creating human bodies that were inhospitable environments for disease-bearing microbes. though the earliest vaccinations transferred living matter from one body to another, concoctions created in laboratories facilitated the wide-ranging dispersal of vaccines, spreading hope that disease could be eliminated through a simple prick in the arm. the promise that the application of science and technology could solve the human problem with disease seemed evermore attainable.indeed, within two centuries of creating the first vaccine against smallpox, humans had eliminated from nature this disease that killed more than 300 million people in the twentieth century alone (henderson 2009). the eradication of smallpox, however, also testifies to the role of human cultures in disease management, for though scientists had proven vaccination to be effective in increasing smallpox immunity, containing smallpox required the physical circulation of the technology along with manifold social acts to convince people to be vaccinated. technology and scientific discovery cannot contain, command, and control, no matter how simple the solution seems. scientists have developed vaccines for a number of deadly diseases that persist in the population, including measles, polio, whooping cough, and yellow fever.in part, because disease eradication requires a cultural system that can broadly manage human behavior, disease persists as a wicked problem. moreover, because microbes are living entities that strive to survive and reproduce, they continually evolve in order to stay alive. new diseases emerge as microbes adapt to survive the assault of the immune system. like a river continually changing over time which cannot be restored to a singular past moment, the pathogens on the planet that have the potential to harm humans are constantly changing and cannot be targeted at a static moment. efforts by scientists or technologists to solve the disease problems of the present become outdated as microbes persistently evolve to find new ways to survive on the planet and in the bodies of human hosts.furthermore, the social systems that mediate the distribution of vaccine technology disperse its effects unequally through society. the continued experience of polio or measles in poor communities is a problem of social origin, as vaccines have dramatically reduced the occurrence of these diseases worldwide. in the global campaign to eradicate smallpox, health workers realized that distributing vaccines around the globe not only required ratification from numerous nation-states but also social strategies that would convince people to allow foreigners with needles to act upon their healthy bodies. in public controversies over vaccination in the current moment, social systems have again made it easier to blame individuals for disease, now framed as a failure to police oneself against pathogens using the technological fixes provided by modern science.for example, when a 2014 measles outbreak in california appeared to spread through unvaccinated populations, a ucla professor argued the event was “100 percent connected” to popular sentiment against childhood immunizations, which had increased the percentage of unvaccinated individuals within the population, saying, “there are some pretty dumb people out there” (nagourney and goodnough 2015). the california center for infectious diseases issued statements directly asking unvaccinated individuals to be vaccinated against measles, and county health officials authorized schools to send home students who could not verify vaccination. this governmental response placed responsibility for the health of the population upon each citizen, not only blaming unvaccinated individuals for the outbreak but vilifying their actions and insulting their intelligence. here, broader questions about global health, economics, and demographics paled beneath debates about individual choices to use vaccinations. even when officials acknowledge the social and political systems that shape contagion, at the moment disease erupts in a population, the public response tends to focus on individual behaviors like hand washing, public sneezing, and the use of vaccines. solutions-based thinking connects vaccines to the promise of a disease-free society, without examining the assumptions and politics of the vaccine itself.throughout the nineteenth and twentieth centuries, disease science gained credibility because the study of microbial nature led to disease containment, both through sanitation and public health works and the eradication of diseases like smallpox. this science has also brought broader social effects. for example, disease intervention relies upon separation and containment, such as the use of quarantine during the 2014 ebola outbreaks, and the forceful management of environments. these practices materialize a deep-seated belief that the human body separates people from each other and the world around them (cohen 2009). not only do we imagine the immune system as a filter to prevent harmful external natures from entering the body, but through disease, we think about interpersonal interactions in terms of risk.the global response to contain ebola attempted to manage how the virus moved between people by managing people themselves, intervening in centuries-old mourning rituals and scrutinizing traveler’s bodies with temperature scanners. such activities may be rational in the face of death, but must also be understood as the outcome of certain ways of knowing the human-microbe relationship. these actions have consequences in how humans understand their connections to each other and the world around them. to create futures where complex understandings of the human place in the world can operate, we must embrace our bodies as permeable entities that bind us to our biophysical environments and to each other.locating the source of disease outside the human body widened a perceived gap between humans and their environment, strengthening the cultural belief that problems can be solved by managing nonhuman environments. as a wicked problem, disease presents complexity because it is so entwined with the corporeal self. every living body faces “a ceaseless problem of boundary maintenance” (cohen 2009) as its immune system works to ward off invasions from the world in which it moves. new scientific knowledge, however, overturns the presumption that all microbes constitute a threat and that vaccines can create a perfect barrier against disease.research on the complex relations between organisms and their microbes challenges dichotomies of good and bad with new ideas about mutualism, adaptation, and co-survival of species. a century ago, the scientific germ theory of disease created microbes as a primary threat to human health and wellbeing, but scientists have since posited that microbial life contained within the human body is integral to health, and even that individuals are constituted by unique communities of microorganisms, the “microbiome” (clemente et al. 2012; shreiner et al. 2015). consequently, microbes are receiving new scientific and cultural attention as bearers of human life.corporations, government agencies, scientists and medical professionals have presented antibiotics and consumer products that kill germs as science-derived solutions to infectious disease, despite growing evidence that unmoderated use of these agents creates new disease problems. the evolution of antibiotic-resistant “superbugs” is an outcome of the problem-solution-problem cycle of disease control. in the twentieth century, antibiotics provided a miracle-like cure for bacteria-caused infections and were widely used to treat disease. this “solution,” however, generated new problems as microbes evolved to avoid harm from anti-microbial treatments. while antibiotics reliably kill bacteria, they also change the worldwide theater of disease, entering a cycle of problems and solutions because the actors on the stage—both human and microbial—are living organisms with the ability to adapt and change. in biophysical systems, the mutable qualities of actors eliminate the possibility for a single, large-scale solution.household products and pharmaceuticals with anti-microbial properties provide consumers a seemingly immediate technological fix for the problem of disease. hand sanitizer, for example, was once used primarily in hospitals but appeared on consumer shelves in the mid-1990s. effective marketing opened a niche for the glossy gel, and sales grew. in 2002, the cdc reported in the “guideline for hand hygiene in health-care settings” its scientific conclusion that instant alcohol sanitizers were “more effective” for hand antisepsis than antimicrobial soaps, and were better at killing drug-resistant pathogens than soaps and detergents. such claims in the hands of marketers built public support for using hand sanitizers as a solution to the spread of infectious disease (owen 2013). sales climbed steadily for the new product before plateauing in the early twenty-first century. sales have stayed relatively flat for years, with the notable exception of 2009 during the h1n1 “swine” flu epidemic. because flu viruses are primarily picked up through the air (spread by coughing and sneezing), scientists questioned the effectiveness of the gel in combating flu, yet sanitizer sales still rose 175 percent during the swine flu outbreak (fottrell 2013).in order to be effective, anti-microbial “fixes” to disease problems must be applied in a society on a scale that cannot be matched by the distribution of consumer products. moreover, product marketing may misrepresent the effectiveness of an antibiotic in preventing individual infection. a product like antibacterial soap may kill germs in a controlled environment, but disease exists in a complex, changing environment with countless unique biological agents. people also have unequal access to consumer products and limited understanding of how these products impact vectors of disease and human health more generally. when the us food and drug administration banned several antibacterial ingredients found in over-the-counter soaps in 2016, they also called for further study of antimicrobial products focusing on how the broad use of these products by consumers, often multiple times a day, diverges from occasional exposure (usfda 2016). studies to assess the safety of these products to humans did not anticipate the ways they would be used in practice, and how the microbes targeted by these products would adapt.while antibiotic technologies offer an effective method for killing pathogens, the spread of these products created new disease problems. because biophysical systems are dynamic and evolutionary, microbes quickly evolve and adapt to survive. the overuse of antibiotics as an attempt to solve the most inconsequential health problems has fostered the evolution of antibiotic-resistant organisms. through the process of natural selection, the microbes most resistant to antimicrobial products survive the application of antibiotics and live to replicate their genetic properties in creating the next generation of microbes.in 2009, the world health organization named antibiotic resistance as “one of the three greatest threats to human health,” and the cdc estimates it to cause more than 20,000 deaths and 2 million illnesses in the united states annually (who 2011; cdc 2013). these adapted microbes have been named “superbugs,” evoking the evolution of an organism with exceptional abilities, while retaining the negative association with “bugs” and other undesirable creatures. the term affirms our cultural expectation that bacteria will succumb to antibiotics, identifying microbes that resist antibiotics as “super” or exceptional. we expect antibiotics to destroy microbes, and when they do not, the disease problem shifts: now, it is resistance that must be controlled.when well-adapted “superbugs” survive a perceived fix, new scientific practices or other cultural interventions must again try to mitigate the spread of the newly mutated germ. recognizing the rise of antibiotic resistance, health workers are reaching out to prescribers and consumers of antibiotics to limit the overuse of antibiotics. this new awareness of unintended consequences of antibiotic use has the potential to ripple into many areas of social life, not only in health and consumer systems but also through food systems, as the prolific use of antibiotics in agricultural systems is a primary influence in the evolution of “superbugs.”in 2015, the obama administration announced the us “national action plan for combating antibiotic-resistant bacteria,” promoting nontraditional therapeutics, probiotics, and an international research agenda. the language of the press release and fact sheet accompanying the plan exemplify the enduring myth that solutions exist: “antibiotic resistance is a global problem that requires global solutions” (white house 2015). the promise cultivated alongside penicillin that antibiotics, vaccines, and other scientific interventions would create a disease-free world has subsided as scientists and practitioners consider complexities in the lives of microbes that were previously unknown. this political initiative reaches beyond national politics and emergency events to frame a problem global in scope. even as a us president asserts a continued pursuit of solutions, the scientific community and public at large have gradually opened up to the possibility that a direct war on microbes may not “solve” disease problems, and indeed may cycle back to create a new equation of disease.one indicator that the problem-solution-problem cycle has generated new ways of thinking about human-microbial life is the “hygiene hypothesis” first put forth in the late 1980s. scientists propose that exposure to microbes in childhood is essential to the development of the body’s ability to fight infection (strachan 1989, 2000). in a discourse eerily echoing progressive era class-oriented associations of disease and cleanliness, the hygiene hypothesis argues that the overuse of antibacterial agents in “developed” nations has led to higher rates of asthma and digestive disorders. the high value on cleanliness, first accessible to those who could afford it, then taken up by the government through sanitation and public health projects, effectively sanitized much of the world inhabited by the wealthy. while achieving the goal of disease suppression for a generation, this work may have unintentionally weakened immunity among the populations living in the disease-free environments they created.the creation of a “healthy” and immunity-producing microbiome during childhood may require exposure to a diverse and broad spread of “friendly” microbes, particularly bacteria and parasites originating in dirt, water, and vegetation. the widespread use of individual and communal technologies to sanitize and “solve” the problem of disease created new problems for people living in a germ-free (or germ-lessened) world. in the last decade, scientists have explored the role of microbial exposure in immunity, spurring a social movement to increase childhood exposure to germs (olszak et al. 2012). the first-world return to dirt exemplifies the ongoing effort of individuals to manage their own relationship to disease, intriguingly framed in a new global perspective of dirt.the concept of a microbiome places a peculiar responsibility upon people (including parents of young children) to manage the concoction of microbes in their bodies which will, through replication of countless generations, be with them through life. in books like eat dirt and healthy food, healthy gut, happy child, medical professionals encourage parents to expose their children to dirt—specifically the microbes associated with dirt—through diet and activities, arguing not only that this practice will protect against asthma and allergies in the long run, but also that it can bring physical and behavioral changes in the short term. managing exposure to microbes, not eliminating them, becomes the work of daily living.where once marketers took up antimicrobial science to sell products that sanitized the world from viruses and bacteria, now the market holds a place for products that help users feel like they are cultivating beneficial microbes within them, a marketable solution to the new problem. spurred by “probiotic” assertions, products like yogurt grew in sales in the early twenty-first century, despite controversy over the immune-producing claims that eventually led to the ban of the term in european marketing. in 2015, probiotics were a billion-dollar industry in the united states, and the world’s largest yogurt company danone sold $2.7 billion in probiotic yogurts (mitchell 2016). aobiome, under the brand mother dirt, markets a “biome-friendly” body spray that “replac(es) essential bacteria lost by modern hygiene and lifestyles” (mother dirt 2016). it seems the probiotic craze is poised to repeat the pattern of the antibiotic craze a century ago, capitalizing upon a new popular awareness of the microbiome to promote the idea that individuals can control the microbes within their body through consumption and behaviors.meanwhile, public and private organizations, from the white house to the bill & melinda gates foundation, have increased funding for microbiome research through the national microbiome initiative, spending hundreds of millions of dollars to “develop approaches to reliably alter microbiomes to benefit individuals, communities, and societies” (white house 2016). this initiative particularly directs the study of the microbiome towards social gain, placing foremost the idea that science must study microbes primarily to understand how they benefit humans, an idea that assumes both human centrality in biophysical systems and the ability of humans to control microorganisms. the 3 cs appear as reliably in discourses about managing “good” microbes as in battling “bad” ones. aside from pandemic events like ebola, the nuanced understandings of the human relationship with disease are growing, but the belief persists that humans can alter nature wholesale to a perceived human benefit without cycling around to further problems and desires for solutions. defining disease control as a human problem necessitates recruiting citizens to respond. while individuals bear the primary responsibility to govern their biological and social selves to promote healthy human-microbial systems, when scaled up to the level of society, disease control becomes the work of nations and governments.although disease is experienced by individuals, it is also calculated on larger scales. a disease can be calculated at the scale of a population: the number of cases of infection among otherwise healthy bodies. this number fluctuates as new infections take place and other bodies recover from illness, but even as individuals heal, the disease remains present in a population. still, disease is never omnipresent within a population; it continually ebbs and flows geographically and temporally. because disease exists on global, national, and communal scales, citizens ascribe responsibility to contain, command, and control to the social institutions they establish to govern collective life. then, because liberal citizens have the right and responsibility to govern their social interactions as they relate to the risk of contracting a disease, they join in the work of disease control, becoming willing participants in upholding the social good.in the twenty-first century, the fluidity of microbial disease compounds with the continually evolving nature of microbes and global communications systems to create a world where people can think about their individual risk of infection on a vast scale. rapid transportation of humans and goods provides vessels that move microbes to new environments as never before. a mosquito carrying the zika virus might cross the globe in a suitcase in an afternoon, rapidly spreading a disease that might otherwise be tamped down seasonally, even temporarily entering into habitats where the vector insect cannot long survive. the speed with which people and goods can move today creates a sense of risk that often seems immediate even among those who do not move. this global social system exposes disease as much more than contact with a germ; an outbreak is created through human interactions that cannot be eliminated, at the scale of the individual and up to the global.while microbes have always moved around the world, knowing microbes as agents of a disease has also changed how microbes are positioned on the globe. desired microbes, such as those used in vaccines or probiotics, are distributed through global laboratory systems or manufactured en masse, while others, such as smallpox, are eradicated. critics point to the role of laboratory scientists in creating new antibiotic-resistant microbes, sometimes a result of their very work to study antibiotic resistance. people also manipulate the qualities of microbes, both to increase health and knowledge and to cause harm and spread death, primarily for social purposes derived from human values. from the time of those first glances of microbes beneath the microscope eyepiece, people have engineered microbes for particular social objectives, including the use of microbes in weapons of war. in the modern world, healthy bodies are continually at risk, not only from the somewhat-predictable movements of disease through the population (such as the annual flu cycle), but also from the unpredictable behavior of humans attempting to bend germs to their bidding to inflict harm and terror. a microbial disease is a wicked problem because the mutating and evolving nature of microbes presents citizens with an unending number of threats.through human-caused and microbe-originating evolution, germs contain the ability to perpetually harm human life. techno-scientific approaches, even when coupled with social-cultural approaches fail to eradicate disease, and recent studies of the microbiome and bacterial resistance cast doubt upon the desirability of environments cleansed of microbes. ever-growing knowledge of the ecological function of disease raises the possibilities that microbes, even disease-causing viruses, can be “good,” fulfilling a vital ecological role. for example, studies of the role of viruses in gene function show that mutualistic viruses were the key to the domestication of bell peppers and the cold tolerance of rice (roossinck 2015; xu et al. 2008). annihilating these viruses, deliberately or not, might severely impact the ability of these crops to survive. centuries after their existence was known, the role of viruses and bacteria in broad ecosystem health is only beginning to be studied, and will likely challenge the very notion of disease and its negative associations.even the perfect management of microbes, however, would operate through human social systems. in a world where a body is continually at risk of contracting an infectious disease, both sick and healthy bodies must be managed in order to contain infection. the technologies that destroy microbial life create effects within populations because they operate through social acts and political systems. vaccines and antibiotics entered society via newly created public health systems which gave governments, as a mediator between individuals, nations, and the world, responsibility for creating healthy environments. bioterrorism and pandemic preparedness activities have further affirmed the government’s role in managing human behavior to minimize disease risk. to contain the spread of disease from so many quarters—food, air, travel, and even terrorism—governments require that citizens be aware of their behavior on a daily basis. thus, the search for solutions to disease problems leads to assigning public institutions with authority over people’s health and bodies. recognizing these outcomes, as discussed in the concluding section of this case, becomes more possible when breaking out of the cyclical search for solutions and scrutinizing the motives that underlie disease governance.disease transforms society through the shared experience of risk and the human desire to mitigate harm. bennett (2010) argues for thinking of publics as “human-nonhuman collectives that are provoked into existence by shared experience of harm.” a public cohering around shared vulnerability to disease may then create a government, or assign responsibility to the existing government, to manage that risk. people who govern have a range of disease responses available to them, ranging from allocating research funding to the scientific search for cures, to managing human bodies and biophysical systems to contain and control disease transmission. most governments respond in manifold ways.the rise of public health more than a century ago established the prevention of disease as the work of government. scientists create knowledge about how microbes can be contained, but governments work to ensure that the population participates in prescribed behaviors to fight disease. this governance can be local, national, and/or international in scale, but notably is always intimate, focused on the individual body and on the interpersonal behaviors that make us human and affirm our cultural relations. sneezing and shaking hands become suspect in a world covered with germs; if we wish to protect ourselves from disease, we must moderate those behaviors.one form of infectious disease management has been to focus on how a disease is transmitted daily by human behaviors. for example, in the 1980s, a chinese public health advertisement posed and answered a question: “where should you spit? in your handkerchief! tissue paper! the spittoon!” similarly, a modern australian ad reminds citizens in rhyme, “the spread of flu is up to you. flu doesn’t spread itself, people spread it.” such campaigns recognize that techno-scientific interventions alone cannot contain a disease, for people must continually regulate their own behavior to protect the population. this language taps into communal values and individual citizenship to motivate people to perform certain behaviors. in turn, citizens bestow a degree of trust upon their governments to identify and promote best practices.health promotion campaigns turn disease control into a psychological exercise in redirecting human behavior, relying upon individuals to police themselves against new social mores. these work in tandem with governmental interventions to manage environments, such as water and sanitation systems. governments also have broad authoritative powers available, such as the enforcement of quarantine or mandatory vaccination programs. infectious disease challenges us to consider the extent to which we wish for governments to intervene in personal liberties to create a healthy population.foucault (2007) theorized a changing relationship between people and disease based upon the new conceptualizations of a population, a collection of beings defined by common biological and pathological characteristics and sharing governance. a population attains security by maintaining a “normal” condition, and the liberal state functions when all citizens work to attain that normalcy. an outbreak of disease threatens the “normal” health of the population, and must, therefore, be mitigated to maintain the security of the population. for this liberal government to function, the state must define normal for its population and then govern deviance. citizens must assume the responsibility to moderate their own behaviors that relate to the risk of contracting a disease. in turn, the public health system can operate as a tool of the security state, working to contain, command, and control disease within the population to control deviance and secure precious human life. because there is no solution, subjects and governments continually negotiate the risks and costs of interventions to the individual and population, often in heated debates over ethics, rights, and responsibilities.in the modern united states, this debate is exemplified in contestations over government-imposed requirements for childhood vaccinations and parents’ claims for the right to decide whether their children should be vaccinated. an infectious disease like measles cannot thrive in a population where most bodies have been vaccinated against diseases, allowing a small percentage of citizens to remain healthy even when unvaccinated. however, as the aforementioned 2014 outbreak of measles in california demonstrated, lower rates of vaccination render all unvaccinated bodies vulnerable. when a critical number of citizens refuse vaccination because of a perceived risk to themselves individually, they create a security risk for the population, which must be addressed by government, and then public officials plead for individuals to be vaccinated for the collective good. when public health posters and politicians from the pulpit cry, “it’s up to you!” they employ a language that locates the problem and a perceived permanent solution with individuals. the educational message lacks the nuances and complexity that scientists see in human-microbe interactions, establishing instead, the expectation that disease can be contained by socially responsible behavior (and conversely implying that irresponsible behavior is part of a disease problem).at the core of the debate, then, are human rights to govern our own bodies that must be separated from the scientific knowledge of how to kill microbes. what, for example, should governments require of individuals by rule of law in order to secure a community—or demand of a community in order to secure the nation? these questions can only be addressed through public debate and cultural politics. scientists cannot determine the ethics of disease control practices, but may provide some insight into how science-based knowledge and subsequent technologies might be applied to control a disease.during the crisis response of the ebola virus in 2014, a full quarantine of healthy bodies was called for by nation states, exercising authoritarian rule to maintain the health of the nation. there is a long history of using quarantine to contain the disease, but it is a history tainted by racial injustice and government acts that correlate health, cleanliness, and fitness with skin color and social class (stern 1999). a court declared a 1900 plague quarantine in san francisco to be racist in closing nonwhite businesses and in roping off chinatown but allowing white residents to leave. while quarantine was never enacted, a 1985 poll by the los angeles times found that the majority of the 2,308 survey respondents favored quarantine of aids patients. a decision to use quarantine during epidemics masks but cannot separate associations between disease and impurity under a call for health security. when governments impose on human rights in the name of health security they often shirk vital ethical discussions and broader social discourses that would expose injustices and systemic discrimination in these acts. neutral, nonsocial responses to disease are not possible.the apparent urgency created by pandemic disease serves a particular social function in affirming the role of the security state to respond to, and even “solve,” disease problems. consider the words of president obama at the cdc, reported in usa today during the 2014 ebola events. the newspaper quotes the president saying “the solution is within grasp,” even as he described a downward spiral of events in west africa. scientific knowledge, coupled with a rapid, militant response, offered the apparent “solution”: “the world knows how to fight this disease. it’s not a mystery. we know the science. we know how to prevent it from spreading. we know how to care for those who contract it. we know that if we take the proper steps, we can save lives. but we have to act fast. we can’t dawdle on this one” (korte 2014). scientific and public health knowledge promised to contain ebola and end the crisis, but that knowledge demanded swift application, in this case, deploying us troops to africa. the us president promises a solution in words that assure the public that scientists have done their part, now the rest is up to the citizens.obama’s language calls people to action—caring for victims, taking proper steps, and acting fast without dawdling. by this articulation, the promise of a scientific solution seems to be achievable if the public cooperates. in 2014, as nations debated closing their borders to global travelers, the politics of disease control met the limits of scientific knowledge. governments shifted blame from science to citizens. displacing culpability away from scientists and onto human subjects may change the framing of infectious disease as a problem, but does not make it solvable. as a wicked problem, the ebola crisis could not be solved, though social decisions made on multiple scales of government and in individual lives could manage its immediate social effects. even eradication of a disease like ebola does not break free of the problem-solution-problem cycle. despite centuries of work in microbiology, people are still learning how complex their relations with microbes are, recognizing that managing disease brings unintended consequences to human and ecosystem health and vitality.by ceasing the fruitless quest to solve disease problems and opening new discourses that do not rely on solutions-based language, everyday politics of disease can more fully center on the individual and collective rights and values inscribed in public health. questions concerning how societies will use the knowledge generated through the scientific study of microbes to address disease outbreaks of all sorts must be discussed prior to emergency events, such that the political response can be brought in accordance with social ideals that emerge during public debate, cultural politics, and careful evaluation of our ethical values.even as the hopefulness of a swift, global conquest of disease fades in the modern era, the successes of applying science and technology to managing infectious disease are apparent. ebola, h1n1, and sars faded from the population. sanitation increases health and vaccines save lives. smallpox virus exists only in secured biological laboratories. with lowered disease stressors, however, populations continue to grow and move. as humans gather into tighter urban spaces but also travel increasingly longer distances on a regular basis, they create new paradigms of contagion and risk. germs are adapting to survive in these new environments, becoming the germs of the future. these microbes have their own evolutionary impetus to grow and change, and their endurance may be inextricable from human survival. microbes are being remade for another generation.in society’s search for a “solution” to the human struggle with diseases, people have created new microbial realities, and new cultural ideas and political systems are taking shape around the “superbugs” and engineered microbes of the twenty-first century. these politics demand a security apparatus that governs the environments where microbes and humans live together. because infectious disease management blossomed around the impossible static goal of eliminating disease, it has created microbial environments (which are all environments) as places awaiting a seemingly endless series of technological fixes paired with calls for specific behaviors. by continuing to manage diseases as a problem of nature to be solved, primarily through species eradication, we have waged a scientific and political fight for knowledge of how to destroy germs.the goal to create a society that does not fear disease is admirable, but work to overcome the fear must accompany any fight to eradicate organisms that may sustain human life in the present and future. recognizing disease as a social condition and an unending condition of nature, not a problem awaiting a singular solution, opens the possibility of addressing both the cultural conditions and biological processes that create and spread disease. living with our social “microbiome” means we can recognize germs as an inextricable part of our social institutions, just as we know they permeate biophysical systems.poor asthma control in children is a well documented public health problem in the us [1, 2] . it is associated with frequent exacerbations that cause respiratory symptoms, activity limitation, school absenteeism, and parental work absenteeism [3, 4] . exacerbations also lead to frequent urgent care visits, emergency department visits, and hospitalizations [1, 2] . exacerbations are seasonal with the greatest risk among elementary-age students occurring shortly after returning to school following summer break [5] [6] [7] [8] .outbreaks of viral respiratory infections have been implicated as a cause for this striking seasonal pattern [8] [9] [10] [11] [12] [13] . regular hand washing is the most effective method to prevent the spread of viral respiratory infections [14, 15] ; unfortunately, achieving effective hand washing practices in schools is difficult [16, 17] . barriers include inadequate time, insufficient soap or paper towels, and inconveniently located sinks [18] [19] [20] . assessment of schools' physical environments has provided mixed results. a 1998 report of elementary school restrooms in the mid-atlantic found that 66% of soap dispensers were nonfunctional or insufficiently filled and 33% of automatic hand dryers were inoperable [21] . a 2009 study of primary and secondary school restrooms in new mexico reported that soap and hand drying were available in 90% of restrooms; however, hand sanitizer was reported in fewer than 2% [22] .to overcome perceived barriers associated with hand washing, some schools have adopted antimicrobial rinse-free hand sanitizers [17, [23] [24] [25] . recent studies indicate that hand sanitizers reduce overall infection-related absenteeism among elementary school students by 20-50% [17, 18, [24] [25] [26] , respiratory illnesses by 30-50% [17, 24, 26] , and teacher absenteeism by 10% [25] . use of hand sanitizer in the home has been shown to reduce asthma exacerbations in children and respiratory illnesses among family members [16, 27] . despite these findings, a review by meadows and le saux [28] did not find sufficient evidence to specifically recommend hand sanitizer use in general or among children with asthma; however, a review by jefferson et al. [15] concluded that hand washing did reduce viral respiratory infections, particularly in young children.to address the questions related to hand washing in general, and the benefit of hand sanitizer in particular, we designed a study to evaluate hand sanitizer use in elementary schools as a mechanism to reduce exacerbations among children with asthma. we describe the study's design, but more importantly, the process by which revisions were made to the original protocol due to both external and local issues that arose after the original protocol had been funded.original study protocolthe original design was a randomized, longitudinal, subject-blinded, placebo-controlled, community-based crossover trial. the primary aim was to evaluate the incremental effectiveness of hand sanitizer use when added to a school's typical hand washing practices to reduce asthma exacerbations among elementary-age students. to control for school variation and to minimize cross-contamination, individual schools served as the unit of randomization. crossover between intervention and placebo schools occurred during the summer break between the first and second year. there were two major advantages of the crossover design. the first was the ability to control for the strong seasonal variation in respiratory illnesses that was expected. the second was the ability to maximize school support and participation because all schools would eventually receive the intervention instead of some being relegated to a nonintervention control group.the primary outcome was the proportion of students who experienced an asthma exacerbation each month defined as one or more of the following: (1) a red (<50% of personal best) or yellow (50-70% of personal best) peak flow meter reading, (2) increased use of quick relief medication from baseline ( 4 puffs), or (3) a respiratory-related school absence [29] .a single large school district in birmingham, alabama that was comprised of 30 elementary schools with approximately 15,000 students was recruited for participation. the system was racially (70% white and 30% black) and economically (33% eligible for free or reduced lunches) diverse. students with asthma were to be recruited by school nurses who sent information packets home to parents via students. interested parents were to be encouraged to provide consent to be contacted by study staff or to contact the study staff directly. prior to obtaining written informed consent from parents and written assent from students, the project was to be explained to both parents and students by the study staff.students who (1) attended one of the participating schools, (2) had physician diagnosed asthma, and (3) could use a peak flow meter were eligible for the study.the intervention consisted of using a nonalcoholbased hand sanitizer to supplement the schools' typical hand washing practices. during the first year, all schools were to receive hand sanitizer containing either an active ingredient or placebo that was dispensed from permanently mounted or free standing 1.8l dispensers (3600 applications) that provided amounts appropriate for elementaryage students. all hand sanitizer was to be provided by the study and was to be placed in the lunchrooms and classrooms. no soap, paper towels, or air dryers were to be provided to the schools.students, faculty, and staff in all schools would be instructed on hand washing and hand sanitizer techniques based on the 'always be clean' (abc) hand hygiene program developed by woodward laboratories incorporated. hand washing with soap and water was to be promoted after using the restroom and when visible dirt was on the hands as recommended by the cdc [30] . hand sanitizer use was to be promoted as a supplement to hand washing upon arrival at the classroom, before lunch, after using the restroom, at the end of the day, and after sneezing or coughing as recommended by abc. grade-level appropriate instruction was to be provided at the beginning of each school year with reinforcement on the first day of each month. faculty and staff were to be provided continuing education prior to the start of each school year.a nonalcohol-based hand sanitizer containing benzalkonium chloride (0.13%) was chosen for the study. benzalkonium chloride, was designated 'gras' (generally regarded as safe) for topical antiseptic applications by the food and drug administration (fda) [31] . it was effective against gram-negative and gram-positive bacteria associated with nosocomial infections and many viruses associated with upper respiratory infections including human coronavirus and adenovirus [32] . it also had been used previously in several large schoolbased studies without adverse events [17, 26, 33, 34] . another important consideration was the availability of a placebo without antimicrobial effects [17] .both alcohol-based and nonalcohol-based hand sanitizers were initially considered, but community concerns regarding alcohol-based products and their flammable nature [14, 35] and the potential for misuse made them a less desirable choice [36] . there were also preliminary data to suggest that alcohol-based products might be inferior to nonalcohol-based products [33, 34] . for example, the antimicrobial activity of benzalkonium chloride had been shown to increase over multiple, consecutive washes whereas the antimicrobial activity of ethyl alcohol tended to decrease over time [33, 34] . both had better degerming activity than soap and water [33, 34] , but 50% of those using ethyl alcohol reported hand pain or discomfort whereas no one using benzalkonium chloride reported similar symptoms [33] .a web-based monitoring system (asthma agents) developed in collaboration with blue cross and blue shield of alabama was to be used to collect daily data without overburdening the schools or interrupting learning activities [29] . peak flow meter (pfm) readings and school absences were to be recorded daily by students and verified by teachers and/or school nurses. quick relief medication (proventil õ hfa) for in-school use was to be provided at no charge to all children enrolled in the study by merck and company, incorporated. a doser tm was to be attached to each student's inhaler to record each actuation of quick relief medication automatically. the count was to be recorded every 2 weeks by the study staff.compliance with hand hygiene recommendations was to be estimated based on the frequency of refills of hand sanitizer in each classroom and in the lunchroom. refills were to be stored in the housekeeping office at each school and the custodial staff recorded refill dates. this method was chosen to minimize the burden on classroom faculty and staff. since all hand sanitizer was to be supplied by the study, the total amount provided to each school was to be monitored.other explanatory variables and secondary outcomes including the student's age, gender, race, asthma severity, quality of life, asthma control, and household smoking exposure were to be collected during bi-annual phone interviews with parents.data from the asthma agents system and the doser tm were to be used to calculate the proportion of students in each group who experienced an exacerbation. generalized estimating equations were to be used to model the marginal rate of exacerbations, defined as the proportion of students within each school who experienced at least one asthma exacerbation each month, while controlling for correlation between observations within each student and between students within each school. adjustment for individual level factors such as the student's age, race, gender, and asthma severity were to be undertaken also. the study was powered to detect a time averaged difference of 7.5-10% between the exacerbation rates of the intervention and control schools given a sample size between 468 and 650 students with asthma.the study was approved and to be monitored by the institutional review boards at the university of alabama at birmingham and the university of arizona. a data safety and monitoring board (dsmb) was established to monitor adverse events. two asthma safety events were mandated as reportable: (1) a red pfm reading (<50% of personal best) with symptoms 3 days in a row and (2) use of more than 30 puffs of quick relief medication in a 2 week period for those whose medication was kept in the school office or more than 40 puffs in a 2 week period for students who self-carried. self-carry of quick relief medication was allowed for any student who had the maturity to use it appropriately provided that the student's physician completed an authorization form. parents, teachers and school staff were to be provided handouts describing potential side effects of hand sanitizer use (i.e., flaky skin, lesions, rash, etc.) and how to report them.after receipt of the grant award in august 2007 (see table 1 for study timeline), three events occurred that required major modifications to the original study protocol: (1) concerns arose regarding the safety of benzalkonium chloride; (2) no nonalcohol-based hand sanitizer substitute was available; and (3) community standards changed regarding typical hand hygiene practices in the schools.while responding to an irb requirement to rereview product safety data following grant awards, we found new data indicating that benzalkonium chloride: (1) induced moderate genotoxic effects in eukaryotic cells [37] , (2) produced histological changes (hyperplasia, incomplete keratinization, loss of the granular layer, acantholysis, and necrosis) in organ-cultured skin [38] , (3) induced biofilm formation (a matrix of cells attaching to each other and a surface) of some bacterial species [39] , and (4) possibly caused allergic contact dermatitis [40] . these concerns prompted a search for another nonalcohol-based product but no substitute could be found. the only viable option was to switch to an alcohol-based product. while this alleviated many of the safety concerns related to benzalkonium chloride, it prevented the use of a subjectblinded design because there was no placebo for an alcohol-based product.between the time of the grant development and its award, the schools' typical hand hygiene practices changed substantially due in large part to changes in the community's perceptions regarding disease risk. school principals, faculty, and parents had become convinced that hand sanitizer was necessary for good hand hygiene within the schools. there was considerable fear that hand washing alone was not sufficient to prevent 'the spread of germs'. this perception was reinforced by a methicillin-resistant staphylococcus aureus (mrsa) outbreak in several schools prior to the study. because of these concerns, hand sanitizer use increased dramatically such that many schools required parents to purchase personal hand sanitizer as a supply item. despite reassurance by the local health department that hand washing remained the best option for hand hygiene, community perceptions were so strong that a hand washing only arm was no longer a viable option.the decision to change a study protocol after a grant award is a difficult one that involves many important stakeholders. for this trial, important stakeholders included the national heart, lung, and blood institute (nhlbi) and its designee (project officer), our data safety and monitoring board (dsmb), our institutional review board, and the community as represented by school administration, faculty and staff, and parents. our goal was to maintain the scientific integrity of the study while adapting to safety concerns and changes in the community's preferences. chronologically, the first major decision involved the change from the original hand sanitizer with its corresponding placebo to an alcohol-based product without one. while the safety concerns that prompted this decision were mostly theoretical, we agreed that ensuring participant safety, especially among children, warranted erring on the side of caution. the principal investigator and key study personnel made this decision in close collaboration with the nhlbi project officer and dsmb over the course of multiple teleconferences. the primary goal was to ensure that the redesigned study addressed an important research question using a methodologically rigorous design without compromising student safety. the school system administration (superintendent and chief nursing officer) were appraised of the rationale for the proposed changes and were asked to approve them prior to implementation.because there was no placebo for the alcoholbased product, it was no longer possible to conduct a subject-blinded design for a direct test of the effectiveness of hand sanitizer as a supplement to hand washing. instead, we chose to compare the effectiveness of a standardized two-step hand hygiene process (hand washing plus hand sanitizer) with handwashing only. schools would be randomly assigned to use study-provided hand sanitizer and hand soap (intervention arm) or to hand washing only (usual care arm). crossover would still occur after the first year.when we met with school principals and parent advisory groups to discuss the revisions, including randomization of some schools to hand washing only, we learned that personal hand sanitizer use had become ubiquitous in many schools. we asked schools to discourage personal hand sanitizer use (e.g., removing hand sanitizer from their required supply lists) by arguing that hand washing was the preferred method of hand hygiene. the local health department reinforced this message on our behalf, but parents and school faculty countered that personal hand sanitizer use was surmounting existing barriers to adequate hand washing and that they were reticent to restrict its use. they also pointed out the difficulty of enforcing restrictions against personal hand sanitizer use while at school.unfortunately, we were unable to secure any restrictions which meant that instead of the usual care arm being a hand washing only arm, it would now also include a variable amount of personal hand sanitizer use as well. the unexpected increase in personal hand sanitizer use presented a potential bias to the null effect; to control for this possibility we developed instruments to monitor the schools' hand hygiene practices more carefully.all of the revisions occurred prior to participant enrollment; therefore, no changes to the consent process were necessary.the revised protocol was a randomized, longitudinal, community-based crossover trial that compared the effectiveness of a standardized two-step hand hygiene process (hand hygiene education plus study-provided hand sanitizer and hand soap) with that of usual care (a variety of school-specific hand hygiene practices).no change.no change.no change.the revised intervention consisted of a two-step hand hygiene practice that included regular hand washing with soap and water supplemented by hand sanitizer use. to overcome potential resource barriers to adequate hand hygiene practices in intervention schools, the study provided intervention schools with alcohol-based hand sanitizer, hand soap, and needed refills. hand soap dispensers were installed by study personnel and hand sanitizer was made available in disposable bottles in all intervention restrooms, health rooms, and classrooms with a sink.to our surprise the installation of dispensers became an important issue. originally, we used the installation of permanent hand sanitizer dispensers as an incentive for schools to participate. since the hand sanitizer dispensers would hold product with either an active ingredient or placebo, installing them at the beginning of the study in all schools did not pose a problem following crossover. after the redesign, the lack of a placebo created the potential for a carry-over effect if year 1 intervention schools were to continue using the dispensers during year 2 when assigned to usual care. we proposed eliminating permanent dispensers altogether, but discontinuation became an issue with the schools as they wanted us to honor our original commitment.a compromise was reached by installing hand soap dispensers, instead of hand sanitizer dispensers, in each school prior to the start of their intervention year. schools were concerned that removing dispensers after the intervention year was over might damage walls so we agreed to leave them in place but we would no longer supply refills. we deemed that the potential use of the hand soap dispensers during the usual care year posed less of a carry-over/contamination risk than the use of hand sanitizer dispensers would.in the revised design, the 'always be clean' hand hygiene curriculum was replaced with the centers for disease control and prevention's (cdc) school network for absenteeism prevention (snap) program (http://www.itsasnap.org/index.asp) because the abc program was a branded program of woodward laboratories incorporated, the company which produces the benzalkonium chloride hand sanitizer. hand washing with soap and water was promoted after using the restroom and when visible dirt was on the hands as recommended by the cdc [30] . hand sanitizer use was promoted as a supplement to hand washing upon arrival at the classroom, before lunch, after using the restroom, and after sneezing or coughing.only schools in the intervention arm received the annual training and monthly refreshers; usual care schools did not receive any hand hygiene education or any hand hygiene supplies. they were expected to maintain their customary hand hygiene practices. these practices varied across schools and included hand washing and personal hand sanitizer use of differing quality and frequency. some of this variation was attributable to the inconsistent supply of hand hygiene resources among some schools. because of this variability, usual care schools might not be able to maintain the hand hygiene practices necessary to minimize the spread of respiratory viruses among the student population.ethyl alcohol (62% solution) in foam (purell õ instant hand sanitizer foam).the data collection procedures for the primary outcome remained unchanged; however, two new data collection instruments were designed to evaluate the school environment as it related to hand hygiene practices. the first instrument was used to conduct a one-time baseline assessment of each school's 'fixed' environmental facilities with regard to the availability, type and working condition of sinks, soap dispensers, hand sanitizer dispensers and hand drying devices (i.e., paper towels or airdryers). the availability of hot and cold water and type of faucet mechanisms available (e.g., springloaded, automatic, manual-turn) was also recorded.the second instrument was used for monthly monitoring of the availability of hand hygiene resources at each school. the type of hand hygiene supplies available at each school (usual care and intervention) and their availability, that is, liquid or bar soap, hand drying mechanism, hand sanitizer, and hand hygiene instructions are recorded. general cleanliness and structural condition also were noted. data were used to describe hand hygiene resource availability in the usual care schools and to monitor implementation of the two-step hand hygiene program in the intervention schools.since hand sanitizer was recommended as a supplement to standard hand washing in a setting of limited school resources, it was deemed important to estimate the incremental value of hand sanitizer use. therefore, an economic analysis was added as a study aim to estimate the additional costs of hand sanitizer use. a careful cost accounting of the usual care and intervention activities is being conducted. cost and effectiveness data will be combined to conduct a cost-effectiveness analysis comparing the two-step hand hygiene intervention with usual care using dollars per averted asthma exacerbation as the primary outcome.power calculations were revised based on the updated study design using the monthly frequency of episodes of poor asthma control (epac) as the primary outcome (table 2) . two general scenarios were assumed: one where there was no carryover effects (data from both years) and one where there were such effects (each year evaluated separately). gee was used to account for the correlation within a child over time as well as the correlation among children within the same school.carryover (or residual) effects occur when the effect of an intervention during the first time period persists into the second time period. the persistence of the effect may bias the measured effect of the second intervention. it is possible that educational intervention could lead to sustained changes in hand hygiene practices at interventions schools that might persist into the second year; however, the presence of a summer break provides a 10-week 'wash out' period that should minimize any carryover effect since no reinforcement is provided to original intervention schools during the second year. research has shown that changes in behavioral practices typically decline by 40-80% after 6 weeks without reinforcement [41] . a recent review of hand hygiene interventions in health care workers noted that without reinforcement the changes in hand hygiene behaviors were sustained for less than 1 week [42] . a 1 month baseline period at the beginning of each school year was planned to measure potential carryover effects.no change.enrollment was completed in may 2009 with a total of 527 students enrolled in 30 schools (mean ¼ 17.6 per school). the enrollment per school exceeded the estimate used to calculate the study's power. the intervention began in august 2009 and will end in may 2011.one of the most difficult aspects of the academiccommunity partnership is the lag time between study development, funding, and implementation. during this interval, key stakeholders, perceptions, and standard practices within the community can change, often in an unpredictable manner which is outside the control of the research team. at the same time, new scientific discoveries may emerge that render the original study assumptions obsolete. because of this dynamic environment, the community-based researcher must be responsive to changes that may undermine the original study design or collaborations with community partners.we have found that a study team with a broad range of skills, talents, and interests is well positioned to respond to a quickly changing environment. not all team members are equally suited to serve as liaisons with community partners. in school-based research, team members with prior work experience in the schools (e.g., former administrators, teachers, or coaches) often can establish more effective collaborations with school personnel than 'academicians'. these team members can use their previous relationships to identify and gain redesigning large school-based clinical trials access to the key stakeholders within the school system. additionally, they can navigate a cultural work environment that is often quite different from the academic setting. having team members with this background is critically important for schoolbased research.in retrospect, the most crucial decision that impacted our original research design was the decision to abandon the nonalcohol-based hand sanitizer containing benzalkonium chloride. without this product and its corresponding placebo, we were unable to conduct a subject-blinded design. initially, we felt confident that the product was safe and effective; however, the in vitro data that subsequently emerged cast doubts on the product's previously established safety record. the new data emerged at a point in the study cycle where little time was available to contemplate the decision without substantially delaying implementation. we also were sensitive to safety concerns given that we were working with a vulnerable population (children) in a challenging research setting (schools). we believed that a smaller body of in vitro findings questioning the product's safety trumped a larger body of in vivo findings demonstrating safety that were obtained through industryfunded, manufacturer-led research.the impact of eliminating the subject-blinded design was magnified by the abrupt change in community hand hygiene practices within the schools. if personal hand sanitizer use had not been prevalent in usual care schools, the crossover design would have been a robust test of hand sanitizer as compared with hand washing alone. however, the ubiquitous nature of personal hand sanitizer use forced us to rely on what had been reported previously to be substandard hand hygiene practices within the schools due to significant structural barriers. by supplying the education and resources to ensure that the barriers to effective hand hygiene in the intervention schools were eliminated, we were able to evaluate the best possible hand hygiene practice (hand washing plus hand sanitizer use) against a variety of usual care practices. unfortunately, the study no longer can measure the effectiveness of hand sanitizer use directly as a supplement to traditional hand washing practices. if the trial results are negative, the possibility of bias created by personal hand sanitizer within usual care schools may be the primary contributing factor.community-based clinical trials are needed to establish the effectiveness of interventions under real-world conditions [43] . a methodologically rigorous study design is important to achieve this goal, but the community-based researcher must also respect community beliefs and practices [44] . failure to address them satisfactorily may compromise the ethical conduct of research, particularly in vulnerable populations. it also may be counterproductive as the community partners are vital to the translation of research knowledge into sustainable practices.the corona virus disease 2019 had originated from china as the first case was reported in wuhan, china in december 2019. eventually, it started to spread in various regions throughout china and on 30 january 2020, world health organization (who) declared covid-19 outbreak as a public health emergency of international concern (pheic) (who, 2020a) which later became a global pandemic. as of 7 april 2020, the who situation report-78 indicates more than 1.2 million confirmed cases and deaths greater than 72,000 globally (who, 2020b) . the infection is spreading day by day and the healthcare system struggles to take care of every infected individual especially in excessively infected countries such as usa, italy, spain and the list goes on. though the characteristics of this novel coronavirus are not well known, we can infer its behavior from the statistics such as rapid rate of spread, vulnerability is higher for low immune, diabetic and aged people, widely different pattern of recovery rate and other information we have is that it spreads by a human to human transmission through droplets or by direct contact and the incubation period for the infection has been estimated as 2-14 days (lai et al., 2020) .to encounter the situation, healthcare systems have put their tremendous efforts in treating the infected individuals and also for testing the public for coronavirus diagnosis. governments are doing their best to mitigate the infection and also to meet the requirements for the healthcare system. moreover, unfortunately, there is neither a medicine for the cure nor a vaccine for prevention of this novel coronavirus as of 10 april 2020. but countries have been trying various treatment methods and usage of different suitable medicines (without proper confirmation). the preventive measures defined by the who is to wash the hands frequently with soap and water or with an alcohol-based hand rub, following social distancing, and practicing respiratory hygiene (who, 2020c) . masks will also play a role in safeguarding people from infection and it is mandatory to know when and how to use the mask. apart from it, the only way to stop the infection from spreading is by staying at home and avoiding social gathering, following social distancing and isolating us from infected people or people subjected to quarantine. hence, to stop the spread, it requires a combined effort from all social bodies such as the healthcare system, government and more importantly from the public. and they can be controlled only to a limited extent. besides, the extensive utilization of potential technologies together with effective healthcare treatment and strong governance will be astonishing that would strengthen the defense line to fight against covid-19.technologies have been consistently developing day-by-day but during an unexpected circumstance as of covid-19 pandemic, the role of these technologies to support humanity in various means is substantial. it is ofcourse acknowledged that the credits for the healthcare system is exceptional in tackling the situation but the part of technologies in supporting the healthcare system, government and also public remains unnoticed. the contribution of these technologies in fighting against novel coronavirus may be either directly impacting or indirectly impacting. the former refers to the technology by the implementation of which the spread of the infection is mitigated or the difficulties of the healthcare system have been buckled down. the latter involves those technologies that have been helpful in supporting the government and the public to deal with the situation.the prime objective of our study is to investigate various technologybased strategies that assist the environment in controlling the pandemic and also other viable technologies that have the potential to be used. the outcome of our study is to make the readers, professionals and scholars to understand the contributions of the technologies in controlling the epidemic and further, to encourage the implementation of these technologies in near-future. the novelty of our work is presented in subsequent points:• investigation of the various implemented technologies and their influence in controlling the pandemic.• presenting prospective viable technologies that can be used in the current or future epidemic situation. • discussing the technological changes that the environment and the society have undergone in tackling the pandemic crisis. • suggesting few drafted pioneering systems in mitigating the spread.this work mainly consists of seven sections apart from the introduction. the first section shows the framework of our study and the following section explains the changes that the environment and the society have been through in handling the pandemic situation from different social bodies aspects such as government, healthcare system, public, industries, and also from an environmental and energy point of view. the next section deals with the technological strategies that are implemented to control the pandemic which includes information communication, artificial intelligence and machine learning, and supply chain strategies. and the subsequent section gives an insight of indirectly impacting technological strategies whose purpose is to support the confinement of the society during pandemic crisis. this section comprises the sub-domains such as work from home, distance learning, and surveillance. these two sections altogether cover the directly and indirectly influencing technologies in controlling the pandemic and are also backed up with few practical illustrations. then, the prospective technologies that are less used but have immense potential in supporting the society during epidemic difficulties is also discussed. then, the subsequent section gives some essential guidelines to follow during this pandemic period as defined by the world health organization (who) and at last, a critical discussion of the influence created by these technologies, the existing challenges and predicted future impacts accompanied by the conclusion is presented.we authors decided to contribute our support to the society to tackle covid-19 by investigating various implemented technologies as well as the potential technologies that would help in controlling the pandemic and subsequently presenting our investigation as a manuscript. we sought guidance from medical and technical professionals as a result of which the topics need to be covered in this study is figured out. in order to write the manuscript in this novel theme, one need to know what is happening around and requires tedious surveying of online information from verified sources together with literature survey for supporting the feasibility of the approach disclosed in the online sources. the literature survey is primarily done by using platforms such as google scholar, elsevier, pubmed and ieee. firstly, the initial screening is done by analyzing the title of the work and then according to the sections in our study, the identified work is sorted. the scrutinizing stage 1 is performed by scanning the abstract of the work sorted and decision of scrutinization of each work is carried out jointly by the authors. the scrutinizing stage 2 filters the irrelevant work which is done by skimming the whole content of the work. further, while writing the manuscript if the scrutinized work content doesn't seem to fit or the information in the work is already covered in some other considered study, then the work is eliminated. for instance, to gather the information in the field of artificial intelligence, the keyword 'artificial intelligence in healthcare' is used for searching in elsevier platform from which the initial screening is performed by analyzing the title whether it is relevant to our study or not. then, the abstract of the identified works is scanned to scrutinize it and further the content of the work is skimmed to scrutinize it as well as to grasp the necessary information which constitutes the scrutinizing stages 1 and 2 respectively.the online sources from which information is extracted mainly include world health organization (who), and reputed information reporting sites such as world economic forum, stats, mit technology reviews and news reports. for online sources, we provide keywords as an input to google search engine from which the initial screening is done by analyzing whether the source provides trustable pieces of information. then, the scrutinizing stage 1 is done by scanning the content of the source whether it is relevant to our study or not. besides, the stage 2 scrutinization is performed by analyzing the quality of the information. as a whole, out of around 1500 works resulted from the searches using different keywords, we sorted 806 works after initial screening from which 172 work is finalized after subjected to scrutinizing stages. so, after shaping the manuscript, we obtained a total number of references of about 155 that include 32 online sources and 123 journal papers. the fig. 1 shows the framework flow process for this manuscript.the pandemic situation demands a certain way of shaping the society to reduce the spread and is the only way to safeguard humanity from breaking the chain of covid-19 infection. in this section, we will discuss the changes that the society had undergone to mitigate the spreading of the infection. the changes can be broadly viewed from healthcare, government, public, industries, environment, energy and also its impact in future. the fig. 2 represents the various changes each social bodies and environment undergone during covid-19.from the health care point of view, technologies have been upgraded a lot to meet the clinical requirements. starting from testing to treatment, various innovations have been implemented and experimented. for instance, the testing procedures for covid-19 have been carried out in different phases from short time results with less accuracy to high accuracy testing in tradeoff with time. generally, polymerase chain reaction (pcr) test is used for the diagnosis of covid-19 which is quite an accurate method as it detects the presence of viral rna. other techniques include serologic testing, antigen testing etc. (verdict medical devices, 2020). testing a voluminous population is necessary to give a big picture of the infection status and thus, the demand for the testing kits is in peak. the technique adopted for testing might vary from place to place, for populous countries antibody tests can be effective for initial screening to know the immune nature of the population and to map the infection. moreover, they can yield results in a short period and rapid antibody testing would consume around 15-30 min to give the results (india today, 2020). bosch developed an innovative quick test to produce the results in two and a half hours and claims that it is one of the world's completely automatic molecular diagnostic tests (verdict medical devices, 2020). ai and ml have been contributed in many ways which is discussed in upcoming sections. they changed the way of approach in interacting and handling the patients, provides insight in predicting the infection spreading rate, innovative approaches in diagnosing the disease and identify those who would develop serve symptoms, and whatnot. another new approach by a group of researchers and engineers of san-francisco called cough for the cure which uses trained model to identify covid-19 with the audio samples of the patient's cough (verdict medical devices, 2020) . though it might not seem to be effective as it is not clear whether covid-19 cough is unique but the approach is novel. and the usage of telehealth services has exponentially risen during the pandemic period.the point of view from the government is not easily perceived as much complexity prevails in every action they take. the decision making, managing public, satisfying the requirements of the healthcare system and to have a future plan are the prime functions of the government during the pandemic period. the changes that are commonly seen in governance is that they are guiding other tech giants to collectively focus on covid issues and imparting broad awareness among the people. these social bodies can control the extent to which technology can be used like experimenting with new techniques for diagnosis. at a certain point, the privacy of an individual is at stake in order to track the super spreaders in the society and these measures are carried out for the sake of people health. governments is also launching schemes, supporting scientific projects and initiatives that will assist in communication with the public regarding health crisis (world economic forum, 2020a) .regarding the public, cooperating with the government is the only way to reduce the infection. during the quarantine period, people might have been psychologically depressed from the constant exposure to the same environment. the streaming industries, cellular technology, broadband connectivity is some without which the public cannot consistently follow quarantine orders. work from home strategies and elearning makes the society to function as quite normal during the quarantine period. but, the whole system from healthcare to the public themselves depends on the actions of the people and their cooperation.from an industry point of view, the factories have been closed to mitigate the infection spread but some industries and companies have been indulged in producing products that are required for health care system by following strict social distancing. automotive industries have modified their production lines to produce ventilators, plastic face shields, 3d printed products and so on (ns medical devices, 2020). fashion brands have changed their manufacturing from clothing and fashion products to prepare masks and other products they are capable of producing. alcohol-based companies, distillers have indulged in producing disinfectants, hand sanitizers, plastic products and so on. also, many other tech companies are providing a helping hand in terms of developing software, to improve computing power, and supporting the research groups (autodesk-redshift, 2020). the table 1 shows the various manufacturing industries producing key medical products that are required during pandemic.other societal changes can be viewed as an economic impact due to pandemic. vendors and small business are suffering from short-term revenue losses. the major problem that every brand is facing now is the shipping problems. a report on covid-19 survey (klaviyo, 2020) shows 40% of the brands encounter shipping problems and 56% of the brands are having problems in their supply chain and increased number of brands are spending more on ads. yet still, 28% of the respondents have claimed to have increased sales. another study shows us unemployment fillings had peaked and spain had almost cut 900,000 jobs as the country imposed strict enforcement of social distancing to fight against the coronavirus as on 2 april 2020 (world economic forum, 2020c). also, air traffic has been tremendously reduced owing to covid-19 pandemic. the data from the flightradar24 website shows a 64% reduction in air traffic from 6 march to 6 april 2020 (flighttradar24, 2020).considering the environmental aspects, the lockdown has made the public to stay at home which resulted in less air pollution owing to less industrial activities, and vehicular movement. india houses about 21 cities of the 30 most polluted cities in the world and have reported a reduction in air pollution as well as the people are experiencing cleaner air during the lockdown. one day curfew in india have resulted in lowest average levels of nitrogen dioxide and other pollutants such as pm 2.5 and pm 10 had also dropped significantly according to the experts at center of research on energy and clean air (crea) (crea, 2020).from energy aspects, we can expect a drop in power consumption due to lockdown as many companies, shops have been shut down. only residential load and industries running for supplying basic needs for the society would draw power from the grid. as a case study, we have analyzed the power consumption data for the southern region of india from 20 march to 29 march 2020 (posoco, 2020). the reason for choosing this period is that only during this period, india announced the complete lockdown in two stages. initially, on 22 march, one-day curfew was established and then, a complete lockdown for 21 subsequent days was executed from 25 march 2020. the graph below (fig. 3) shows the variation of power consumption in the southern region of india from 20 march to 29 march 2020. from the graph, we can notice a drop in power demand on 22 march corresponding to the one-day curfew and similarly, the power demand decreases during complete lockdown period which was initiated from 25 march. as a whole, on 20 march 2020, the power demand was 533.01 mega units (mu) whereas on 29 march 2020, the power demand was 394.67 mega units (mu) which is almost 26% reduction in the demand power.as people, we know how crucial role the technologies play in our day-to-day lives but the perspective of technology in assisting the mitigation of infection and in controlling the situation like the covid-19 pandemic is something we fail to notice. therefore, we authors conceptualized the aspects of technology utilization as various strategies to provide a helping hand in an epidemic state of affairs. for overcoming the epidemic circumstances, the contribution of various technologies can be identified as directly influencing and indirectly influencing. directly impacting technologies are the ones that help in framing strategies to reduce the infection, to assists in health care facilities and to support the society to function as one. in a society, it is found that the following sections: information communication, artificial intelligence and machine learning, supply chain are the sound areas where technologies are extensively used and explored whose application has been actively supporting the society in a pandemic situation.the covid -19 is a rapidly transmitting disease primarily due to human-to-human interaction and it is given a status of the pandemic. the necessary information like disease nature, how it is transmitted, involved risks, precautions and government policies are required to inform the people at the right time. for assisting this, mass media and social networking are crucial in transferring information from source to the user end. all the updates that are occurring related to pandemic were broadcasted globally via radio, television, newspapers and the internet. and social media carries special attention in spreading news across different platforms throughout the globe. now, arises the question of a communication challenge, how to effectively communicate, the extent of risk perception by the people after the info is communicated, the truthfulness of information perceived. we will answer these questions from the management aspect.the people in a pandemic-circumstances need to have clarity on government decisions, policies, travel bans, quarantine periods, and other such important updates. the communication should impart awareness among the public for such an emerging infection and should be clear regarding what the health care system knows and that does not about covid 19. the information must be updated as soon as verified by the authorities and at the same time, risk perception of the public should also be considered depending on the dose of the information. the challenge can be overcome by carefully addressing the information to the mass public in such a way that the information does not increase the panic among the people. for example, if the quarantine period is extended for an additional 2 weeks, then the information should also carry a solution for by how people can access the basic need. this will favor in reducing the panic among the people. when the update is small to report, the mass media can add the basic infection control information and other pieces of information which will impart awareness among people (ratzan et al., 2020) .the epidemic outbreak has gained broad media attention and is subjected to social media discourse which might have induced the risk perception among people which in turn would trigger their behavior (sjoberg, 2000; weinstein, 1988) . the optimistic people might be easy to control but the pessimistic people will have increased panic. this would result in ineffective cooperation from the public side for the health policies which will lead to grave danger (weinstein, 1988; slovic, 1987) . hence, the risk perception is a factor depending both on the information from the government end and also on the digesting capacity of whole society (huynh, 2020) .for effective risk communication, a simplified model of government-expert-public-healthcare system risk communication is presented in fig. 4 . this is an upgraded communication model of one presented by zhang et al., 2020 with a messagecentered approach.the model comprises of four interaction medium that is the healthcare systemexperts, governmentexperts, governmentpublic, and expertpublic. here the government is the supreme decision-maker in controlling the activities and the decision will have an impact on the public which can be observed from their behavior as feedback. the government-public communication is typically an external communication and the information to be conveyed must be complete and accurate. the public must remain optimistic to cooperate with the government and perceive the importance of the information conveyed by the government. the actual public response is compared with expected one and needs to be evaluated for effective communication (charlebois and summan, 2015) and often the government is frustrated by unrealistic public demands (covello et al., 1987) . also, the public's feedback would help the government to reshape its communication strategies (covello et al., 1987; european food safety authority, 2017) . the governmentexpert communication is the key for the whole risk management and decision-making policies and it acts as internal communication. the expert panel consists of expertise in professional knowledge, management, and technology. they are empowered by the government bodies and they give the data, evidence for the risk communication. they assess the risk and help in making a rational decision which best benefits the society (renn, 2008; savage, 1951; french, 2012) . experthealthcare system communication is the source for assessing the risk or potential impact the identified problem would cause and is regarded as internal communication. healthcare system is the one which accurately knows the seriousness of the epidemic, what health facilities it requires, how much time it needs, precaution steps to tackle the situation. this is communicated to experts which in turn to government to raise the fund towards the need, making decisions, or informing the public. the expertpublic communication is required to bridge the gap between them and it depicts an external communication. the public usually fails to understand the complexity of the risk analyzed or involved. thus, experts can play a role to convey the issue in a more simple and explicit way to make the public understand and act according to the facts (gesser-edelsburg et al., 2015) . in general, risk communication management should neither be too centralized nor be too de-centralized (conrow, 2003) .another important lesson learnt from affected countries like china and italy is that the risk communication should initiate as soon as possible from the instant the risk is identified and evaluated (lundgren and mcmakin, 2013) . for a case of an unknown disease, the communication should be abrupt without any sort of conclusions and once the proper shreds of evidences are gathered to prove it as a novel case, the information should be disclosed immediately to the public with appropriate remedial strategies. any delay in such instances will cause an unexpected consequence.even though effective communication is important, the false information would result in an unpredicted consequence. the filtration of false news especially in social media is impractical but steps have been taken consistently to reduce the same. moreover, it's a decentralized way of information communication and hence, its control on spreading false information is in the hands of users. it is highly recommended to the public to follow a reputed or official page where verified information is provided. it is reported that facebook blocked all the health pronouncements related to covid-19 except official sites and pinterest made all of its search related to covid 19 posts, created and approved by who (ratzan et al., 2020) . matteo cinelli et al. analyzed mainstream platforms such as instagram, twitter and youtube and also some regulated social media platforms and from their analysis, they suggest that the spreading of information is due to the interaction of specific patterns of a group of users engaged with the topic (cinelli et al., 2020) . thus, study related to social dynamics caused by the consumption of false content is needed to control the misinformation spreading among different mainstreams. a piece of evidence also shows that the high exposure to and sharing of fake news in the us has been identified to be concentrated on comparatively sub-sections of the population (guess et al., 2019; allcott and gentzkow, 2017) . another study suggests that the government and social media companies should develop and test interventions combined with independent behavioral scientists (van bavel et al., 2020).artificial intelligence is viewed as a revolution in this information era occurring all around the world and it possesses immense application. the introduction of information technology in the health sector has advanced the field in many aspects (alsuliman et al., 2020) . first, we will define the technical terms involved in the field of artificial intelligence.• artificial intelligence (ai) is the ability of the system to acquire the data, interpret, learn and apply the learnings to achieve the required outcome. • machine learning (ml) is the sub-domain of ai in which the computers can learn the relationship between given input and output data or within the input data alone and it is then tuned to interact with new data according to a different application. the nature of the learning can be supervised learning or unsupervised learning. • supervised learning is the process of training and testing. the computers are first trained with sample data and then they are used to predict the new data samples. • unsupervised learning is the process of learning from the data samples without supervising it and it consistently learns from the input data. • deep learning is the sub-domain of machine learning that analyzes high level features from raw input and handles large data processing sets. it is a neural based computational system. the fig. 5 illustrates the relationship among ai, ml and deep learning.the voluminous collection of health data from a variety of media such as genomic sequencing, electronic health records (ehrs) and wearables has resulted in biomedical big data (luo et al., 2016; toga et al., 2015; murdoch and detsky, 2013) . machine learning and rapidly developing deep learning-based technologies have exhibited their ability to convert these big data into a usable form in biomedical applications. in general, the implementation of ai and ml in the healthcare field have improved the welfare of the patients (lundberg et al., 2018; saria et al., 2010; marella et al., 2017) , improved quality of healthcare and effective diagnosis (kuo et al., 2019; rumsfeld et al., 2016; liang et al., 2019) , and also have lowered the healthcare costs (bates et al., 2014; özdemir and barshan, 2014; lo-ciganic et al., 2015) . though a huge amount of data is available, most of them are never used for building mathematical models that can be integrated with health care system (weintraub et al., 2018) and it is seen that only about 15% of the hospitals are currently using these technologies even then the usage accounts only for limited purposes (zeng and luo, 2017) . thus, the research on these active topics would be beneficial (rajkomar et al., 2019; beam and kohane, 2018) . in a pandemic situation, these technologies provide substantial support to the healthcare system. we can sort the role of these technologies in the health care system as prediction, diagnosis and treatment which will be discussed in the coming section and also other aspects of these technologies that helped in the pandemic situation is also presented.the widely used application of ai and ml are forecasting and classification of data. it is reported that an ai-based start-up bluedot uses an infection-surveillance system all around the clock which scans for more than 100,000 online articles across the globe in 65 languages for every 15 min. on 30 december 2019, the algorithm noted an unusual bump in 'pneumonia cases' with 'unknown reason' in wuhan, china and it alerted the outbreak of disease much before it has officially identified as covid 19 (diginomica, 2020) . thus, these eye-opening technologies can predict such epidemics and alert humanity to take the necessary advanced measures. companies like bluedot and metabiota employs natural language processing (nlp) algorithms to perform analysis of health-care reports in different languages and their predictive tools can also be employed to trace the potential infection hubs from the air-travel data. for instance, public report of metabiota listed the countries which include china, italy, iran and the us will likely to report new cases and the reality isn't differed much (mit technology review, 2020a). a data-based analysis by constantinos siettos et al. forecasted the outbreak in hubiei, china up to 29 february 2020, considering the data reported between 11 january and 10 february 2020. they forecasted that a minimum infection would be 45,000 and the death count will be around 2700. and the infected number was around 67,000 and the death count was in the 2800 s which is close (itn, 2020a) . from these incidents, we can infer that ai and ml can be used for predicting the situation and based on which we can act accordingly to reduce the intensity of outbreaks. data classification along with prediction is significant because it can give a clear idea of how to deal with the data. for example, during the outbreak, there is a demand for identifying the extent of infection cases from mild to critical illness. one such analysis was carried out by xiangao jiang et al. in which the ai framework was used to find the covid outbreak and the patients at critical illness based on the data from two hospitals in wenzhou, zhejiang, china . the predictive model developed was 70% to 80% accurate with the predicted critical cases. such an analysis would have helped the clinical infrastructure to meet the upcoming healthcare product demand. also, lishi wang et al. had developed a patient information-based algorithm to predict and estimate the mortality caused by covid-19 (wang et al., 2020a) .numerous factors influence the clinical outcome of the patient which includes the disease, the treatment methods and its effect, patient's intrinsic characteristics (noorbakhsh et al., 2019) . supervised learning techniques are employed in prognosis and biomarkers prediction. ml approaches are used in the design of prognostic markers include regression models and classification and regression trees (zlobec, 2005) . artificial neural networks (ann) are employed in the analysis of marker studies (zafeiris et al., 2018; bertolaccini et al., 2017) . unsupervised learning is widely used in identifying biological samples and classifying them. it is useful in identifying homogeneous subgroups within the heterogeneous clinical outcomes. this type of learning is helpful in treating breast cancer patients (perou et al., 2000; sorlie et al., 2001; dai et al., 2015) . dente et al. used machine learning algorithms to recognize the predictive profiles of bacteremia and pneumonia in the patients treated for combat wounds (dente et al., 2017) and another utilized ml to design preliminary test models whose role is to predict whether a patient would be tested positive for a specific respiratory virus (mai and krauthammer, 2017) . ai and ml have been significantly boosting the discoveries in genetics and molecular medicine field which also impact on developing vaccines (hamet and tremblay, 2017) . so, the role of these technologies in prediction and classification of data is vital in any situation and also one should not blindly believe the outcomes. the predicted outcomes should be evaluated along with cognitive thinking to yield a better solution.artificial intelligence application in identifying the infected people and disease is phenomenal in the healthcare system and would transform the medical practice. the implementation of ai in visual tasks has significantly growing in the medical field. machine-learning models designed to examine the medical images to detect the disease at an early stage is revolutionary. this is fueled by large digital dataset and deep learning algorithms to train themselves to attain a specific task. the potential application where this vision-based learning can be implemented is radiology, ophthalmology, pathology and dermatology (kulkarni et al., 2019) . the ai is employed in the diagnosis of melanoma (fuller et al., 2016) , dementia (bhagyashree et al., 2017) , diabetic retinopathy (gargeya and leng, 2017) , tuberculosis (lakhani and sundaram, 2017) , and glaucoma (kim et al., 2017) .in a circumstance of rapidly spreading disease like covid-19, the screening of public to pathogenic testing is essential to mitigate the infection. but it is a time-consuming process and also accuracy matters. a study by shuai wang et al. developed a clinical diagnosis for covid-19 based on radiographical changes in ct images by employing deep learning method. the method attained an internal evaluation accuracy of 89.5% and an external validation showed an accuracy of 85.2% (wang et al., 2020b) . companies like delft imaging and thirona together developed a cad4covid screening solution built on the cad4tb software. this is now employed by ministries of health and tuberculosisfocused institutions for screening covid-19 (itn, 2020b) .artificial intelligence role in treatment is put to limited use and they can help to frame novel methods for diagnosing and monitoring of diseases which will eventually simplify the task for healthcare professionals. for instance, researchers in japan utilized ai for sequencing genomes of cancer in order to find the patients having hematological malignancies and also to identify the appropriate drug details (tojo, 2017) . heinson et al. used ml in reverse vaccinology whose purpose is to distinguish the bacterial protective antigens (bpas) from nonbacterial protective antigens and this would boost the progress of developing vaccines (heinson et al., 2017) . studies also suggest that ai will assist in the drug development field to analyze the possible outcomes in using a clinical trial drug (doyle et al., 2015) and also to identify the response in the patient body (vidyasagar, 2015; hall et al., 2017 ). another problem in the medical field of intensive care is the individual ventilator setting for each patient. steven ganzert et al. presented a solution for this problem using ml based on data obtained from intensive care. they analyzed various methods of determining pressure-volume curves in artificially ventilated patients suffering from adult respiratory distress syndrome (ards) and implemented ml in recognizing the method for the given pressure-volume curve and also in predicting the volume with the given pressure, method and patient data (ganzert et al., 2002) . this would help in assisting the treatment of respiratory illness of the patient and have huge potential in future.machine learning has the ability to serve the work of clinicians by processing and organization huge pile of patient data stored in electronic health records and is implemented in clinical applications which include identifying patients having high risk who needs icu (escobar et al., 2016) , detecting early symptoms leading to lung cancer (ardila et al., 2019) , determining the respiratory condition of the patient from chest x-rays (rajpurkar et al., 2017) . thus, ai and ml enhances the performance of diagnosis, prognosis and also in management decisions in healthcare domain (ben-israel et al., 2019) . also, deep-learning techniques have a significant impact on the state-of-art speech recognition (hinton et al., 2012) and visual recognition techniques (krizhevsky et al., 2017) which has a potentially bigger role in future. these deep learning methods employ neural networks to predict the relationship between input and output data. another potential aspect of ml is its ability to reduce the service and product costs, automation (yang, 2020) , and better customer services (lee and shin, 2020) . intelligent fault diagnosis (ifd) is another domain of ml where models are designed to diagnosis the machine fault and it frames a relationship between the health state of the machines and growing monitoring data (lei et al., 2020) . this would help human labor substantially and automatically detects the health status of the machine. these are the budding technologies that can help a number of sectors for the betterment of society.in covid situation, such technologies have already assisted humanity to encounter the circumstances in a much better way. a data analytics company, stratifyd situated in charlotte, north carolina employs ai to scan the posts on the social media streams such as facebook and twitter and cross-references the same with descriptions of diseases extracted from official sources such as national institutes of health, world organization for animal health etc. (mit technology review, 2020a). ramesh raskar and team at mit media lab developed an app called private kit: safe paths that would track one's travelling path and can see whether the person has come in contact with an infected individual without knowing who it is. by means of this one can perceive whether the infected person is near them along with other features (mit technology review, 2020b). also, other dimension of security issues prevails and apart from it, this app alerts us where the infection has been and might make users believe that the certain places aren't safe. these can be effective only when the people use it and tracking coronavirus hotspots have proven to be effective in countries like south korea.artificial intelligence is also indulged in creating tools for patients rather than only focusing on clinicians such as chatbots. they belong to special application of ai and employs natural language processing (nlp) to interpret with the general medical literacy and diagnostics . these chatbots can be extended as an application to act as an interface medium for the people to buy basic necessities which can allot timings and order numbers to collect their billed things during quarantine period such that it will assist in maintaining social distancing. the table 2 summarizes the reported al and ml technologies that are utilized for controlling covid-19.another important aspect of the use of ai and ml in extensive search and gathering of scientific literature related to covid and making them accessible. a report says that the several organizations had released covid-19 open research dataset that contains over 24,000 peerreviewed research papers from various reputed journals and also from sources like medrxiv and biorxiv where researchers can publish nonpeer reviewed preprint papers. it provides an extensive collection of scientific literature regarding current pandemic and updated as and when new research is submitted (mit technology review, 2020c) . this is the situation of life and death for numerous patients and improving the healthcare, research on the coronavirus, its treatment is the need of hour. scientists are racing against time to answer crucial questions about the virus and to fasten the development of vaccines. and these are the little help we can contribute to enhancing their work.the supply chain includes the production and distribution of a product. here, we will focus on products that are prime important in encountering an epidemic situation. as the active cases of infection is raising, it is necessary that the health care system must have a required number of medical equipment, testing facility, protection equipment. in case of covid-19, the infection mainly spreads through tiny droplets carried in air or any surface from the cough produced by the infected person. so as a preventive measure, masks and hand sanitizers are required in large amount to satisfy the need of the public. also, to treat infected persons, hospitals need ventilators in a massive quantity. to meet such demands, several solutions have been carried out. dyson ltd., a british tech company has partnered with the technology partnership (ttp) designed a brand-new ventilator named covent and it meets the standards of the clinical specification (techcrunch, 2020). it might be challenging for industries using complex technologies for manufacturing their products to adapt for producing ventilators but several automotive industries have successfully repurposed their factory to produce different products to strengthen the health care system. brewers and distillers were restructured their production system to produce hand sanitizer and alcohol-based disinfectants and other suppliers purchases new injection molds for producing test kits (autodesk-redshift, 2020). fashion brands such as gucci, prada, zara have transformed their production lines to make millions of masks (ns medical devices, 2020). all these infer the adaptable nature of manufacturing technology used and their crisis response is satisfying the health care system needs. also, 3d printing techniques have provided support by manufacturing some key small parts. for instance, isinnova, an italian 3d printing company was able to 3d print a valve designed by decathlon that connected the mask to the conventional hospital respirator (world economic forum, 2020b). in the hospital, purchasing of medicines, stocking of medicinal products, handling waste, all have to be managed by health care workers. as the number of patients rises, it is better to apply ai technology to handle the data (jordona et al., 2019) .in the view from people's end, technologies such as telehealth services have been helpful. and in this pandemic, the health system is reported to have an exponential increase in the use of telemedicine technology (stat, 2020) and the health system is also using technologies such as chatbots, video consultations etc. to minimize the load on the hospital. during the quarantine period, there exists a problem of getting basic needs for the people in order to survive especially food ingredients. this can be dealt with by opening the markets at a specific range of time in which limited people at a time can buy things they need by strictly following social distancing. for severely affected area, the supplies can be provided by the workers with protective equipment. we propose a system that can be effectively followed by the people to support social distancing. initially, the information of available markets in an area should be collectively gathered and uploaded in a website run by some private, public or government agencies. the people can access the website and choose the market and then can give a request for their need. the people will be allotted a slot with specific time range (like between 9 and 10 am) along with a token number corresponding to the slot. the shopkeeper will be in touch with the website request and act accordingly to pack the listed things. after verifying the token number and slot timings, the things can be handover to the buyer. by implementing this, one can run the market throughout the day and this will help the mobs to effectively follow the social distancing. for the areas prone to serve infection, service may be extended to deliver them to the address provided. the fig. 6 represents the workflow for the proposed supply chain system. also, robots can assist the healthcare workers in providing food, taking care of the needs of the patients and other related works within the hospital. this can help in reducing the frontline healthcare workers from the possibility of getting infected. countries like china, india have been implemented robots for sanitizing the hospital, delivering foods and medicines (the economic times, 2020).technological strategies that support the society are the one which helps the people to follow quarantine, social distancing effectively in order to reduce the spreading of the infection and in turn helps in controlling the pandemic. this is represented in fig. 7 . when analyzing such technologies, we found three domains because of which people can cope up with their routine life following social distancing. these domains are: work from home, distance learning and surveillance which will be discussed under the following sub-sections.the covid-19 spreads easily and moreover, an infected person doesn't know whether he or she is infected since the people might be sick with the virus ranging from 1 to 14 days before developing the symptoms (who, 2020c). so, if the society functions as usual, the spreading will be at its peak and hence, every company which doesn't necessarily need the presence of employees at the working spot is shut down during quarantine period. and these companies can get the job done by implementing work from home strategy which is widely employed all over the world. the basic requirements for an individual to work from home are a computing device, internet accessibility and cam if needed. meeting and conferences can be conducted remotely through video conference. with the advancement of communication technology and network connectivity, remote working has been functioning well. when considering security, the calls can be encrypted and firewall software can be used.the rapid spreading nature of covid-19 has also caused to shut down all educational institutes. so, students staying at home needs to be addressed with some solution to continue their learning. e-learning represents an innovative form of education which provides rich learning experience. e-learning is a web-based technology where sources can be provided by variety of means (zoroja et al., 2014; babu and reddy, 2015) . the countries leading the chart of online education include us, uk, india, china, south korea (edtechreview, 2020). many platforms have been developed for distance learning such as google classroom, coursera, udacity etc. in covid situation, coursera have offered many free courses to enhance the learning experience of the students from home. numerous initiatives have encouraged the elearning during the quarantine period to keep the students in line with education. in certain cases, the online session was live-streamed through video conferencing by the professor for a group of students. all these technologies have indirectly contributed in helping people to stay at home. also, online competitions are conducted by the fig. 6 . workflow of proposed supply chain system. government in the covid topic to stimulate young minds to think about a solution in some countries like india.keeping in track the infected person and their travel history would be helpful in controlling the spread. many governments follow different methods to achieve this. in china, cctv cameras were installed at the apartment door for those need to be in 14-day quarantine to make sure that they follow it. in singapore, the government launched a mobile application namely, tracetogether. it utilizes the bluetooth technology of the cellphones to identify any potential carries of coronavirus that they might have been in closer contact with other people. whereas in hong kong, specific persons were made to wear a wristband that is synced with smartphone app so that if they leave the place of quarantine, it would alert the authorities (cnbc, 2020). in india, people in the southern state of kerala have been tracked to determine who have been in close contact with an infected person through a mixture of cctv camera footage and mobile phone location data. while in south korea, authorities employ cell phone technology and satellite technology to track down the individuals (thomson reuters foundation news, 2020). bluetooth technology is more precise than gps technology as it can be located up to six-foot precision at a given time. also, drone technology has been helpful in surveillance. they can be used to tell the public to a wear mask and other awareness sentences. they are also used to deliver medicines, and food to the public (cnbc, 2020).the previous two-section deals with technologies that are typically implemented to fight against the novel coronavirus infection and are categorized as technological strategies that are employed to control the pandemic and support the society. in this section, the viable technologies and emerging technologies that have the potential to help in encountering this pandemic situation is discussed. these prospective technologies include artificial intelligence, machine learning, internet of things (iot), drone technology and robotics. even if they are already implemented, their potential is tapped only to a small extent.these technologies aren't new to the world and have already achieved countless tasks. in healthcare, there have been many applications from interpreting medical data, text, images, bioinformatics to intelligent machines that behave like human and also, they can understand human languages to aid in making a flawless decision (murdoch and detsky, 2013; misawa et al., 2018) . it improves the quality of the healthcare services at lower cost, train medical students and can give guidance to the doctors in effective diagnosis (jiang et al., 2017; . regarding scanning technologies such as computed tomography (ct), x-rays, magnetic resonance imaging (mri), artificial intelligence plays a special role in interpreting and diagnosing them accurately. these ai technologies is used less in the health sector, and here we will explain the prospective areas in a healthcare facility where these technologies could be implemented such that will assist in strengthening the health care system to fight against novel coronavirus.radiology: it is the field where ai can be trained to diagnose the scanned images of the person and can infer whether the person is positive to a certain disease or not. it is reported that the use of ai in ct scans for diagnosing coronavirus and is proven accurate enough (wang et al., 2020a (wang et al., , 2020b itn, 2020b) . this is the field where the time-consumed for report generation after testing through scans can be reduced tremendously by utilizing ai in the interpretation of the scanned image with minimized errors.when compared to other areas, ai is limitedly used in surgical fields. moreover, surgeons and doctors are efficiently capturing the data and integrating them with ai and it has a promising future for providing quality healthcare by assisting doctors during surgery because it promotes evidence-based clinical decision to carry-out the workflow. it might not possible at present to implement ai in the surgical field to treat covid-19 infected patients. but at least, in the near future, we can make use of ai to treat the patient and also, for adjusting ventilator parameters for individual patients (ganzert et al., 2002) .ai technology is proficient for clinical trials and provides effective monitoring to attain a precise result. medicine and vaccine development are some crucial areas where ai can be implemented to accelerate the process. further, the effects of a drug when used in a human body can be predicted with the given input data.ai can be effectively utilized to maintain medical records and perform general administration works in the health care facility. in an epidemic situation, ai can support the hospital management systems to automate the customer and patient data storage, maintaining the medical records and other essential details. they can track and analyze the patient data and can provide real-time data to the healthcare workers as well as to patient's family members . these are small efforts which can deliberately ease the work for health care workers. the table 3 shows the various potential applications of ai that can be implemented to diagnose, treat, predict and make decisions regarding covid-19.apart from these aspects, ai can be helpful in making wise decisions in many situations. furthermore, it can manage patient bookings and provide a reminder to the doctors (buch et al., 2018; kulikowski, 2019; upadhyay and khandelwal, 2019) . these technologies also led to the development of virtual interaction with doctors through various platforms. thus, by deploying ai in the medical field, the manual load for doctors can be reduced such that they can focus on planning, decision making and identifying treatment (patel et al., 2009; wahl et al., 2018) .the emergence of the internet of things (iot) has influenced every field and the advancement has been skyrocketed in recent years (dohr et al., 2010; miorandi et al., 2012; chen et al., 2014) . iot in healthcare is expected to influence a substantial improvement and hence, enhancing the quality of healthcare service to humans (domingo, 2012; yan et al., 2015; fan et al., 2014) . these technologies are of utmost use when the machine to machine communications and automation is involved. according to the study (ying et al., 2020) , in china, one of strategy utilized to resolve drug delivery issues during the epidemic period was by implementing iot based service platform (fig. 8 indicates the workflow) . the platform generated orders automatically based on the data of previous sales from the hospital information system (his). this can be updated and submitted by the pharmacists and then, the orders are sent to suppliers from where the medicines are delivered within a stipulated time. this had mitigated the spreading of infection during drug purchase and also, saved the resources and labor.drones are vehicles which propel using aerodynamic forces that can be remotely controlled or autonomously functional (rosser et al., 2018) . drones are primarily been used in the military and the application is extended to industry, agriculture, construction, public monitoring and surveillance, ecosystem monitoring for any degradation, delivery of goods and in medical purposes (rosser et al., 2018; greaves et al., 2019) . in this epidemic situation, it is clear that people should stay indoors and big data analytics enhancement, effective interoperability is essential in smart cities (ullah et al., 2020) 7 chatbots chatbot is an interactive patient and doctor communication platform that helps the user to diagnose their condition based on their described symptomstraining the bot with appropriate data and its accuracy in diagnosis of disease or condition of the patients many models to achieve effective decision making (stevic et al., 2019) if they come out to get basic needs, they should strictly follow social distancing to break the chain of infection. thus, the drone can assist in two ways: one is the transportation of goods or basic needs with the proper network of communication between the public and the supplier and the other is the surveillance.this can be viewed from two perspectives: delivering medicines, goods, samples to the health care system from the local hub (poljak and sterbenc, 2019) . another aspect includes delivering basic needs such as food items and medicines. for the healthcare system, masks, disinfectants and other lightweight goods can be transported from local hub on a truck-and-drone delivery system which is claimed to be effective (crisan and nechita, 2019) . drones in logistics and first aid are regarded as emerging technologies with enormous potential and many experiments were investigated to analyze such possibilities (cision pr newswire, 2016) . also, in populous countries, collection of samples for testing can be done in localized approach, reducing the load on the healthcare system space and the samples can be sent to nearby testing facility by adopting drone technology for faster transportation. certain reports showed the viability of transportation of biological samples by the deployment of the drone at room temperature and it was seen that no considerable influence on the accuracy of hematology, coagulation analysis and routine chemistry (amukele et al., 2015; amukele et al., 2016) . also, drones have been successful in delivering life-saving materials to the healthcare in a stimulated austere territory in which the vehicle access is far-fetched. drones have accurately delivered medical supplies weighing 4.5 kgs to the target within a one-mile range quickly than any other means (mesar et al., 2018) . another potential drone technology includes 'lab-on-a-drone' concept which is especially suitable for regions where the laboratories are located at remote places and the regions where delivery of diagnostic instruments is arduous. in this 'lab-on-a-drone' the sample preparation strategies and molecular diagnostic platforms are coupled with the drone and it also helps in reducing the time taken for testing the sample (priye et al., 2016) . this usage of drone technology approach can be also used in supplying food and basic needs in especially highly infected area to prevent people coming outside. but it requires a proper system of getting the public requirements which should be communicated to the supplier from which the delivery of products will happen from a localized hub. though this involves many complications mostly due to public engagement, it might be promising in near-future (the new york times, 2018). the development of information and communication technologies (ict) has increased the possibilities for implementing drone technology with the aid of telecommunication.surveillance: drones are best suited for surveillance application and are in practice for a while (vacca and onishi, 2017; mishra et al., 2020) . in covid-19 circumstances surveillance is particularly needed for monitoring the public whether they are following the lockdown and social distancing and also for imparting awareness through drone communication. for this purpose, a commercially available drone can be utilized to monitor society. this can help patrols to focus on other important issues that need action. the table 4 shows the potential applications of drone technology that can be implemented during the pandemic situation.robotics can provide assistance in an innumerable way and it is a proven technology in many respects. nursing and healthcare receiving are a labor-intensive work and robotics in the healthcare system is an encouraging solution. with the support of artificial intelligence and machine learning algorithms, a robot can learn itself from massive data and acquire immense intelligence. these robots can be more effective in providing diagnosis and treatment when compares to a human caregiver. further, mobile robots have tremendous advantages in healthcare facilities (wan et al., 2019; yi et al., 2008) . in an epidemic outbreak, the healthcare facilities will be flourished with patients. in such situations, the help of robots is highly favorable and it can assist in data analysis to treatment. in diagnosis, a well-trained robot can perceive information from the scans and can interpret whether the person has got a certain disease. this can also be applied in detecting coronavirus by training the robot with many infected individual ct scan images. a simplified robot for communication purposes, or for providing foods for patients, even scanning every person working in health care facility and asking them to wear masks or gloves if they weren't would provide a great support for healthcare individuals. in an advanced level, robot to identify stress levels of health care workers using facial recognition to monitor their health status will be fortunate. to improve healthcare services, effective communication between the robots and data centers are required. hence, a concerned framework needs to be designed for maintaining edge computing and centralized computing which is essential for both robotics and communication communities (liu et al., 2017; sahni et al., 2017; wan et al., 2018) . finally, a robot is good at (ying et al., 2020) .performing repetitive tasks with less error relative to humans and will strengthen the healthcare facilities.the development of information technology has created widespread application in various means and is rapidly growing in the presence of internet. further, the smartphones have paved a way to access these technologies in much simpler way. in the present world, smartphones play phenomenal role as they are embedded with interactive high-quality displays, high resolution cameras, widespread connectivity to the internet and supporting for various software. mobile application software is vital since they have the potential to connect with the world from just a hand sized device and can perform various tasks. in the pandemic situation, they can assist in number of ways ranging from offering mobile health (m-health) facility to helping farmers in logistics. m-health applications can provide clinical assistance at any time and any location thus, overcoming the geological restrictions and it helps the healthcare workers to provide optimum service via cellular technology (pinem et al., 2020) . as the world is heading towards 5g cellular communication, the mhealth application would get a tremendous boost. another perspective regarding healthcare lies in giving therapies and a study reported the use of mobile application for hand therapy (valdes et al., 2020) . mobile applications also act as a guidance for many activities such as for performing exercise, cooking, monitoring the habits, task management and what not. integration of technologies in market, production and supply chain handling can be effectively improved by the development of mobile applications which also influences the digitalization to some extent. farmers are mostly affected by the logistics problem in pandemic crisis. proper connectivity with the market with the aid of government can help the farmers to identify the demand location for their products and the subsequent supply chain requirements can be met. all these can be controlled through a mobile application effectively (nuanmeesri, 2019) . as an advanced application, the usage of augmented reality is encouraged. even shopping can be assisted with the utilization of augmented reality during lockdown period (mclean and wilson, 2019).here we will provide some essential guidelines to follow for various social bodies to encounter the novel coronavirus. these instructions and guidelines have been extracted from the who official website (who, 2020d) and also, we present our suggestive guidelines along with it.general instructions on preventive measures (do's and don'ts):• frequent cleaning of hands with alcohol-based hand rub or soap and water, and the wearing of the mask are the only and simple preventive measures that can prevent the infection of the novel coronavirus. the disinfectant will pave a way for rapid killing of the coronavirus. • know the procedures for wearing, using and disposing of the mask. it is advisable to wear a mask only when exposed to an infected environment or when taking care of an infected person. and it is fundamental to cover your mouth or nose when you are coughing or sneezing. • the common symptoms that an affected individual experience is dry cough, tiredness and fever. the only best way to diagnosis covid-19 disease is through a laboratory test. hence, if symptoms are perceived, voluntary approach for testing is entertained. • frequent consumption of alcohol could potentially increase the health problems. • thermal scanners are not an effective method for diagnosis of covid-19 because it can only detect people having higher temperature i.e. fever and moreover, people might remain infected for 1-14 days before developing actual symptoms. thus, it cannot detect people who are infected yet are not sick with a fever.guidelines for government:• create awareness, educate and communicate with the public actively through risk communication and communication engagement. • find active case by testing, trace the infected person history of travel, quarantine of contacts and isolation of infected person. adapt an existing surveillance system to monitor the infection spread. • test all the individuals who meet the suspected case definition.• follow the government and coordinate to fight against covid-19.show support, kindness and compassion for those who are affected and avoid the social stigma. • get exposed to adequate information about covid-19. too much watching, listening and reading the news about the situation can fig. 9 . five moments of hand hygiene for health care workers (who, 2020e). make one feel anxious or distressed. also, focus on facts and avoid misinformation or rumors. get information only from trusted sources (who or local health authority platform). • protect yourself by adopting proper preventive measures and also help others who are in need. find a way to enhance the positivity among the family and society. • honor healthcare workers, clinicians and others supporting in this pandemic fight which also includes you.guidelines for healthcare workers:• healthcare workers should follow established protocols and safety procedures to diagnose, triage and treat the patients. • make sure that the admitted patients should have covered their nose and mouth when sneezing or coughing. also, patients with suspected covid-19 should be provided with masks while they are waiting. • follow hand hygiene after contact with respiratory secretions. the fig. 9 shows the five moments of hand hygiene for health care workers • maintaining your mental health is as significant as your physical health. try to stay connected to loved ones through digital communications and also with your colleagues. take necessary rests. afterall, this is a marathon and not a sprint.the outbreak of coronavirus 2019 (covid-19) has widely affected people all over the world and radically changed the routine functions of humanity. as a species on this earth, we have to use our gifted intelligence to encounter this novel coronavirus. using technology, proper governance, healthcare service, coordinated public behavior can help a lot in mitigating the risk. the support of technology in handling this situation is irreplaceable. so, in this section, we will summarize the key aspects of each section and analyze the current challenges associated with it.the first section presents the technological changes that the society and the environment have been through from different aspects. the healthcare facilities have rapidly been modified for increasing their patient intake capacity and also improving the telehealth facilities to reduce the load on the hospitals. the testing methods and facilities are technologically enhanced to diagnose a large number of test samples in this pandemic situation. government role in a society is important and it satisfies the needs of the healthcare system and simultaneously, helps the public in accessing the basic needs and monitoring them. public viewpoint is to coordinate with the government and follow the social distancing and other preventive measures correctly. industries have aligned themselves to help in meeting the demands of the healthcare system and regarding energy aspects, the power consumption by the people during the lockdown was significantly lower when compared to the time of before lockdown period. other insights about the economical viewpoint of the society and environmental changes involving a drop in air pollutants are discussed.the core investigation is presented in the sections of technological strategies to control the pandemic and support the society during pandemic which is followed by viable prospective technologies. the technological strategies that aids in controlling the pandemic play around information communication, ai, ml and supply chain technologies that have a direct influence on mitigating the spreading. when considering communication, information transfer to the public is much more important to control the mass public for which media and social media creates a pathway. then, risk perception by the people will affect the societal response to the pandemic. hence, proper communication should be conveyed by the government to the people and it is mandatory to eliminate the rumors or false information that is potentially taking place in social media streams for which many steps have been taken by companies and government jointly. artificial intelligence and machine learning are the promising technologies that can help in numerous ways in tackling the situation. they are being adopted in the prediction of outbreaks, and in the healthcare systems for the diagnosis of disease through scans, classification of medical data, handling big data of patients, assisting in treatments and so on. other aspects where ai is implemented in covid-19 period are for supporting chatbots, developing apps for tracking infected people and in creating a huge database for accumulating all published sars-cov-2 related researches. in this situation, supply chain technologies address the production and transportation issues of prior products required by the health care system. this explains how different industries adapted their production lines to produce ventilators, masks, hand-sanitizers and other products. and this is possible only by use of technology. further, supply chain of the basic needs required by the public also has some vacant space where tech can be implemented to avoid crowding in certain places. the technological strategies supporting the society during pandemic focusses on the implemented strategies that are helpful in supporting the public, government and health care system to make them stay at home. these strategies include work from home, distance learning and surveillance. work from home and distance learning gives people some purposes for staying at home whereas the surveillance technologies help the government to monitor the general public and track the same. the section, viable prospective technologies deals with the potential technologies that are used less and their utilization can effectively enhance the various processes in healthcare facilities, surveillance and in avoiding direct contact with the infected persons. these technologies comprise of ai, ml and iot, drone technology and robot technology. the various application of ai has been listed in the table along with the discussion of the possibility of their use in the current situation. also, iot is a crucial technology in automation which can assist in supply chain technologies to transform it to be completely automatic with the given requirements. drone and robot technology are high tech field which had tremendously improved in recent years. drone technology will be most appropriate for applications such as the delivery of goods, samples, surveillance and so on. whereas, the robot technologies can have a significant impact on the healthcare facilities in numerous aspects which have been discussed briefly. and finally, we provide some essential guidelines for various social bodies to mitigate the spreading of the infection.the emergence of covid-19 has pushed the limits of the technologies and many alternatives have been proposed to encounter the pandemic. this had accelerated the innovations taking place in technologies in almost every field. the online experience that the people come across during this period might have a long-term influence in online shopping, e-learning, digital payments, telehealth facilities and mobile entertainment. the core technologies that would get a boost include artificial intelligence, machine learning, internet of things, location and navigation technologies, augmented and virtual reality, drone technology, robotics, cloud and entertainment technologies. the situation has caused to search for alternatives and innovative technologies. for instance, the ban of biometrics for the welfare of the people during pandemic have a potential to shift the tech to other options such as facial and iris recognition technologies (gcn, 2020) . the datadriven applications and responses regarding the ongoing situation will encourage the development of it systems to enhance the tracking, detection and analysis. the telehealth technologies have been improved to handle telehealth consults which have gone up multiple folds since the pandemic. global quarantine has put a strain on the maintenance of energy and water demands and other utilities. hence, these utilities need monitoring of the variations in the usage patterns and thus, the supply can be redirected wherever required. apart from it, these data can be useful to take advance actions in future outbreaks.the innovations are rolling out using various prospective technologies and many start-ups have come up with different solutions. but these need robust testing before deployment in a practical environment. apart from these, the government has to give approval for such innovations (financial express, 2020) . it is neither possible to survive with existing technologies nor to analyze the full potential of such an innovative approach as the infection will get worse with the delay. hence, there should be a balance in considering these innovations. some reports suggest that digital transformation will accelerate and the cybersecurity risk might be a problem within a shorter term (cio, 2020) . also, the adopted changes might have an influence on how we will live and work in near-future.to conclude, it is certain that humanity will fight its best and heal from the pandemic. but the concern is regarding how soon we can eradicate this viral infection meaning that the humanity is racing with time. thanks to the healthcare workers and researchers. the utilization of technologies will strengthen the defense line against the infection but it is purely in the hands of humans to mitigate the spread. the government should deploy tech-based solutions. apart from the technologies, management and governance are key factors in facing this crucial situation and how we deal with it, will showcase the intelligence of human species. the technology will be a pioneering weapon in this war against the unexpected.this work did not receive any external funding.credit authorship contribution statement rajvikram madurai elavarasan:conceptualization, data curation, formal analysis, writing -original draft, supervision, writing -review & editing.rishi pugazhendhi:conceptualization, methodology, visualization, investigation, writing -original draft.the authors declare no conflict of interest.we are witnessing the spread of the most deadly and devastating virus attack of the last one hundred years. this virus is known as the novel corona virus or sars-cov-2 and the disease resulting from this virus has been named by as covid-19 by [1] , where a historical background of the corona virus can also be found. figure 1 shows a visual of a virus.covid-19 was first detected in december 2019 in wuhan city of the peoples republic of china. as the virus spread, the world health organization (who) [1] declared it to be a pandemic on 12th march 2020 [2] , signaling the significance of its global spread. during the first 4 months of spread, this deadly disease has infected about three million people resulting in about two hundred thousand deaths in more than 209 countries. these figures are mostly of the hospital admissions of a handful countries as reported by the media. real numbers would never be known. the united states of america has the maximum number of casualties as well as infections, followed by italy, spain, france and the united kingdom. these figures are largely reported by a handful of developed countries. however, there is limited information of fatalities reported from developing countries, many of which do not have adequate testing facilities and/or hospital beds to treat all the patients. therefore, the extent of actual damage by covid-19 would be limited in its accuracy.undoubtedly covid-19 is causing the most severe economic crisis after the great depression of 1930s. as the virus continues to cause havoc, the extent of the global damage resulting from it cannot be counted until it subsides. in this article we shall discuss damage which it has already caused to different walks of life and speculate further damage it could inflict.in recent years we have witnessed an increased growth and spread of communicable and highly contagious viruses and diseases like ebola [3] , hiv aids [4] , swine influenza (h1n1, h1n2) [5] , various strands of flu [6] , severe acute respiratory syndrome (sars) [7] and middle eastern respiratory syndrome (mers) [8] in africa, the middle east and several other parts of the world. wiping, cleaning and treatment of some of these viruses is a very challenging job [9] , and so it is very difficult to assess the spread of some of these viruses (e.g. ebola) which could create havoc in the society.in this article we shall analyze issues associated with and impact of covid-19 in different walks of life. in particular we shall describe the devastation and damage it has caused to economic, social, cultural, and political fabric of the society globally, particularly in different regions. indeed some industries have benefited from the crisis caused by covid-19, which we shall also analyze.the coronavirus disease covid-19 is a highly transmittable and pathogenic viral infection caused by severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2) ( fig. 1) , which is resulting in a heavy toll on people's lives and colossal economic damage. some reports (e.g. [10] .) suggest that covid-19 would ''cause the worst recession since the great depression (of 1930s). it is said the pandemic had plunged the world into a ''crisis like no other''. although covid-19 is being dubbed to be very destructive to the human lives and economies, it is currently not as lethal as many other pandemics have been. there have been more destructive epidemics in the past. the most deadly of all pandemics occurred in 1918-19, which is known as the ''spanish'' influenza pandemic causing acute illness in about thirty percent of the world's population and claiming the lives of at least 40 million people [11] . according to [12] , it caused up to one hundred million deaths. but the best estimates seem to be fifty million [13] .let us glance at some of the earlier pandemics and diseases. the archaeological sites called ''hamin mangha'' and miaozigou, in north-eastern china suggest that it was an epidemic which devastated the entire region. around 430 b.c., an epidemic in athens went on for about 5 years killing an estimated one hundred thousand people [12] . during 165-180 a.d., the antonine plague, is thought have killed more than five million people in the roman empire. during 541-542 the bubonic plague, named as justinian (after the name of the emperor) killed up to one tenth of the world's population [12] . the black death during 1346-53 killed more than half of the population of europe [12] . during 1545-48, the cocoliztli epidemic took the lives of fifteen million people of mexico and central america. the great plague of london during 1965-66 killed about one hundred thousand people, and the great plague of marseille during 1720-1723 wiped out thirty percent of the population of the area [12] . the russian plague during 1770-1772 took the lives of about one hundred thousand people in and around moscow, and flu pandemic during 1889-1890 took the lives of about one million people globally [12] .the 2009 swine flu pandemic was caused by a new strain of h1n1 that originated in mexico in the spring of 2009 before spreading to the rest of the world. in one year, the virus infected as many as 1.4 billion people across the globe and killed between 151,700 and 575,400 people, according to the centre for disease control and prevention (cdc). a vaccine for the h1n1 virus that caused the swine flu is now included in the annual flu vaccine. ebola ravaged west africa between 2014 and 2016, with 28,600 reported cases and 11,325 deaths. there are other pandemics and diseases including the philadelphia yellow fever of 1793, american polio epidemic of 1916, for which a vaccine was developed in 1954, and the middle east respiratory syndrome coronavirus (mers-cov) of 2012 which has accounted for thousands of lives.covid-19 appears to cause dry cough, high fever and ultimately chest congestion and pain resulting in breathlessness if not controlled. the source and causes of sars-cov-2 are not known as a certainty. however [14] asserts that the virus is found in bats but what causes its transfer to humans is not known. another study [15] claims that the virus has jumped from snakes to humans.to date there is no vaccine or medicine to prevent or treat covid-19. however, many health centres are treating patients with some antibiotics (erythromycin), and chloroquine or hydroxychloroquine. these drugs neither provide a definitive treatment nor are approved by who or any credible organization. nevertheless [16] claims, based on clinical trials in china, chloroquine phosphate is apparently shown to be effective with acceptable safety level to cure pneumonia in covid-19 patients. according to [17] , combination of the chinese medicine, interferon, lopinavir, ritonavir and corticosteroids was helpful in the recovery of 50 out of 51 patients. according to [18] , administration of moxifloxacin, lopinavir, interferon, and methylprednisolone to non-icu patients was successful in treating icu patients-26 patients were discharged from the intensive care unit (icu) and sixteen were relived from the hospital. there are some unconfirmed success stories of treatment of covid-19 with herbal ingredients like black seeds, ginger, and honey, etc. these ingredients are indeed recognised as good for health in general. pain relieving medicines like panadol are of course used to bring down the body temperature caused by virus. in severe cases, when patients cannot breathe by themselves, ventilators have to be used. there are many myths surrounding the treatment of covid-19, which we shall look at next.the world health organization has framed some guidelines and measures to check or slow the spread of covid-19 to the community. some of these measures are also summed up in [19] . here we provide a summary of these measures.first and foremost, it is highly recommended to wash hands properly and regularly. whenever the hands are exposed to any surface, the hands should be washed with soap for at least 20 s. use of hand gloves is helpful in preventing exposure of hands to contaminated surfaces and places. protective gears for medicos are a necessity but the case of medical and medical workers will be dealt elsewhere. frequent and regular use of sanitizers (creams, gels, sprays) is also recommended. there seems to be some controversy about the effectiveness of face masks. various outlets have frequently reported the shortage of medical grade masks (n95) due to high demand for medical professionals and general public globally. the centers for diseases and prevention (cdc) has also advised people to use face masks, and even use cloth masks if proper ones are not available. studies have revealed that even the best face masks cannot prevent some unfiltered air getting through. in order to make them highly effective, social distancing is recommended to reduce the risk of contaminated droplets being spread from an infected person to other people through coughing or sneezing. self-isolation is also a very useful technique to prevent the spread of covid-19.unfortunately, there are many myths about curing covid-19 patients, some of them are astonishing. the world health organization [20] has refuted many of them. we provide a summary.the following acts or practices do not prevent covid-19.• 5g mobile network • exposure to temperatures more than 25 the following are also clarified in [20] . if one is exposed to coronavirus, the virus would not stay in the body for the rest of life. holding the breath for 10 s or more without coughing or feeling discomfort does not mean that the body is free from covid-19. mosquito bites cannot transmit coronavirus. there is no evidence that eating garlic prevents coronavirus although garlic is considered very healthy for the body. people of all ages can be infected by the new coronavirus (2019-ncov). but those at greatest risk of infection include the elderly, people with compromised immune systems and people with chronic health conditions (e.g. asthma, diabetes and heart disease).thermal scanners are only effective in detecting people with fever but cannot detect people with coronavirus. one should not use uv lamps to sterilize hands or other areas of skin because uv radiation can cause skin irritation. some people have claimed that cow urine can prevent coronavirus. there is no evidence to support their claim. on the contrary [21] and [22] have categorically stated that the cow urine doesn't help prevent the virus. in [22] it is stated that ''experts have repeatedly asserted that cow urine does not cure illnesses like cancer and there is no evidence that it can prevent coronavirus''.the covid-19 pandemic is although a health crisis but it is damaging the world economy. if the pandemic was prolonged, it could even threaten the monitory systems of some countries. civil aviation industry is one of the hardest hit and many airlines have slashed their staff by up to 90%. int. j. inf. tecnol.hospitality and tourism is another sector which is facing the brunt of covid-19. revenue generating historical monuments and places have shut their doors due to social distancing measures such as mandatory lockdown, impacting the economy of several nations. these and other setbacks have soared unemployment in most of the countries threatening even the governance of some of the countries. the pandemic is in its full fury even after the first 4 months of its emergence. the full scale damage can only be assessed when the pandemic subsides. let us look at some of the damage to various aspects of the society so far.the covid-19 is causing the most severe losses to the economies of many nations. recently we have witnessed the oil prices to hit the subzero territory for the first time during the history of the mankind. we are already witnessing some very serious impact in china, where the virus first emerged in december 2019, seems to be coming out of the pandemic. according to [23] , china has suffered loss of 13.5% in its industrial production, 21% in retail sales, 92% in car sales, and 95% in restaurants. according to [24], world's working class, estimated to be more than three and a quarter billion strong is being severely impacted by the sudden and unimaginable slowdown in the world economy causing unprecedented loss in employment in all countries. one of the reasons cited for the heavy toll lies in the fact that more than four-fifth of the workforce lives in countries which are under severe restrictions of distancing and lockdown due to curfews and other mandatory closures. according to [26] , decline in working hours by 1st aril 2020 is estimated to be equivalent to two hundred million fulltime job loss. many developed countries are facing a two digit unemployment rate forcing people to seek unemployment benefits, severely impacting the economies of those countries. if the pandemic is prolonged, the loss of jobs could be many folds. goldman sachs has predicted that the us economy in the april-june quarter of 2020 could shrink to about three fourth, more than twice worse of any previous setbacks [23] . the pandemic has the potential to cause the worst recession ever.politicians in many countries have responded to salvage their economies. the us has come up with a stimulus package of more than us $2 trillion.one of the hardest hit economic sectors is civil aviation. most of the air travel has been suspended for weeks now, forcing many airlines to slash their staff by up to 90% and asking their government to salvage the industry. preliminary estimates according to [25] for the period of january to june of 2020 suggest the loss of over five hundred million passengers, amounting to about fifty percent of the seats available, causing loss of revenue of more than one hundred billion dollars. if the pandemic was prolonged, we should expect even more severe economic losses to the economy in general and civil aviation in particular.the oil producers are reeling on the face of the current pandemic. due to lockdowns and severe restrictions on all modes of transportations, the demand for oil has drastically depleted. despite the reduction in oil production, the price of crude oil has gone to under twenty dollars a barrel. this will severely impact the economies of the oil exporting countries like saudi arabia and other countries of the arabian peninsula and africa, as well other oil producers like russia, brazil, venezuela, mexico, and kazakhstan.on the face of covid-19, many countries had debated whether closing down educational institution was in their interest. many countries like australia delayed their action plan but in eventually they had rightly decided to close down or limit attendance to all educational institutions to prevent the spread of covid-19. due to these closures, millions of children and adults in many countries have suffered not only the loss of education but also the mental health. educational institutions, mostly in the developed countries, with the help of online tools have managed to impart education in this situation but mostly in the higher education sector. some developing countries like saudi arabia have also done a remarkable job to provide education through learning management systems or open access internet tools like teams, skype etc. but in many other developing countries there has been a virtual wash out of educational activities at all level since march 2020. the pandemic has forced many countries to invest more in the online teaching delivery. however the online teaching would not be very helpful at the school level. many other activities like conferences, symposia have adopted online mode. due to uncertainties surrounding the pandemic and the disrupted educational sector, the admissions to the academic year in the northern hemisphere face a difficult task to manage. authors in [26] and [27] have assessed the impact, which covid-19 has caused so during the first 3 months of its spread.sadly, social and religious setbacks arising from covid-19 have been heart-breaking. most death have occurred to the elderly, disabled and indigenous people. the highly contagious virus has not only killed tens of thousands people but have also prevented their loved ones to be with them in their last moments. an account of social carnage is presented by the un [28] . the daily loss of lives in some cities have caused severe difficulties in in their last rites. mass graves, like one in new york (fig. 2) , are very sad realities of our lives.the pandemic has caused severe setback to religious practices, which has no parallels in the history. many religious institutions, including mosques were closed in march 2020 in efforts to limit the spread of virus. this closure also included the grand mosque in makkah which houses kaaba (fig. 3) , the most sacred site for muslims. kaaba is center of hajj and umrah pilgrimages [29, 30] , which attracts millions of pilgrims. its closure, especially during the upcoming fasting month of ramadan, is very unfortunate. the grand mosque closure causes losses of billions of dollars to the government of saudi arabia. if the pandemic caused the cancellation of the annual pilgrimages of hajj in late july 2020, the saudi economy would incur the loss of several billion dollars. there have also been setbacks to other religious communities of the world. the pope john paul had to address an empty hall at vatican on the occasion of easter. also the devotees were denied the entry to bethlehem, the birth place of jesus the son of marry. the pandemic also severely impacted the religious observation of passover.while more than half of the world population locked down to contain the spread of covid-19, accusations and counter accusations have surfaced in different parts of the world. some of these accusations are aimed against certain ethnicities and religious minorities, which are divisive in a time when unified approach is required. many of the accusations are centered on the action plans of different countries and the origins of the virus itself. it is a general belief that many governments did not take the threat of covid-19 serious enough. reported by the guardian, leader of the democratic party in the us, where more than 50,000 people have died in the first 4 months, nancy pelosi on 29th march accused the president of the usa, mr. donald trump, of denials and delays in action plane to limit the spread of covid-19 to save costing human lives. on the other hand, mr. trump claims to have saved hundreds of thousands of american lives. as reported by the international media, he also called sars-cov-2 to be a chinese virus. many accusations have also surfaced in australia, england and other developed countries. in some countries, hatful behavior and even physical assaults have also been witnessed against certain communities. many doctors and nurses have been attacked by the patients or public mobs.there are many economic and social sectors which are indirectly affected by the covid-19. full extent of the damage to these sectors will be known after sometime. some of the business sectors, which have severely been impacted by the pandemic, include general transport, investment banking, traditional retail, professional sports and entertainment, cinemas, general (home and car) insurance, manufacturing, some form of healthcare.although the losses from covid-19 are staggering, there are some winners as well. environment is the greatest winner from the covid-19. pollution levels globally are so low that none of us expected them to go down so much, especially in china, india and other developing countries. businesswise, super markets and grocery stores have witnessed increase in sales without relying on any discounts and promotions. initially, the supermarkets in australia and elsewhere were unable to meet the demand of essential food and other items. the online businesses in general and digital content providers in particular have also witnessed bumper sales. indeed price of many items have doubled and tripled. there have been complains of some stores charging excessive prices for the sought after items like face masks and hand sanitizers. the pharmaceutical companies have also benefited from the pandemic. demand for certain drugs (antibiotics, chloroquine, and sedatives) have created shortage. face masks, gloves, sanitization gels and creams have also disappeared from the shelves of the pharmaceuticals. other sectors which have benefited from the pandemics are logistics/delivery, entertainment streaming and gaming, and video conferencing.covid-19 is causing human, economic, social, and cultural setbacks of our lives. we already witnessed colossal economic losses in the first 4 months of the emergence of coronavirus in china. during the first 4 months of the battle with covid-19, 200 people, including many health workers, have lost their lives. we know that many countries lack resources for testing and treating the epidemic, therefore the real loss of lives caused by it will never be known. indeed the pandemic is causing severe depression across the board. with no cure or vaccine in sight, we cannot the end of this crises caused by this pandemic. evidence based warning of the medical experts on the reoccurrence of covid-19 attacks on already treated people, are heartbreaking. one wonders if the worst is yet to come. when we come out this crisis, only then we shall be able to assess the actual damage it caused. many of us would be left without our loved ones. a sizable section of the society would have lost their jobs. all these add to the ingredients of a depression of a magnitude unimaginable to many of us. unfortunately, some politicians are perusing their political agenda in disregard to the suffering of the society reeling under covid-19. although the end of this pandemic is currently unknown, historically mankind has managed to recover from similar events in the past. this suggests that we will eventually be able to recover from this crisis.the coronavirus disease 2019 (covid-19) which started in china was declared a global pandemic by the world health organization (who) on march 11, 2020, following its spread to several other countries across the globe [1]. the outbreak in china began in december 2019 after some health institutions reported clusters of patients reporting with pneumonia of unknown cause that were epidemiologically linked to a seafood and wet animal wholesale market in wuhan, hubei province [2, 3] . coronaviruses, a large family of viruses, have caused two pandemics in the past two decades-severe acute respiratory disease (sars) in 2002 [4] and middle east respiratory syndrome (mers) in 2012 [5] . the sars coronavirus (sars-cov-1) is similar to the novel coronavirus (sars-cov-2) and scientists believe that sars-cov-1 which is mainly found in bats could cause a future disease outbreak.aside from pneumonia, it has been observed that other clinical symptoms of covid-19 include fever, dry cough, and breathing difficulties (dyspnoea). disease onset of covid-19 may result in progressive respiratory failure owing to alveolar damage (as observed by transverse chest computerized-tomography images) and even death [6] .according to the who, covid-19 had spread to 180 countries and territories, killing more than 50,000 people and infecting about 1 million people with 202,000 recoveries as of april 2, 2020 [7] . the spread of the disease has forced many countries to activate their public health surveillance systems with the intention of tracing contacts of identified cases for quarantine and isolating and treating active cases to reduce the spread of the disease. as covid-19 continues to rapidly spread, efforts are being made to discover vaccines and other interventions to prevent and treat the infections as well as to flatten the infection curve to the barest minimum college of health sciences, university of kwazulu-natal, durban, south africa as soon as possible. in the meantime, some medicines in use for other conditions are being relied upon for the treatment of active cases based on anecdotal reports. this paper presents the pharmacovigilance implications of the introduction of these medicines.the development of vaccines and their remarkable success in preventing several infectious diseases such as ebola virus disease and the swine flu (h1n1) infection has given mankind hope that infectious diseases could be controlled or even eliminated. vaccines typically prevent the occurrence of infectious diseases in the uninfected population thus creating the opportunity to flatten the infection curve. vaccines work by eliciting an immune response in the individual in order to fight the active infection should it occur in future [8] .in most pandemics, the media, public, research institutions, pharmaceutical companies, and other stakeholders focus largely on the design of vaccines rather than therapies to treat patients with the active disease. this leaves healthcare professionals in a predicament as to deciding the best therapeutic agents to use in order to achieve optimal treatment outcomes. as a result of the self-limiting nature of most viral infections, physicians manage the symptoms and complications of infection while the patients are advised to rest and maintain good nutrition and hydration to enhance immune function [9, 10] . however, with covid-19, there are emerging therapies which are purported to be associated with very good treatment outcomes. the food and drugs administration (fda) of the usa for instance has sanctioned the compassionate use of chloroquine [11] , a 4-minoquinoline medicine which has been used for many years to treat rheumatoid arthritis, systemic lupus erythematosus, and porphyria cutanea tarda even though its use in the treatment of malaria in sub-saharan africa was banned in the early 2000s due to the incidence of adverse reactions and resistance [12] . this compassionate approval of chloroquine as well as a statement made by president trump on the possible benefits of chloroquine in the treatment of covid-19 has led many into believing that chloroquine is a magical covid-19 drug.aside from the approval of the compassionate use of chloroquine by the fda, the national institutes of health (nih) of the usa has recently published a new study that found hydroxychloroquine which is also a 4-aminoquinoline and a derivative of chloroquine as more effective and potent than chloroquine against covid-19 in vitro [13] . moreover, a recently conducted randomized controlled study by gautret et al. in france showed that 100% of patients who received a combination of hydroxychloroquine and azithromycin tested negative and were virologically cured within 6 days of treatment [14] . consequently, large pharmaceutical companies are considering re-positioning themselves to manufacture chloroquine and hydroxychloroquine in larger volumes and seeking to establish contacts with markets where profitability could be maximized with the resulting increase in the demand for chloroquine and hydroxychloroquine. bayer and teva pharmaceutical industries for instance have donated chloroquine products to the usa while mylan plans to restart production of chloroquine tablets [11] . currently, many countries have drafted their covid-19 treatment protocols using these medicines and there have been varying treatment outcomes which corroborate what another french study on the efficacy of hydroxychloroquine and azithromycin has found out-there is no evidence of rapid antiviral clearance or clinical benefit [15] .a recently conducted systematic review on the efficacy and safety of chloroquine for the treatment of covid-19 observed that there is rationale, preclinical evidence of effectiveness and evidence of safety from long-time clinical use for other indications to justify clinical research on chloroquine in patients with covid-19. however, the authors advised that the clinical use of chloroquine should either adhere to the monitored emergency use of unregistered interventions (meuri) framework or be ethically approved as a trial as required by the who [16] . while the compassionate use of chloroquine and other medicines pending the approval of potent medicines from clinical trial data might be good news for medical professionals and covid-19 patients, there are likely consequences these unlicensed indications could have on people who do not have the disease as well as the healthcare system. these include toxicity of medicines, shortage of medicines, and viral resistance to medicines in case they finally get approved by drug regulatory agencies. these are pharmacovigilance issues that must be addressed to ensure the safety of the general population and covid-19 patients during this crisis period.chloroquine and hydroxychloroquine are associated with cardiotoxicity (prolonged qt syndrome) with prolonged use particularly in patients with hepatic and renal dysfunction. these drugs could also cause immunosuppression, aplastic anemia, agranulocytosis, retinal damage, and peripheral neuropathy with hydroxychloroquine associated with a lower incidence of side effects [17, 18] . there has been a surge in the demand for chloroquine and hydroxychloroquine in many parts of the world. in china, there have been complaints about people ordering chloroquine from online drug stores and self-medicating at fatal doses. moreover, in nigeria, west africa, two cases of chloroquine poisoning have already been reported which have raised concerns among healthcare professionals [19] . furthermore, in the arizona state of the usa, a man died after ingesting a high dose of chloroquine in an attempt to protect himself from covid-19 while the wife who also ingested the same drug was admitted at the hospital under critical care [20] .the rush for these medicines because of the covid-19 scare could deny those whose conditions require their prescriptions. patients with rheumatoid arthritis and systemic lupus erythematosus rely on chloroquine and hydroxychloroquine as part of their treatment regimen [21] . chloroquine and hydroxychloroquine are particularly indispensable in managing the constitutional, musculoskeletal, skin, and mild pleuritic symptoms of systemic lupus erythematosus, an autoimmune disease that is very challenging to manage. the shortage of these medicines could therefore cause poor treatment outcomes. with the current lock-downs being enforced in many countries across the globe to reduce the movement of people toward mitigating the spread of the virus, the situation could be worsened by panic buying to keep these medicines for use at home as first aid pharmaceutical products to prevent covid-19. moreover, the disruption in supply chain due to the restricted movement of humans and goods could aggravate the situation as the stocks of these medicines get depleted. a recent scoping review conducted by phuong et al. [22] has revealed that medication shortages resulted in negative patient clinical, economic, and humanistic outcomes. consequently, efforts must be made to curb this impending crisis.the indiscriminate use of chloroquine and hydroxychloroquine could lead to resistance of sars-cov-2 to these medicines in an event where the ongoing clinical trials establish that these medicines must be approved for the full-scale treatment of the disease. resistance of the plasmodium parasite to chloroquine which used to be a potent medicine for the treatment of uncomplicated malaria in the twentieth century resulted from the indiscriminate over the counter use. a repetition of same could pose a challenge to covid-19 treatment and even complicate cases if the efficacies of these medicines are lost through their misuse. given the fact that drug development is a long, laborious and expensive process, already existing therapies like chloroquine and hydroxychloroquine must be preserved.the way forward in assuaging the situation is to intensify public campaign against the routine or over the counter use of chloroquine and hydroxychloroquine for the prevention of covid-19. all community pharmacists must adhere strictly to this recommendation and seize the opportunity to educate patients on methods of preventing the spread of the disease such as regular hand washing with soap under tap water, the use of alcohol-based sanitizers with alcohol concentration not less than 60% v/v, eating balanced diet, resting well, and reducing stress [23] rather than selfmedicating with chloroquine and hydroxychloroquine in the bid to prevent the disease.doctors must also ensure that only patients diagnosed with covid-19 are given prescriptions for these medicines. this will require that laboratory tools are made available in all health institution to facilitate diagnosis as continual empirical treatment could lead to resistance of virus to the medicines.lastly, regulation of these medicines must be strengthened and enforced. in sub-saharan africa for instance, drug regulation has been very challenging over the years. unapproved border trade of pharmaceuticals and drug counterfeiting resulting from high demand must be vigorously checked through the collaborative efforts of drug regulatory and security agencies. this could save patients from taking sub-standard medicines and consuming medicines they do not really need.in conclusion, as covid-19 continues to spread and efforts are being made to flatten the infection curve, the general population must be monitored and educated on indiscriminate medication use in an attempt to prevent the virus from infecting human hosts. they must be made aware that current medicines are served on prescription basis at hospitals and covid-19 isolation and treatment centers and are not for covid-19 prevention. rather, they must be educated on approved methods of preventing the spread of the virus recommended by the who. in spite of the global panic to quickly resolve the covid-19 pandemic, scientists must be vigilant and ensure rational medicine use while repurposing old remedies.objective: social distancing and hand washing with soap and water have been advocated as the main proactive measures against the spread of coronavirus. we sought to find out what other alternative materials and methods would be used among populations without running water and who may not afford alcohol-based sanitizers. results: we reviewed studies that reported use of sand, soil, ash, soda ash, seawater, alkaline materials, and sunlight as possible alternatives to handwashing with soap and water. we identified the documented mechanism of actions of these alternative wash methods on both inanimate surfaces and at cellular levels. the consideration of use of these alternative locally available in situations of unavailability of soap and water and alcohol-based sanitizers is timely in the face of coronavirus pandemic. further randomized studies need to be carried out to evaluate the effectiveness of these alternatives in management of sars-cov-2.dry taps? a synthesis of alternative "wash" methods in the absence of water and sanitizers in the prevention of coronavirus in low-resource settingsobjective: social distancing and hand washing with soap and water have been advocated as the main proactive measures against the spread of coronavirus. we sought to find out what other alternative materials and methods would be used among populations without running water and who may not afford alcohol-based sanitizers. results: we reviewed studies that reported use of sand, soil, ash, soda ash, seawater, alkaline materials, and sunlight as possible alternatives to handwashing with soap and water. we identified the documented mechanism of actions of these alternative wash methods on both inanimate surfaces and at cellular levels. the consideration of use of these alternative locally available in situations of unavailability of soap and water and alcohol-based sanitizers is timely in the face of coronavirus pandemic. further randomized studies need to be carried out to evaluate the effectiveness of these alternatives in management of sars-cov-2.dry taps? a synthesis of alternative "wash" methods in the absence of water and sanitizers in the prevention of coronavirus in low-resource settingson july 6, 2013, asiana airlines flight 214 from seoul, south korea, destined for san francisco with 307 people on-board, crashed, injuring 182 people and killing 2. the incident dominated the u.s. news. newscasters and media journalists analyzed every minute of the crash and the events leading up it. for at least 2 days, it appeared as if nothing else occurred in the world. in reality, a great deal was occurring, from a bloody civil war in syria, to major economic crises in europe, to gang murders in chicago. other news simply ceased to exist while the attention of the u.s. media became fixated on the crash of asiana flight 214, with the media paying a great deal of attention on issues of human error.this chapter does not enter into the engineering details of plane crashes; however, it does examine the public’s perception of what it perceives to be a danger in the skies and how these perceptions are translated into the world of tourism surety. “surety” is the key word here for numerous reasons. the western world is as dependent on air traffic for travel and commerce as the ancient world was dependent on water transportation. in other decades control of the seas and rivers meant not only control of economies, but it also transformed into military prowess. in today’s world, sea travel is still necessary for commerce and often for military success, but ever since the berlin airlift of 1948, the public has understood the importance of aviation as a military and political tool. by the 1960s, businesses became international and began working across borders and in many different countries. this internationalization meant that many businesspeople became dependent on efficient and safe air travel in order to conduct business around the world. the aviation industry also promoted air travel as a luxurious experience, and thus people could now fly with ease and comfort to their vacation spots or combine air and car travel in what was called a “fly-drive vacation.” in all of these areas, the public assumed that despite the fact that a person was thousands of miles above the earth, air travel was safe and efficient. air safety became of paramount importance, especially as the world of aviation entered into the age of the jumbo jets.if we distinguish security from safety, in the earlier decades security was a different issue in aviation. the hijackings of multiple planes to cuba in the 1960s were often taken at first in a somewhat light-hearted manner. in most cases, airplanes were hijacked for a short while and the passengers and plane were soon returned. in october 2012, patrick weidinger, a specialist in aviation security and hijackings, called the period between 1958 and 1970 the “golden age of hijackings.” in 1969, there were 82 planes hijacked from the united states to cuba. during this period, it was not clear what was to be done with hijackers or how to prevent hijacking. although these hijackings were relatively benign, they alerted the public to the fact that not only did air travelers have to worry about the flight’s safety but also about the flight’s security. to add to this confusion, no one was quite sure if these were political acts, criminal acts, copycat actions, or pranks. not only did hijackings destroy people’s travel schedules, but also no one knew where the rash of hijackings would lead. this so-called golden age came to its conclusion in 1973 when (1) cuba and the united states agreed that hijackers would be returned to the united states for criminal prosecution, and (2) the united states introduced the metal detector. table 7.1 indicates that the u.s. hijackings may have begun with political motives, but soon became vehicles for robbery and extortion. the preferred weapon of choice was a gun, but the claim that a bomb was on-board became an important new weapon. what began as an inconvenience soon turned into a very different and more deadly experience. by the 1980s, hijacking (or “skyjacking” as it came to be known) was no longer a mere inconvenience, but had become a deadly political weapon. a few incidents show the extent of how deadly hijacking had become.on june 27, 1976, palestinian and german terrorists hijacked an air france plane flying from tel aviv to paris via athens with 250 passengers on-board. they diverted the plane to entebbe, uganda, where it came under the protection of the ugandan president idi amin. he supported the hijackers with both extra troops and arms. the hijackers separated passengers who were either jewish or israeli and on july 1, 1976, released the non-jewish passengers who were then flown to paris. the crew was given the choice of leaving, but chose to stay with the plane and remaining passengers, all of whom were then transferred to an airport terminal building. on july 4, 1976, israeli commandos attacked the entebbe airport and rescued most of the passengers. the death toll included 3 passengers, 20 ugandan soldiers, all 7 hijackers, and 1 israeli soldier. the israeli commandos also destroyed 11 russian mig fighters. the remaining 97 passengers were flown to tel aviv.members of hezbollah and islamic jihad hijacked twa flight 847 enroute from rome to athens and took the plane to amman, jordan. after murdering a u.s. naval diver, the plane was taken on an odyssey to other arab capitals including algiers and beirut. many of the passengers were not released until the end of june. the capture of the twa flight proved that, as a political and propaganda tool, hijacking was a very powerful instrument. it attracted a great deal of media and was a successful instrument in convincing the israeli government to release some 700 prisoners. it would also lessen airline passengers’ sense of security. not only might they be inconvenienced, but also they might be held captive for weeks, and, in a style reminiscent of the nazi era, people might be killed due to their nationality or religious affiliation.five pakistani hijackers took control of indian airlines flight ic-814 traveling to delhi from kathmandu with 180 passengers on-board. the terrorists killed a number of passengers and took the plane first to pakistan and then to dubai where 27 hostages and the body of rupen katyal were released. the plane then left for kandahar, afghanistan. the other passengers were released in india, freeing three terrorists. once again, it became clear that hijacking was a successful terrorism tool.the hijackings that occurred on september 11, 2001, may be the world’s most famous cases of plane hijacking. these multiple acts at the same time changed the course of aviation security and demonstrated clearly to the world that a civilian aircraft could be used as a weapon of mass destruction. prior to the attacks on september 11, most hijackings were of a limited scope, and although there were actions such as the entebbe raids, most people did not necessarily integrate these acts of terror into their private lives. the 9/11 attacks not only demonstrated how vulnerable a major world power was to a well-coordinated hijacking used for military purposes against civilian targets, but created a major economic shock wave that impacted a great deal of the united states and world economies. the attacks demonstrated that tourism was now at the forefront of nonconventional warfare, that civilian homefront populations were highly vulnerable to attack, and that in a world of interconnected economies, such an attack could damage national economies around the world. the attacks not only resulted in the deaths of thousands of innocent victims, but also further demonstrated how much both u.s. and international businesses had become dependent on the air transportation system over the last few decades.there are certain goals that most hijackers have in mind when planning a hijacking, which include:• media attention. most hijackers do not seek financial gain, but rather seek publicity or political success for a particular cause. the old adage that “all publicity is good publicity” is true for hijackings. the hijacking of a plane receives wide media coverage. this coverage means that the group’s cause and name now become public. from the hijackers’ perspective, the longer the incident lasts, the more publicity their cause receives.•the airline industry is a major part of not only the transportation industry but also the tourism industry. in fact, anything that hurts the tourism industry also hurts a state or nation’s overall economy. when terrorists hijack a plane, they not only receive media coverage, but they also cause both immediate and long-term economic loss. a terrorist hijacking may also result in loss of life. even failed attacks produce a great amount of inconvenience for the traveling public. the case of richard reid, the infamous “shoe bomber,” serves as a perfect example. on december 22, 2001, reid attempted to bomb american airlines flight 63 from paris to miami. the public was still reeling from the 9/11 attacks that had occurred earlier that year, and reid was apprehended by a flight attendant and other passengers. although reid was arrested, he succeeded in further damaging the airline industry by causing a new policy to be implemented. passengers in nations such as the united states were now required to remove their shoes for inspection before boarding a flight. this measure was meant to be an additional protection measure, but many airline passengers questioned if shoe removal was nothing more than a bureaucratic overreaction. it is not clear if shoe removal made air travel safer. some scholars have attempted to measure airline security on a cost–benefit basis. in an essay titled “assessing the risks, costs and benefits of united states aviation security measures” by stewart and mueller, the authors note that although the hardening of cockpit doors has proved to be cost-effective, the use of air marshals has not. their analysis reduces hijacking to a statistical number. such a number may have great value from an actuarial perspective, but tourism is not only about numbers. it is a business with a long after-life and often lives as much on perceptions as it does on facts. thus, the traveling public, especially the leisure traveling public, often panics and this sense of panic may, if enough media attention is given to the incident, last for many years (mueller & stewart, 2008).hijacking then takes on at least three different aspects. first, on a national level, it may become part of the political or economic narrative within that country. many nations have developed both preventative and legal policies to deal with internal hijackings. second, on the international level, hijackings can become a more complicated issue. for example, the hijacker may take the plane to a country that has no diplomatic relations with the nation of origin or is at a state of war with the latter nation. the united nations has enacted a number of conventions and protocols to deal with hijacking and considers it an unlawful act. these acts, however, do not mean that any particular nation may choose to respect the protocols of an enemy nation, or protect its citizens. thus, there is the potential for innocent civilians to be held as hostages or pawns. third, the hijacking may do great harm to a nation’s tourism industry, to its reputation, and to its overall economic well-being.for all of the above reasons, tourism industries, airlines, and national governments have joined forces to prevent airline hijackings. although at first most people did not realize the seriousness of hijackings. (there are a few exceptions to this statement, such as the israeli airline, el al. in fact, el al has built a reputation on being a secure airline and has often been able to charge higher fares due to the fact that the airline is perceived to be safe.) after 9/11 most people understood that hijacking was an act of asymmetrical warfare. once that perception entered into the public, governmental, and business consciousness, new rules were developed and it soon became clear that simply asking for a person’s driver’s license and if the passenger packed his or her own bags was not enough.current counter-hijacking measures are based around a series of concentric circles. these include:•encouraging passengers to become aware of their surroundings and fellow passengers.•hardening the airport’s defenses and creating “sanitized” zones.•greater examination of luggage.•making the plane itself more secure. each one of these steps has a series of substeps. often visitors turn to popular web sources for information concerning what to do. the following is an example of one of these popular web-based sources and the information that it gives to its readers. in the e-line news service “wikihow,” six steps are given for passengers to protect themselves against a terrorist attack. these include:1.before boarding the plane, be alert to what is going on around you. there should be no unattended luggage. passengers want to be sure that they have full control of their own luggage and that no piece of luggage is ever left unattended. in a like manner, the now famous phrase “see something, say something” is an important part of personal security. if you feel something is wrong, then listen to your gut.2.being aware of what other terrorists have done in the past, such as the shoe bomber and the underwear bomber. the authors point out that alert passengers are safe passengers.3.choose proper clothing. airplanes are not meant to be fashion shows; they are meant as forms of transportation. wearing light, comfortable, and nonflammable clothing is an important part of a personal evacuation should that ever be needed. women should not wear heels, and people should use vision aids that are least likely to fail during an emergency.4.listen to and read about the plane’s safety steps. too many people simply do not listen to the flight attendant’s briefings and then review visually the passengers who are in close proximity. ask yourself in case of an emergency: who is the strongest person in close proximity, where are children located, and how close am i to an emergency exit?5.have a plan in mind should there be an attack. the old pattern of simply doing nothing and thereby appeasing the attacker may no longer be the best plan. however, you do not want to stand out in a crowd or raise the attacker’s suspicion or anxiety level. decide if you want to attack first or be submissive and establish a rapport with your abductors.6.should you decide to fight: be prepared that the person may have a knife. do not try to take the attacker on alone, but rather think how you can get other passengers to aid in the attack. your highest chance of success will come if you can catch the hijackers off guard (http://www.wikihow.com/end-a-plane-hijacking). experts in security use the word “hardening” to mean making a target less vulnerable or making it less susceptible to an attack. it should always be remembered that there is no such thing as 100% security. all life, reputations, and locations are always vulnerable and there is nothing made by human beings that cannot be destroyed. nevertheless, experts can lessen a locale’s vulnerability, and this lessening is called “hardening.”in the united states, airport and security professionals after the 9/11 attacks realized that they could not merely depend on passengers, but that airport terminals would have to become harder to target. to make the airports less likely targets, numerous measures have been taken around the world. many airports were built, however, in a different era, and the airport’s architecture does not lend itself easily to airport security, checkpoints, and metal detectors. often airports need to be redesigned so as to accommodate a world that demands greater security. airports have developed numerous ways to increase security. these include:1.vehicles are not permitted in close proximity of the terminal.2.vehicles are examined before being allowed to enter the terminal’s premises. the preparking scan, however, is not easy to accomplish, as passengers normally carry baggage with them, and the opening of car trunks or the random scanning of vehicles hardens the target, but does not ensure security. newer airports are taking into account the principles of cpted (crime prevention through environmental design) and the cpted offshoot tpted (terrorism protection through environmental design). for example, many airports have found ways to remove blind spots from their security observers so that security personnel have a clear line of sight not only from the naked eye, but also via observational points and cameras.3.the use of body scanners and metal detectors. perhaps the most common way to protect a large part of the airport and its airplanes is through the use of mechanical devices such as body scanners and metal detectors. certainly these machines have proved themselves effective in having found numerous weapons and other prohibited objects. nevertheless, it should be noted that they are only as effective as the people watching the machine. although a great many weapons have been caught, there are still too many that get past these machines. furthermore, often airport security machine personnel demonstrate lack of motivation (or overmotivation), a poor understanding of the travel experience, and signs of both physical and mental fatigue.4.airport peripheral areas. security personnel have questioned some of the security measures that governments have instituted. although the areas beyond the security checkpoints are relatively safe, the precheckpoint areas are another matter. the same can be said for many airports where people must go to pick up luggage. not only are many of these areas minimally guarded, but because so many security personnel have been moved into other areas of the airport, there is often no one guarding luggage as it comes off the conveyor belt. this lack of human supervision produces not only luggage that is taken by mistake, but means that luggage is open to being stolen or having a foreign object placed within it.5.other areas of concern. some of the other areas of concern are airport parking lots and garages, many of which are connected to the terminal and intertransportation (that connects to other forms of transportation, such as rails and bus service with the heart of the airport). another method of making an airplane (and the same also applies to cruises) more secure is through the examination of cargo. in the world of air travel, cargo tends to fall into three categories:1.shipped cargo (e.g., packages and mail)2.personal cargo (e.g., checked luggage)3.on-board cargo (e.g., carry-on luggage, handbags, medical equipment) each of these forms of cargo requires special treatment. from the tourism security perspective, the security professional must be able to enforce rules while acting in a civil and professional manner. because tourism is such a media-covered industry, any mishandling of a passenger will almost immediately become a news item. on the other hand, the public demands full protection and does not tolerate security mistakes.in the united states, as in most nations, civil aviation authorities and law enforcement agencies such as the police have been given the authority to inspect all baggage and also the traveler’s person. this means that if security believes that a passenger’s luggage or person may be a threat to the aircraft, other passengers, or the airport, the security professional has a right to investigate as he or she believes is necessary, or to deny boarding for that passenger. most countries also have the following policies:1.if the passenger refuses to cooperate, then that passenger is subject to the laws of the nation from which the aircraft is to depart. carriers have the right to deny a passenger boarding rights should he or she not cooperate with security personnel.2.each nation has lists of who may perform baggage and personal examinations. the aircraft’s captain always has the right to conduct further investigations even after the passenger has boarded the aircraft. there is little doubt that the transportation security administration (tsa) still has problems with its current system(s). in december 2008, it was announced that full-body scanners would be used at u.s. airports. the full-body scanners were not only disliked by the public, but took a great deal of time to pass through and, despite the government’s assurances to the contrary, many people questioned their impact on personal health due to the fear of radiation. furthermore, there were questions as to the protection of personal privacy.the scanners were disliked enough that on may 31, 2013, fox news reported that:the full-body scanners that caused an uproar for taking semi-scandalous snapshots of fliers at security checkpoints have been removed from america's airports. the move comes after a congressional mandate and several complaints lodged by privacy-rights activists who likened the scanners to a virtual strip search. instead, airports will now use scanners that only show generic images of bodies, according to a letter released thursday from tsa officials to members of the house homeland security committee. “as of may 16, 2013, all ait units deployed by tsa are equipped with (the body-masking) capability. additionally, tsa's procurement of next generation ait requires” the same body-obscuring capability, tsa administrator john pistole wrote in the letter, according to the hill.(“tsa gets rid of full-body scanners at us airports,” 2013, para. 1–4) furthermore, many other types of scanning machines often find false-positives such as peanut butter jars, baseballs, or sports equipment. some experts believe that the rate of false-positives falls between 18% and 35% of all baggage examined. other experts note that screeners became less careful as the number of false-positives increases. freelance writer beth pinsker quotes isaac yeffet, formerly of el al airlines (considered to be the world’s safest airline), as stating, “let's say i'm a screener, and i open the luggage to do a search and find chocolate or peanut butter—i'm happy because i found what the machine flagged” (pinsker, 2003, para. 10). yeffet goes on to state: “i can assure you, from my experience and knowledge…that most of the explosives will be in a false bottom” (para. 10). yeffet notes that el al trains its personnel not to be machine operators, but rather to be “security professionals” who can think on their own. pinsker goes on to ask the question: “what constitutes success? the answer of course is a machine that identifies every bomb while keeping false positives to a tolerable level. that's a formula sure to please passengers…” (para. 23).in the united states, the tsa publishes a regularly updated list of what is allowed and not allowed on planes. for passengers confused as to what may or may not be allowed, the tsa provides an online web service that allows passengers to ask questions. some of the items that have long been on the tsa’s not-allowed list include:•sharp objects•sporting goods that may cause harm•guns and firearms•tools that can become weapons•martial arts and self-defense items that may become weapons•explosive and flammable materials, disabling chemicals, and other dangerous items•other items as determined by tsa agents perhaps the best way to handle the “what to bring” question is to realize that flying is a privilege and not a right, and that when we are on an airplane we are dealing not only with our own personal safety but also that of our fellow passengers and that of the crew.there have been various methods to ensure the hardening of the aircraft itself, especially once it is in the sky. although no one will provide (nor should it be provided) a full list of on-board security policies, some have become well known. among these are:1.the use of air marshals on selective flights.2.the locking of the cockpit door.3.additional training for all flight attendants. being aware of what is happening on the plane may be a major deterrent.4.because most cargo is not passenger cargo (it is estimated that the number is well below 50%), it is important that cargo also be inspected. to ensure the plane’s security, air cargo is subject to random searches and x-raying; other suggestions (some of which have been implemented) include the reinforcing of cargo holds and passenger plane airframes. a number of transportation companies have developed “blast-proof baggage containers” and it is rumored that el al now has multiple devices on board to deflect an incoming missile. it is almost impossible to write about airline safety and ignore the el al model. there are those people who approve and there are those who disapprove of some of el al’s practices, but most people have come to see this model as the standard for the industry. although there is a great deal we do not know about el al security, there is also a great deal that has been made public. included in these known facts are:1.airport security personnel are well-educated professionals who speak at least two languages.2.airport and national security agencies work together and share intelligence.3.israeli security agents are tested throughout the world and throughout the year. if a security person fails an infield test, he or she immediately loses his or her job.4.when it comes to the security of its planes and passengers, el al ignores issues of political correctness. in el al, world profiling is not a bad word and is done along psychological lines.5.psychological profiling is also accomplished by interviewing all passengers prior to boarding the plane. el al does not have technicians. instead, it has security specialists who are trained to read signals given off from every part of the body.6.el al was the first to not only lock cockpit doors, but also to reinforce them.7.el al planes use a system called “flight guard.” this system, developed in israel, protects planes from incoming missiles and/or flares sent off to confuse the airplane’s protection system.8.el al uses air marshals and well-trained flight personnel who work in concert to make sure that every el al flight is safe. because many parts of an airport are one-way streets (entrances without exits), fire safety and design are especially important, especially in a period of time in which the majority of emphasis is on counter-terrorism. it should be remembered that a terrorist has a great many tools in his or her arsenal and the use of fire as a weapon to destroy both property and lives should not be discounted. for example, security specialists tend to see airport check-in, security, and immigration customs lines as challenges. these lines may produce bottlenecks where orderly lines quickly melt into chaos. airports must have a fire evacuation strategy that permits the exiting of potentially large numbers of people in areas that are not designed for two-way pedestrian passages. what is true of the public areas of an airport is also true of the airport’s “off-limit zones.” cargo areas are prime locales for a fire and this fire may then quickly spread to any number of locales. should the fire in any way mix with fuel services, then a tragedy can easily turn into a catastrophe. airport security specialists then need to identify all areas where a fire may break out and have a plan in place to contain the fire and evacuate large numbers of people in a minimum amount of time. because airports welcome people from around the world, airport signage must be such that a person can understand it even if the person does not read the local language.there are numerous methods that have been tried around the world. the author does not endorse any of the ideas found below; they are merely creative ideas. it is necessary, however, to make sure terrorists understand that we are constantly changing our security models and that we are not merely reacting to what “was,” but working hard to ensure that it “will not be.” here are a few suggestions:1.require all flight personnel and especially pilots to have a background check, and use the top psychological models to make sure that pilots are not suicidal.2.consider allowing police officers to fly at a deep discount if they carry a weapon and handcuffs.3.determine what passengers really can and cannot carry. the belief that a plastic baggie worth less than a penny can protect a plane from exploding toothpaste is simply silly.4.take protective measures at both check-in counters and bag claim.5.have an air marshal on every flight and have this person in a different seat each time.6.provide pilots and other air crew with pepper spray or other similar substances.7.use some form of iris screening to identify passengers.8.develop new techniques so that if the pilot is incapable of landing the plane, others can land it with or without knowledge of special equipment.9.run a counter-terrorism video on the airplane prior to take-off, telling people that in case of a terrorist attack, not to panic and that the pilot may take certain precautions.10.make sure that the cockpit is totally isolated from the rest of the plane; use double doors or nonbreakable doors.11.require all crewmembers to be trained in counter-terrorism techniques. although terrorism often grabs the headlines, perhaps an even more important issue is that of health. health issues in the air take on three separate dimensions:1.passenger health, the ability not to get sick while flying.2.cross-continental and transnational health issues. this topic includes the transporting of illnesses from one place to another, and the exposing of populations to risks that normally do not exist in the host society.3.use of illness as a “weapon” of mass destruction. in this case, a person who is intentionally ill is sent to another airport or nation for the expressed purpose of carrying an illness from one location to another. there are a number of health risks that can impact any airline passenger, especially when the passenger is on a long trip (4 hours or more) and seated with minimal legroom. deep vein thrombosis, for example, may be one of the traveler’s greatest risks. most airline websites offer some guidance on how to avoid this problem through the use of exercises in place, the encouragement of taking a walk every few hours, and care in drinking a minimum of alcohol. for example, the united airlines website offers the following suggestions:•wear comfortable clothing and shoes.•get a good night's sleep before your trip and rest as much as possible during the flight.•while away, get as many hours of sleep every day as you normally would at home. taking short naps of 30–40 minutes will refresh you as you adjust to the new time zone.•drink plenty of water and/or juice before and during the flight to stay hydrated.•eat light meals during your flight. also avoid caffeinated beverages and alcohol.•don't remain in one position too long; perform the simple stretches as seen below and walk when possible.(“tips for healthy travel,” 2013) flying entails other risks. for example, an article written by various doctors found on the federal aviation administration website notes that:1.aircraft are pressurized to be somewhere from 6,000 to 8,000 feet above sea level. this higher altitude especially for people from sea-level communities means that there is less oxygen and that gases in body cavities expand more rapidly. the doctors also note that: “furthermore, an increase in cabin altitude will cause gases in our body cavities (abdomen, middle ear behind the ear drum, sinuses) to expand as much as 25%. this can cause problems in the abdomen (bloating or stomach cramps), ears (a crackling sensation or ear block), and respiratory tract/sinuses….”2.issues of jet lag, especially when one is crossing several or more time zones.3.infectious diseases. just as in any other confined space there is a chance that an infectious disease may pass from one person to another.(bagshaw et al., 2002) because air travel is the most common form of travel, there are bound to be in-flight emergencies ranging from the birth of a child to a heart attack. the centers for disease control and prevention published a book on health for travelers. chapter 6 of this book states:worldwide, more than one billion people travel by commercial aircraft every year, and this number is expected to double in the next 20 years. increasingly, large aircraft combined with an aging flying population makes the incidence of onboard medical emergencies likely to increase. approximately 1 in 10,000 to 40,000 passengers has a medical incident during air transport. of these, approximately 1 in 150,000 requires use of in-flight medical equipment or drugs. the most commonly encountered in-flight medical events, in order of frequency, are the following:1.vasovagal syncope2.gastrointestinal events3.respiratory events4.cardiac events5.neurologic eventsdeaths aboard commercial aircraft have been estimated at 0.3 per 1 million passengers; approximately two-thirds of these are caused by cardiac problems.(marienau, illig, kozarsky, & gallagher, 2013) in addition to standard first-aid kits, depending on the size of the aircraft and applicable regulations, enhanced emergency medical kits may include, but are not limited to:•automatic external defibrillators•intubation equipment (pediatric and adult)•cpr masks (pediatric and adult)•intravenous access equipment and solutions•intravenous dextrose•antihistamines (oral and injectable)•first-line cardiac resuscitation drugs (atropine, epinephrine, lidocaine)•nitroglycerin•bronchodilators•analgesics in 2011, the movie contagion was released as a major motion picture. the movie is part of an ongoing genre of movies dealing with pandemics. scientists and pandemic experts noted the accuracy of contagion. the movie deals with a fast-moving pandemic. as in real life the medical community must not only scramble to find a cure, but it is unclear who may be transmitting the disease and what the role of air transportation may be in the spreading of the pandemic. the movie underlines the fact that it is not only the disease that is creating social havoc on a macro level but also the human proclivity to panic in the face of a silent killer. the panic causes the unraveling of much of society and this unraveling becomes a crisis in and of itself.although the movie is pure fiction, it serves to remind the tourism security professional that travelers, especially international travelers, may transmit diseases from one part of the world to another, either knowingly or unknowingly. this potential hazard is especially true if the host country has wiped out the disease and its population is not immune to it. because airlines are not only an enclosed space but also carry people from multiple nationalities the potential to transmit disease is extremely high. furthermore, most airlines use a hub-and-wheel method for flights and this means that people from various parts of the world may be feed into one hub. thus, the passengers on a plane may have originated in various locations. the potential for illness may begin in the host locale, pass onto one or more terminals, be carried on an airplane, and finally infect people in the receiving locale. in june 2012, cnn provided a list of the 10 top airports for spreading diseases in the united states (table 7.2 ).to add to the problem is the case of a media scare concerning a new pandemic. at least during the initial period it may not be clear where transmission is found or what the incubation period may be. some of the airborne illnesses that have worried both medical personnel and travelers alike are:•tuberculosis•severe acute respiratory syndrome (sars)•common colds•influenzas•meningococcal diseases•malaria•dengue•measles•food-borne illnesses a good example of a false panic is sars. the so-called sars pandemic became a media event and did a great deal of damage to both hong kong and toronto, canada. in the case of toronto, there were many more traffic fatalities than there were deaths caused by sars and no one outside of a hospital environment was stricken with the illness. another example is the 2006 outbreaks of avian (bird) flu (h5n1) in various nations around the world. these outbreaks caught the tourism industry's attention. despite the great amount of publicity given to avian flu, it is important to note that as of this writing there have been less than 700 people so far who have contracted the disease.the sars panic caused far fewer deaths than did traffic accidents in the impacted places, but the panic that sars caused created economic havoc. although the media was a major component in scaring the public, reality proved to be different than what was stated on television. the tourism security officer then needs to be aware of not only the facts but also the perception of the facts as presented in the media. as a tourism security specialist you need to know that:• tourism is highly vulnerable to a panic situation. the days after 9/11 ought to have retaught the tourism industry that for most people travel is a leisure purchase based on want rather than need. if travelers become afraid they may simply cancel their trips. in such cases, there may be massive layoffs of tourism workers.• you must be prepared to take care of sick employees and their families. the people staffing the tourism industry are also human. that means that their families and they are also susceptible to illnesses. should large numbers of staff (or their families) become sick, hotels and restaurants may have to close simply due to manpower shortages. tourism industry people need to develop plans on how they will maintain their industry while suffering from manpower shortages.• security personnel must be prepared to take care of visitors who fall ill and may not know how to contact local medical authorities or even speak the language of the local doctors. another problem to be considered is how the tourism industry will aid people who fall sick while on vacation. medical notices will need to be distributed in multiple languages; people will need ways to communicate to loved ones and to describe symptoms to medical personnel in their own language.• security personnel must be prepared to fight against a pandemic not only from the medical perspective, but also from the marketing/information perspective. because the public may well panic it is important that the tourism industry be prepared to offer concrete and credible information. this information should be given to the public almost immediately. every tourism office should have an information plan ready should a pandemic occur in its area. develop creative websites so that people can gain information any time of the day and without regard to where they may be located.• security personnel must be prepared to counter negative publicity with an action program. for example, in areas that have been impacted by a disease, make sure to advise travelers to stay current with their vaccinations and create medical information sheets. it is essential that the public know where to go for information, as well as what is true versus what is false. for travelers who may not be up-to-date with current shots, offer lists of doctors and clinics willing to accept traveler's insurance.• an up-to-date first-aid kit and proper preventative procedures at hotels and other places of lodging. for example, make sure that employees use antibacterial hand wipes and encourage hotels to provide these for travelers.• security personnel must be prepared to work with travel insurance companies. in case of a pandemic, travelers may not receive value for money and may desire to either cancel a trip or cut it short. the best way to maintain good will is by working with such organizations as the united states travel industry association (in canada, it is called travel and health industry association of canada). develop travel health programs with these organizations so that visitors feel financially protected.• be prepared to work with the media. a pandemic is like any other tourism crisis and should be treated as such. prepare for it before it strikes. if it should occur, set your action plan in place and make sure that you work with the media. finally, have a recovery plan set so that once the crisis has abated you can begin a financial recovery program. the bottom line is that air travel may not produce illnesses, but the transfer of large numbers of people from one place to the next may be a source of worry not only for medical authorities, but also for tourism security professionals.if an unintentional disease or pandemic can send the tourism industry into a panic, then an intentionally planned attack could have catastrophic results. tourism security specialists realize that their industry could be used as part of some form of biological warfare.tourism is based on the premise that we live in an interconnected world. for the most part, this interconnectivity has brought a great deal of benefits to millions of people. nevertheless, there is nothing gained in this world without a price. one of the prices we all pay for bringing the world together is that we are not only open to new cultural experiences, but also new biological threats. as newsweek noted in its april 29, 2009, issue in reference to the swine influenza:the central driver is the increasingly interconnected world we live in. even the most remote areas of the planet can now be reached in less than 48 hours. diseases now plaguing those in refugee camps, heavily populated and growing slums or the most remote tropical rainforests can, without warning, show up in far-flung towns and cities. a devastating hemorrhagic-disease epidemic in africa or south america could rapidly become the hemorrhagic epidemic of boston or bordeaux. even good clinicians rarely have the knowledge to diagnose and treat exotic tropical diseases. until a month ago, our attention was focused on asia—the source of the last two influenza pandemics, in 1957 and 1968—as the likely source for the next one. and yet it appeared in mexico while we weren't looking.(“opinion: swine flu is a wake up call,” 2009, para. 3) the tourism industry is particularly vulnerable to biological warfare, especially in the form of contagious illnesses such as smallpox. because tourism is a peacetime and often leisure industry, it can become the perfect undercover delivery system. here are just a few reasons for this:1.traveling today, especially in a world with limited visa restrictions, is relatively easy.2.airports are hubs with thousands of people going to any number of places. these are easy centers in which to expose people to contagious diseases and they will then act as carriers to any number of other places.3.often travelers make more than one stop. these additional stops mean a greater potential for infection. it can also become exceedingly difficult to develop the common thread that unites all of the infected victims.4.tourism receives a great deal of publicity. once the epidemic (pandemic/disease) is identified by the media, there is a high probability of some form of panic.5.tourism is a major economic generator in and of itself and numerous other industries are also dependent on the travel industry. if the public fears travel, the economy will be severely injured if not destroyed. what makes many of these potential diseases scary is that they are easy to produce/make, and the delivery system may be almost impossible to detect. furthermore, were terrorists to use a powder of anthrax or get someone ill with smallpox organisms, these diseases would be almost impossible to detect until it was too late. to make matters still worse, the physicians attending the sick might lose valuable time until they were able to determine the cause of the illness. additionally, health workers might panic, leaving the sick unattended and the public in a state of alarm.finally, tourism security specialists and professionals will need to be concerned about not only the movement of people, but also the threat to food and the movement of contaminated food from one location to another. these are special threats to people who may eat contaminated food, then board an airplane and not realize that they are sick until they are at the next locale or in the air. for example, the world health organization notes that:during 1996, tourists who travelled to yellow fever endemic areas without having had yellow fever vaccination imported fatal yellow fever infections into the united states and switzerland. during the same year approximately 10,000 reported cases of malaria were imported into the european community, with one fourth of them reported from the united kingdom. when cholera re-entered peru in 1991, after a long absence, it found an opportunity to spread through the existing sanitation and water systems, causing over 3000 deaths. seafood exports were embargoed from peru and tourism decreased, costing an estimated loss of at least us$770 million to the peruvian economy in one year.(“global infectious disease surveillance,” 2013, para. 2) the world is an interconnected planet. the good news is that tourism allows people to get to know each other and understand each other from around the world. the bad news is that often we bring other baggage when we travel than merely our suitcases!although air travel, especially in tourism, is the most preferred form of public transportation, other forms of transportation have long played a part in tourism. in an earlier chapter, we discussed the cruise industry and its impact on tourism. in this chapter, we turn to two other forms of land tourism travel: travel by train and travel by bus and motor coach.perhaps no form of travel has captured the public’s imagination as much as the train called the orient express. portrayed in film and in literature, this train has come to be the epicenter of both intrigue and romance within nineteenth-century europe. the actual train began service from paris to constantinople (now istanbul) in october 1883. the media dubbed the train the “orient express,” and the name stuck. the “luxury” train became a favorite of european royalty and was also known as the “spies express.” a number of movies portrayed the train as a center of spies and even murder, and this portrayal added to the train’s acquired glamor (zax, 2007). the orient express was not the only train to be considered romantic in the nineteenth- and twentieth-century world of train travel. u.s. trains have also become part of what we might call the “romance of the old west.”train travel began in the united states in the early part of the nineteenth century. with the expansion toward the western states, train travel had the advantage of comfort and speed over horse travel, especially over long distances. trains in the united states had three main purposes: transportation of goods, transportation of people, and in the latter part of the century, more luxurious trains provided tourism experiences to parts of the united states that were relatively unknown to a large part of the nation’s eastern population. train travel, however, was not without problems. not only was there the problem of derailments and other mechanical breakdowns, but there were also issues of attacks by “hostile” natives and by robbers. many of these “security issues” became part of the u.s. movie industry and added to a sense of adventure. in 2010, national geographic published its list of the top 10 train trips in north america. the list included:•peak experience: colorado’s durango and silverton narrow gauge railroad•revolutionary railway: new york to vermont ethan allen express •northwest passage: oregon to british colombia canada, amtrak cascades •a ride in the woods: west virginia’s cass scenic railroad•westward ho: chicago to california, california zephyr •mountain climber: british colombia to alberta, rocky mountaineer •on the rim of copper canyon: mexico’s chihuahua pacific railway•hail to the chief: los angeles to chicago, southwest chief •wilderness alaska the easy way: years 1988–2013•grand old time: arizona’s grand canyon railway.(duckett, 2010) in the latter part of the twentieth century, train travel, which had fallen into a downward spiral, began to take on new life in tourism. the reasons for this renaissance were economic and involved issues of security. these included:•trains were considered to be more ecologically friendly. they can carry more people for less use of energy.•trains were considered by some to be safer. there was less publicity given to a train disaster than to an air disaster.•the introduction of the bullet train in japan and europe made train travel a lot faster than it had been in the past.•the “europass” gave thousands of young north americans a train travel experience that they had not had at home.•senior citizens and young people had the extra time to travel by train and see the countryside as they traveled. despite the fact that train travel is somewhat immune to accidents, violence, and even terrorism, the reality is that it is not immune. found below is a listing of some of the worst train accidents in the last 25 years:•july 12, 2013: six people are killed and nearly 200 injured just south of paris when four cars slide off the tracks as a passenger train speeds through the small french town of brétigny-sur-orge.•april 22, 2012: a woman dies of injuries a day after two trains collide head-on in amsterdam. at least 16 people are seriously injured.•april 13, 2012: three people are killed and 13 injured in a train crash near frankfurt when two trains collide and derail.•march 3, 2012: two trains collide head-on in southern poland, killing at least 8 people and injuring around 50.•january 30, 2011: a head-on collision between a cargo train and a passenger train kills at least 10 people and injures 23 near the eastern german village of hordorf.•december 9, 2010: one person is killed and two others are injured after a train derailed in southern greece between the southern cities of argos and tripoli.•august 6, 2010: a train derails in southern italy, killing one passenger and leaving about 30 injured on the outskirts of naples, its destination.•july 23, 2010: switzerland's popular glacier express tourist train derails in the alps, killing one person and injuring 42 on its spectacular journey between zermatt and st moritz.•february 15, 2010: a train wreck in buizingen, belgium, kills 18 people and injures 55.•july 1, 2009: thirty-two people are killed and 26 injured when a train carrying liquefied gas derails and explodes while traveling through a downtown neighborhood in the tuscan seaside town of viareggio.•october 6, 2008: a local passenger train runs into the back of a long-distance train near budapest, hungary, killing 4 people and injuring 26 people.•january 27, 2008: a passenger train derails in central turkey, killing at least 9 people and injuring dozens of others, possibly due to ice on the tracks.•september 2006: the transrapid magnetic levitation train, which floats on a magnetic cushion, hits a maintenance vehicle on a test track in the emsland area of germany, killing 23 people.•july 3, 2006: a local passenger train crashes in the southern city of valencia, killing 41 people. excessive speed is blamed.•january 2006: up to 46 people are killed and 198 injured when a packed train derails and plunges into a ravine outside podgorica, the capital of montenegro.•january 2005: seventeen people are killed when a passenger train and a freight train crash north of bologna, italy.•june 2003: a spanish passenger train travelling to cartagena from madrid crashes into the path of an oncoming goods train at chinchilla, killing 19.•may 2003: thirty-four people are killed in hungary when the budapest-nagykanizsa train hits a coach full of mainly elderly german holidaymakers at a level crossing near siofok.•november 2000: a fire in an austrian tunnel engulfs a funicular train packed with skiers, killing 155 people.•october 1999: two trains collide near london's paddington station, killing 31 people. one of the trains had gone through a red signal.•june 1998: a high-speed train derails near the village of eschede in lower saxony, germany, killing 101 and injuring 88. it was caused by a single fatigue crack in one wheel that caused the train to derail at a switch and collide with a road bridge.•december 1988: thirty-five people die in a crash involving three trains at clapham junction in london. slack safety measures are blamed.(“european train crashes,” 2013) one of the most recent tragic incidents involving train travel occurred in spain in july 2013. the crash is important not only in that it was one of spain’s worst disasters since 1944, but also because it symbolizes that all forms of transportation carry risk. the accident took place near santiago de compostela, a major tourism center, especially for religious tourism. although it will take some time to know all of the facts, as of this writing, we know that at least 79 people died when the train derailed. the train’s conductor has pled guilty to having spoken on a cell phone while taking a major curve at a speed well above what the law permitted. it is clear from the evidence given that human error caused the crash. the victims came from numerous nations around the world, and to quote one news source: “the crash has cast a pall over the town, a catholic pilgrimage site. santiago officials had been preparing for the religious feast of st. james of compostela, spain's patron saint, the day after the crash, but canceled it and turned a local sporting arena into a morgue” (“driver in spain train crash,” 2013, para. 23).tragedy has struck the spanish rail system in other ways. for example, on march 11, 2004, bombs went off almost simultaneously in various commuter trains entering the city of madrid. these explosions killed 191 people and wounded over 1,800 other innocent victims. the bombings may have not only murdered and injured a great many people, but may have caused the prime minister at the time to lose the election. spain’s new government then pulled out of its involvement in the iraq war.from both the train accidents and terrorism attacks, a number of facts begin to emerge:•although train travel is considered less dangerous than air travel, the reality is that in both forms of transportation, there is always risk.•although most governments place their resources into airline protection, the possibility of a terrorism attack against a train, especially against a commuter train, is ever present.•currently trains are a weak link in the world of tourism security.•nations would be wise to consider the consequences of attacks against not only people but also against cargo. often trains carry dangerous chemicals or other substances through populated areas. train transportation then is an area about which not only tourism security officials need to concern themselves, but general security officials also.on february 25, 2012, some 22 passengers were robbed and assaulted on a mexican tour bus traveling near the tourist city of puerto vallarta. luckily there was no loss of life, although there was loss of property. the attackers “intercepted” the bus as it passed through the town of el nogalito. the incident followed on the heels of another incident in mexico where an american mother and her daughters were among seven passengers who lost their lives in pachuca (state of veracruz). it should be emphasized that these were not motor coaches per se, but tour buses. nevertheless, this incident teaches us several important security points:•the robbers had inside information as to where the buses would be.•there was no special dispensation given to visitors.•in the case of the puerto vallarta incident, the robbers specifically targeted people on a tour bus. a more typical situation is what occurred in july 29, 2013, in italy. some 39 people died when their bus plunged off a ravine in southern italy. it should be noted that this was not a tour bus. the tragic news, however, demonstrated that both locals and tourists are forced to use often-substandard roads, bridges, and other public arteries.the bus world is highly complex and it is essential for tourism security personnel to be aware of the different forms of bus travel and the different challenges that each one of these subcategories faces. •develop holding statement immediately.•contact team leaders (who makes up the coordination team).•meet with coordination team.•determine current situation (identify what is known, what must be verified).•make key assignments to team leaders.•determine if “on-site” team needs to go.•prepare statements with legal/finance review (but legal does not have the final call on statement—company leader/coordination team leader does).•alert all systems/staff (reservations, it, etc.).•assign a scribe to record all events chronologically—right hand to internal team leader (consider a report/time sheet for key individuals to complete as things happen and regularly submit to the scribe).•internal communications—employee nurturing—critical to remember the care and feeding of the staff.•develop succession plans for when key players are not available and/or shift controls on rotation (i.e., if internal team leader is not available, who takes that role, and then who fills his/her role, etc.).•always keep looking forward—anticipate (let the teams deal with the details and minutia so the whole process keeps moving forward).•ongoing evaluation of process for adjustments as needed and for future use.•wrap-up session as crisis ends (or key stages come to an end).  •immediately tell employees and customer service personnel how to respond—develop a holding statement (“yes there is a situation. we are aware of it and investigating it, and we’ll find out the details and get back to you.”).•dependent on the situation, share appropriate messages of condolence. don’t forget to reference staff, drivers, etc.•after the coordination team meeting—develop official statements for customer inquiries.•prepare written statements for email inquiries.•coordinate with agency team because agents will be calling reservation center line first.•coordinate with the guest relations and media teams for messages.•run manifest of guests on tour for reference during inquiries.•develop rotation system so everyone can be better prepared and rested for their shifts.•consider special touch-tone message or 800 line with prepared statements to public (depends on situation).  •contact external pr assistance.•establish media site (off-site of main management area, like a local hotel)—be sure there is meet-and-greet staff and phone reception for all media inquiries.•establish spokesperson(s) (may be more than one depending on situation, never more than two—may be one at home and one on-site).•remind/inform all employees to refer all media calls to media team and make no comments outside of statements provided. give them talking points to pass on to the media team, so that it is handled properly and positively).•review initial “holding statement” (or create specific to media as needed) and revise as possible with updates.•recognize the power and immediacy of social media.•have email/phone number for key media people for quick access, including national media, depending on crisis.•identify who if anyone will speak to media on-site—especially before on-site team arrives (local supplier, tour director/staff, officials).•be sure that anyone in proximity who could be approached by media is briefed with statements (e.g., shared tenants).•ongoing:•monitor news and social media (online, tv, radio, etc.).•coordinate closely with all communications teams to ensure messages are consistent.•gather as much information as possible for other trams.•notify/update partners, suppliers, nta, etc.•have hard copy, updated lists of contact information and keep current.   •locate “go bag” (prepared in advance and ready for travel to site; contains satellite phone, if necessary; cameras; crisis manual; employee contact lists for 24/7 coverage; cash access; corporate credit cards).•provide direction to on-site interim staff for actions prior to on-site team arrival.•complete logistics of getting to the site (flight arrangements, lodging, etc.).•coordinate with suppliers at the scene (coach company, dmo).•instigate roles with the on-site team and consultant team, if appropriate.•establish location of all involved.•establish on-site command center and distribute contact information to hq, suppliers, etc.•coordinate with media team for on-site spokesperson/media needs.•provide counseling/comfort for those involved.  •coordinate with on-site team to develop interim on-site team by identifying who is in the immediate area (tour directors, drivers, supplier representatives).•identify other resources in the area (other suppliers/contacts the company has access to in local area).•prepare the tour director (on-site staff) with “holding statement” and initial talking points particularly for media—refer media as possible to media team at hq.•run manifest for who was involved.•begin verifying facts—determine fatalities, injuries, causes of accident/situation, etc.•conduct ongoing analysis of the situation.•key: internal/external communication plan must be solid and consistent.•prepare information for contacting families/next of kin as needed—turn over to customer service center.•coordinate logistics for anyone else who needs to get to the site, such as family members, suppliers, other staff, etc.  •review supplier contracts.•review insurance forms.•review passenger manifest.•check insurance coverage—what is financial exposure.•notify insurance broker and legal counsel.•coordinate with operations team on potential liabilities/exposure: •driver record.•equipment record.•supplier record.•company record. •hire accident investigator as needed.•fund tour directors—wire money—have plan for weekends, holidays, etc. (may need to rely on local contacts/suppliers).•what did the participants lose?—what will the company need to replace (passports, keys, clothing, valuables, etc.).•get police report, if applicable.•begin looking at future impacts from incident (insurance increases, contract clauses, etc.).  •first, determine who “owns” the crisis—is it your company’s, carriers’, etc.?•anticipate appearance of cell-phone video of the incident. social media is everywhere and coverage will be instantaneous of everything.•suppliers must have 24/7 emergency contact to reach company.•let suppliers and partners know what you expect of them in a crisis situation—suppliers need to have emergency kits with critical emergency information for reaching company.•in europe, government is more involved with control of accidents than in the united states. what may happen in this specific location?•assist people who can’t get their belongings—company must provide prescriptions, glasses, clothing, other needs.•short-term costs pay off in the long run.•be sure you document your due diligence (any resources used to determine safety and security of destination).•most overlooked or neglected component is staff: what if the trauma devastates the employees’ work? needs to be a major focus of your business continuity plan.•contact cascades—who contacts whom—especially in a catastrophic event at all levels have contingencies.  •initial notification.•internal updates: what? when? how?•interteam communication.•communication beyond hq.•critical especially with shift rotations—is there a paper trail or central location for people to get briefed?•assign company contact(s) for suppliers to deal directly with at hq and provide backup contacts.•consider relevant time differences.•emergency card with contact numbers and essential logistics number provided to all staff and a checklist on other side of top dos and don’ts so they have an immediate reference of what to do first. on march 11, 2020, covid-19 was declared a pandemic by the world health organization (who). the sars-cov-2 infection has swept the globe with 2,101,164 confirmed cases and 140,773 deaths in 184 countries and territories as of april 16, 2020 [4] . according to the centers for disease control and prevention (cdc), two crucial actions can reduce the risk of viral transmission: frequent hand washing and surface decontamination. while such amplified hygiene measures are of utmost importance for the prevention of person-to-person viral transmission, these changes in practice are projected to trigger a rise in adverse cutaneous reactions such as contact dermatitis in the community. dermatologists should be familiar with the hygiene practices recommended for covid-19 prevention and prepared to counsel patients on strategies to combat potentially debilitating skin damage that can result from repeated exposure to detergents and disinfectants. in this report, we review the recommended hygiene procedures for prevention of emerging viral pathogen transmission and discuss the adverse skin reactions associated with these augmented hygiene practices. we conclude with strategies which patients can implement during the covid-19 pandemic to minimize skin irritation white still performing hygiene practices effectively.in response to the sars-cov-2 outbreak, the cdc and environmental protection agency (epa) released updated guidelines for infection prevention. the cdc describes proper hand hygiene as frequent hand washing with soap and warm or cool water for 20 s or use of alcohol-based hand sanitizers with at least 60% alcohol [2] . for disinfection of environmental surfaces, the epa released emerging viral pathogen recommendations for the use of antimicrobial pesticides against sars-cov-2 [9] . although limited data are available regarding survival of sars-cov-2 on surfaces, early reports suggest that viable virus can be detected on certain materials like stainless steel or plastic for up to 48 or 72 h following viral exposure, respectively [10]. disinfectants meeting the epa criteria for use against sars-cov-2 contain active ingredients such as quaternary ammonium, sodium hypochlorite, peroxyacetic acid, hydrogen peroxide, and alcohols, many of which are known skin irritants or allergens [11, 12] .as hygiene recommendations evolve during the covid-19 pandemic and community members adopt changing practices, dermatologists are likely to see a rise in adverse cutaneous reactions from prolonged irritant exposures and widespread use of antimicrobials. adverse consequences of frequent hand hygiene include skin dryness, irritant contact dermatitis, and allergic contact dermatitis [12] . skin dryness is an early sign of damage to the natural skin barrier, which can result from recurrent use of lipid-emulsifying detergents that deplete lipids in the stratum corneum. lipid-dissolving alcohols in hand sanitizers may also contribute to barrier dysfunction [6] . following barrier compromise, irritants and allergens can more easily breach the stratum corneum causing inflammation in the deeper layers of the epidermis and contact dermatitis. dermatitis symptoms include dryness, roughness, itching, burning, erythema, edema, blistering, scaling, and fissuring. the most common form of contact dermatitis is irritant contact dermatitis from direct exposure to environmental irritants. while strong irritants like caustic chemicals may induce acute dermatitis on initial contact, milder irritants like hot water, detergents, or alcohols may require multiple exposures to cause skin damage. recently, a high incidence of hand hygiene-induced skin damage was reported in first-line covid-19 healthcare workers at the epicenter in china. of 434 healthcare workers in hubei province, 74% (321) performed hand hygiene more than ten times per day, and 76.6% (246) of these frequent washers reported hand skin damage with dermatitis symptoms [7] . a less common form of contact dermatitis is allergic contact dermatitis, which can occur when patients have hypersensitivity reactions to fragrances, preservatives, or chemical antimicrobials in detergents or disinfectants [12] . among the 370 epa-registered disinfectants for sars-cov-2 (as of april 16, 2020), the most common active ingredient is quaternary ammonium, found in 203 of the registered products [9] . importantly, the quaternary ammonium salt, quaternium-15, was found to be the allergen most frequently associated with a positive patch test reaction (16.5%) in a study of 959 patients with allergic contact dermatitis of the hands [11] .to combat adverse cutaneous reactions from shifting hygiene practices, skin moisturization and allergen avoidance are paramount throughout the covid-19 pandemic. regular use of oil-containing emollients after hand washing has been associated with reduced skin damage [5] . in a double-blind, randomized trial of healthcare workers with occupation-associated severe hand irritation, scheduled use of oil-containing lotion was superior to barrier cream for improvement of hand skin scaling, cracking, and pain [8] . subjects treated with oil-containing lotion also exhibited a 50% increase in the mean total number of hand washes per day by the fourth week of use, suggesting that improved skin condition correlates with increased hand hygiene compliance. in addition to preventive skin moisturization, precautions should be taken to avoid contact with allergens in surface disinfectants. patients should always wear gloves and clean hands upon completion of product use.dermatologists can promote protective strategies throughout the covid-19 pandemic by endorsing the following cdc-and epa-based recommendations related to hand hygiene and surface disinfection: first, proper hand washing procedures entail wetting hands, lathering with soap, scrubbing for at least 20 s, rinsing with clean running warm or cool water, and drying hands. hot water was not shown to significantly improve hand washing efficacy, and patients should avoid washing hands with hot water to minimize skin damage [3] . second, antibacterial soaps should be avoided, because they were not shown to be superior to non-antibacterial cleansers at preventing infectious illness symptoms in community, non-healthcare settings [1] . avoidance of antibacterial chemicals in soaps may reduce patient risk of irritant or allergic skin reactions. third, if soap and water are not available, alcohol-based hand sanitizer (at least 60% alcohol) can be rubbed into hands for 20 s. patients can reduce their risk of allergic skin reactions by avoiding fragrance-containing sanitizers. fourth, surfaces should be disinfected with epa-registered products for use against hard-to-kill emerging pathogens. the active ingredients have predicted efficacy against sars-cov-2 but are also known skin allergens, so patients should avoid direct skin contact with these disinfectants by wearing impermeable gloves during use and cleaning hands on completion. finally, emollient moisturizers should be applied regularly after hand washing to combat barrier damage induced by irritant or allergen exposure. use of skin moisturizers may promote long-term hand hygiene compliance, thereby decreasing the risk of pathogen transmission over time. by providing anticipatory guidance to patients during the covid-19 pandemic, dermatologists can help to limit the adverse cutaneous effects associated with evolving hygiene practices in the community setting.conflicts of interest margaret a. macgibeny and cindy wassef declare that they have no conflicts of interest.ethical approval not applicable.the principal problems with growing populations do not involve space although population density is a problem unto itself for reasons discussed in previous chapters. the main problems are how to nourish people with food and water. the chronic malnutrition that about 1 billion people suffered from in 2013 is likely to grow in number in some regions due to global warming/climate change because humans cannot adapt to less food if they are already at subsistence rations. for example, the 2012 population in sub-saharan africa is 902 million people. the population is projected to increase to about 1.25 billion in 2030, an increase of about 38 %. within the same time frame, the united nations estimates that acreage under maize cultivation in the region will decline by 40 % because of heat and drought brought on by climate change. the loss of arable land for food production can be countered in sub-saharan africa if marker assisted hybridization of maize or maize genetically modified to withstand heat and drought come onto the seed market together with modified seeds for other food staples and if african nations that do not now accept gmo seeds do so in the future. if not, nations favored for food production by climate change will have a moral obligation to provide food staples to people in nations with declining food production at accessible costs based on their economies. it is clear that what happens in sub-saharan africa and other regions with declining cultivation acreage or that will bear other effects of climate change (e.g., drought, shifting rain patterns) will affect the rest of the worldwide community politically, economically, and socially. the earth's problems that associate with global warming/climate change will be further discussed in the last section of this chapter.water is the staff of life. it keeps the body hydrated and is necessary to grow food crops, hydrate food animals, and grow feed grains. chemically or biologically polluted water does not serve these ends. if ingested, contaminated water can result in sickness as discussed in chap. 2. water stokes industry and manufacturing as well, thus keeping economies in many countries contributing to a population's wellbeing by providing employment, goods, and services. ideally, these businesses contribute their fair share to a tax base that supports social needs (e.g., education, healthcare, maintenance of infrastructure). factory owners adapt and plan against water shortages by having a water recycling system in place but may also slow or stop production until operational water conditions return. citizens with a reliable water supply can adapt to periods of water shortage by limiting use according to mandates by government officials but still have water for basic daily needs. however, persons in nations with a chronic per capita water shortage may not have this option to serve their daily needs unless water is imported or new water sources are found (see chap. 2). if imported water is not an option to meet immediate essential needs, an alternative adaptation for people (and animals) is to try to reach a location where water would be available to them. with growing populations, per capita water availability is greatly diminished (table 2. 2), water shortages become endemic, and people are at risk of existing at subsistence levels or dying. most at risk from the lack of a basic water ration are pregnant women, infants, young children, and old people. water wars are a future possibility as nations battle for their peoples' survival unless political differences are set aside and projects are supported to develop and share water sources. in a welcome effort, jordan, israel, and the palestinian authority signed a memorandum of understanding in the world bank, december 2013, with specific aims: (1) produce millions of cubic meters of drinking water for a water-deficient region; (2) pipe 200 million cubic meters of water annually *180 km (110 mi) from the red sea to the dead sea; (3) build a desalination plant at aqaba that would supply water to aqaba and eilat; (4) the israeli water utility would supply 20-30 million cubic meters of drinking water to the palestinian authority for the west bank population at a reduced cost; and (5) there would be an inflow of water to slow and in the future perhaps abate and reverse the shrinking of the dead sea. funding for the estimated $400 million, 5year project will come from the world bank, donor nations, and philanthropic groups.as the global population increases and more people in developing and less developed nations have more disposable income, there will be a growing draw on natural resources other than water and food to service their industrial, agricultural, and manufacturing needs and wants. competition can force economic wars among national and multinational corporations for the resources necessary to provide goods and services and thus drive up prices for resources. industries and manufacturing units that cannot compete economically for natural resources will shut down, thus contributing to unemployment and downturns in economies because of falling domestic demand. to keep order in the increasingly interdependent world economy, accommodation for shared natural resources (or substitutes for them) at affordable prices is the adaptationnecessary. this can be mandated by the world trade organization backed by other practical-minded international groups.another adverse effect of growing populations that is a national resource that can be lost at the expense of some countries to the benefit of others is brain power. this brain power has been cultivated at excellent universities in developing countries, often times at little or no cost to students (e.g., in medicine, science, engineering, economics, the arts) who attend and graduate in increasing numbers. where there are too many well-educated professionals but lack of employment opportunities for them in their fields of expertise, educated people have the option of relocating to another country that can nurture and use the expertise. many adapt to the employment problem by taking up this option. this may mean moving from a developing country to a developed country or from a less developed country to a developing or developed country. ultimately, this loss of citizens with special skills can hurt a country. to counter this brain drain or reverse it, a country can adapt by investing in its future to create programs and conditions that keep talented professionals home, or if they have emigrated, entice them to return. china and india are examples of countries that have successfully taken this tact.when there are increases in a population because of immigration, problems can ensue between immigrants and a general population. adaptation to diversity and the multicultural experiences it brings to a community is often not a comfortable change. the antipathy of some in a host country is based on slowness of the immigrants to learn the language and inability of host country citizens to understand what immigrants are saying among themselves. this makes citizens feel uneasy. some view immigrants as a threat to their own or a family member's employment or advancement. race difference is a factor that some cannot readily adapt to as is ethnicity with its traditions and customs unfamiliar to the general public. religion can be divisive if adherents to its beliefs engage in acts of hatred detrimental to the host country fueled by fundamentalists and zealots who interpret religious writings as giving them license to commit crimes or absolving them of the crimes. sadly, many citizens paint an entire religious community with the taint of the relatively few evildoers. adaptation to diversity is essential for our earth's citizenry with joint efforts by all to resolve worldwide issues (e.g., global warming/climate change) so as to become the keys to providing a sound future for coming generations. there has to be a shared attack on global threats, no matter what the language, race, ethnicity, or religious beliefs are, no matter social or economic status, no matter whether a threat affects less developed, developing, or developed countries.adaptation is a progressive process when dealing with natural hazards because as each type of natural hazard impacts global communities over time, lessons are learned from each one that give direction to the methods of adjustment. adaptation to living where hazards can be expected to strike and where populations continue to increase is dependent on what we learn from the study of past hazards. we can use this evaluation of measured and observed data to minimize the immediate effects and aftermaths of hazards and protect citizens from injury, death, and from damage or destruction of property or infrastructure when hazards strike in the future.in areas prone to earthquakes, we know that earthquakes do not kill and injure people but that collapsing buildings and infrastructure do. earthquakes are not predictable so that there is no adaptation by a timely evacuation to minimize deaths and injury. however, building structures to make them more earthquake resistant can save lives, reduce injuries, and protect property. thus, after a high-magnitude earthquake, forensic engineering teams come to assess the damage and determine where and why damage and destruction took place within the context of the magnitude of an earthquake, the type of motion it originated (shaking, jarring, rolling), its duration, the area it affected, and the geologic properties of rocks underlying structures' foundations. hazard assessment teams also evaluate other factors that contributed to additional damage such as ruptured gas lines that feed fires and ruptured water lines that inhibit fire control. the engineers establish how construction can be improved in the future in terms of construction techniques and materials to prevent the types of collapses and utility failures they investigated.municipalities revise building codes accordingly to direct reconstruction and future building projects. where possible, structures that withstood an earthquake with minor or no visible damage should be retrofitted to improve their resistance to the next "big one." with each event, we gain more data on how to better construct earthquake-resistant structures and alter building codes to more stringent specifications. in theory, this adaptationto an irregularly recurring global event is good, but in practice it is most applicable to nations with the economic resources for reconstruction according to revised building codes and where there is no corruption to allow a bypass of the code. the same can be stated for retrofitting to give more resistance to earthquakes to existing structures. many developed nations and nations rich in commodity exports (e.g., oil) have a moral obligation to donate funds, material, and expertise to help citizens in economically disadvantaged nations recover from a destructive earthquake. some commodity-rich and economically sound nations do not do so directly, whereas others, big and small, rally to help disaster victims. for example, immediately after megatyphoon haiyan devastated many regions in the central philippines in 2013, israel sent 250 medical doctors and nurses and field hospitals to help philippine citizens recover from the impacts of the typhoon.as discussed in an earlier chapter, volcanoes are predictable in terms of becoming active by emitting wisps of smoke, bulging on a slope, warming of the soil or nearby pond or lake waters, emitting increasing concentrations of gases, and showing increased low-frequency seismicity. however, this activity does not always result in an eruption. a marked increase in measurements and observations, especially the low-frequency seismic activity, suggests that an eruption is imminent. adaptation to living and working on or near a volcano means investing in equipment to monitor volcanic activity and listening to alerts from scientists monitoring its activity and being ready to evacuate by gathering important papers and precious mementos and prepared to load into transportation for evacuation to safe locations. governments adapt by charging geologists to map out areas considered as high-, moderate-, and low-hazard zones in the volcano environs. geologists do this by studying rocks deposited from past eruptions and assessments of the topography. municipalities then pass zoning regulations applicable to the hazard level.governments have adapted to repeated periodic flooding in areas by creating flood control systems described in chap. 4. dams hold water during times of heavy and/ or extended rainfall and release any overflow into channels that move water away from urban or rural population centers. levees increase the volume of water that can move through a channel, thereby keeping it from spreading into populated areas and cultivated farmland. for smaller waterways that flow through cities, municipalities may invest in deepening, widening, and straightening channels as well as erecting walls so that more water can flow through the area more rapidly without coming out of a channel. governments define zones on flood plains according to a recurrence interval of damaging floods (e.g., 100 years) as being off limits for residential and factory/plant construction. as much as we plan to adjust to living in an area prone to flooding, there is always the possibility of a megaevent that can overcome in situ control systems. therefore, as described chap. 4, governments adapt to this possibility by installing flood prediction equipment in drainage basins to provide warning to those at risk from rising and sometimes raging waters. the warning gives people time to gather important documents and personal treasures and evacuate to safe areas. the apparent increase in the frequency and magnitude of storms and resulting flooding in recent years is thought by many weather scientists to be related to global warming and the increased amount of moisture in the atmosphere from warmer oceans that gathers in clouds and precipitates during storms. this will be discussed further in this chapter.adaptation to extreme weather events such as an extended period of drought, heat waves, and frigid weather means preparation to wait them out. some municipalities adapt to repeated, sometimes seasonal, times of short-term drought by storing a 3-6 month water supply in surface or underground reservoirs during periods of normal precipitation that can be tapped (conservatively) as needed. others may plan to move water via pipes or water tankers from where it is plentiful to where drought conditions exist. otherwise, to survive, people move as best they can to where they have access to water. in instances of years long drought, crops and livestock and other life forms may be lost. heat waves can kill. adaptation to heat wave conditions means that water has to be available to people to avoid dehydration. where possible, homes should have air-conditioning or fans to keep people comfortable and municipalities should have cooling centers to which people can go. personnel should check on senior citizens and escort them to cooling centers if necessary. clearly, economically advantaged nations have the resources to give support to citizens during natural hazards such as these. these nations, international organizations, and ngos have a moral obligation to help economically disadvantaged nations as is possible when hazard conditions such as these threaten populations.the most extreme of weather conditions that can injure and kill people and destroy housing and infrastructure are tropical storms that evolve into violent hurricanes (typhoons, monsoons) by increasing wind speeds and sucking up moisture (water) as they track across oceans toward land. when these storms make landfall, they drive storm surges that can wreak havoc onshore communities, and as they move inland precipitate heavy rains that cause life-threatening and destructive flooding. these violent storms are destructive to coastal populations and island nations and have regional reach inland as they move along paths until they finally spend their energy or move out to sea. on november 8, 2013, the typhoon named haiyan, the strongest recorded typhoon ever to make landfall smashed into the central philippines killing more than 2,600 people, injuring about 12,500, and displacing almost 600,000 people. there was a 4-m (*13 ft) storm surge driven by winds measured at over 312 km/h (195 mi/h) with gusts reaching 380 km/h (235 mi/h). the typhoon flattened the city of tacloban that was home to 200,000 residents, and there was major flooding inland. the weather alerts led to a government call for evacuation away from the predicted path of the storm, and about 1 million people followed the evacuation warning, surely saving many lives. access to aid typhoon-ravaged areas was difficult, and there were shortages of water, food, and medical care for many evacuees for several days. the philippine central government and local officials were not prepared to deal with a storm of this magnitude but help started arriving from many nations worldwide. there was a post-event concern of attending to sanitation needs of survivors to prevent outbreaks of diseases such as cholera, typhoid fever, hepatitis, and dysentery. if the philippine government had adapted by adopting better policies with respect to response to high-category typhoons in addition to the call for evacuation, the impact of haiyan would have been ameliorated. one would hope that this deficiency would be dealt with to limit the effects of future like disasters.evacuation to prevent injury and death in coastal zones that could be struck by high winds, heavy sustained rains, and storm surges is dependent on weather bureau forecasts and warnings from police, firefighters, or other government-authorized personnel. homeowners adapt to hurricanes by securing roofing with additional nails or special fasteners as a retrofit precaution and by boarding up windows on structures before an incoming storm hits. governments have adapted to the onslaught of violent high-energy storms by constructing seawalls of varying designs and heights to protect population centers by damping the force of storm surges. in china, for example, a seawall 6.72 m (*22 ft) in height and that has been heightened in the past protects shanghai from the full damaging effects of high-category typhoons. as a result of rising sea level, the shanghai seawall and other that protect coastal cities from being flooded by surges from high-energy tropical storms will have to be heightened to afford a greater degree of protection to people and property.wildfires can be a natural hazard when ignited by a lightening strike. however, most wildfires are started by human carelessness such as tossing a lit cigarette on a forest floor or failing to completely extinguish a campfire, or by arsonists. one may adapt to living in an area with a history of wildfires in two ways, neither of which is practical or promises 100 % protection. first would be to clear an area of vegetation in a 30-m (100 ft) swath around a dwelling or site for building. second would be to build with nonflammable materials so that embers propelled during a wildfire could not ignite a structure. adaptation to the advance of a wildfire would be to heed warnings to evacuate carrying a prepared case with important documents and other items of personal value. to delay evacuation by going back to retrieve something from then home can be fatal as it was for two people in a recent (june, 2013) wildfire that destroyed almost 500 homes in colorado springs, colorado, usa.when there is a hazard event coming that calls for evacuation, responsible and often economically advantaged governments have adapted to the threat by designating evacuation routes, by providing transportation for people who need it, by having evacuation centers stocked with water and food, cots and blankets, basic medical supplies and medical personnel, and by having phone service available for people that need it. in the case of a primary or triggered hazard that happens with little or no warning (e.g., an earthquake, a tsunami, a volcanic mud flow), search and rescue teams should be ready to move in soon after dangerous conditions ease and they can move with safety. there should be medical attention to treat injured survivors, and stations set up as soon as possible to provide water, food, and other essentials available to those that survived with little or no physical hurt. these first steps at adaptation are the keys to survival. recovery after a shock phase can be long and drawn out, depending in grand part on a nation's social and economic resources and physical and economic assistance from other nations, international institutions, and ngos.change on our earth's inhabitantsglobal warming is a fact attested to by an overwhelming majority of the scientific community and unwaveringly supported by a february 2014 joint publication of the us national academy of sciences and the royal academy in the uk on the causes and evidence for global warming [1] . as noted in earlier chapters, during the past century, measurements show that the earth has warmed by *0.8°c (*1.44°f). global warming is an ongoing process that is attributed in grand part to a slow but continuous and increasing buildup of greenhouse gases in the atmosphere. the greenhouse gas most associated with global warming is carbon dioxide (co 2 ). a plot of the increase of co 2 content in the atmosphere with time against the increase in global temperature shows an excellent correlation of one with the other. additional lesser contributors include methane (ch 4 ), nitrous oxide (no 2 ), and chlorofluorocarbons (cfcs). with the beginning of the industrial revolution and the increased use of coal as the principal energy source, the content of co 2 in the atmosphere was 280 parts per million (0.028 %). the combustion of coal and later oil (petroleum) and natural gas emits co 2 to the atmosphere. initially, and for many years thereafter, the added greenhouse gases were taken up by vegetation for photosynthesis and was also absorbed by the oceans and other water bodies. this kept the atmosphere co 2 close to the 280 ppm pre-industrial level. however, with increased industrialization, the need for electrical power, and the use of internal combustion engines, the amount of co 2 generated was greater than what could be absorbed by nature and the content of co 2 in the atmosphere increased. during june 2013, its concentration reached more than 398 ppm, an increase of over 40 % over the pre-industrial concentration (scripps institute of oceanography mauna loa measurement). the increasing co 2 content, other greenhouse gases, aerosols, and particles acted as a media that admitted sunlight (heat energy) to the earth's surface but did not let all of the heat escape back into the atmosphere. this abets global warming. in the past two to three decades, the rush to industrialization in developing countries (e.g., china, india, and brazil) and their growing power needs and vehicular use has thwarted the implementation of international agreements to reduce emissions from coal-fired power plants, other industrial and manufacturing operations, and the transportation sector.a direct consequence of global warming is sea level rise (slr) caused by the progressive melting of icecaps and ice sheets in greenland, the arctic, and antarctica, and of mountain glaciers in the himalayas, the alps, the rocky mountains, and the andes. the *20-cm (*8 in) sea level rise during the past century may see a rise of another *50 cm (*20 in)-1 m (*39 in) during this twenty-first century.one-third of the rise would be from the expansion of warmer sea water, one-third from icecap and ice sheet melt, and one-third from mountain glacier melt [2] . in 2012, other researchers used computer models on existing data and proposed that 50 % of sea level rise between 1903 and 2007 was from glacial melt [3] . following the same line of investigation, other scientists studied satellite data and ground measurements from alaska, the canadian arctic, greenland, the southern andes, the himalayas, and other high mountains of asia and estimated that glacier contributions to sea level rise from 2003 to 2009 was 29 % and together with ice sheet melt explained 60 % of slr [4] . a publication in 2012 estimated that ocean thermal expansion 0-300 m deep and 300-700 m deep contributed up to 35 % to sea level rise [5] . these latter two estimations are in line with the ipcc prediction for melting ice and ocean thermal expansion contribution to the estimated rise of sea level by the end of the century [2] . with a rise in sea level, marine waters encroach on land. as the rise continues, possibly at an increasing rate, it threatens habitation in lowlying islands, coastal villages and farmland in lowlying zones, and heavily populated cities worldwide settled on inshore terrain close to sea level (e.g., bangkok, ho chi minh city, jakarta, manila, miami, new york, boston, buenos aires, london, rotterdam). rising sea level and warming of ocean waters have other ramifications that affect coastal communities as well as inland areas. as explained in chap. 7, the warmer surface water releases more water vapor with heat energy into the atmosphere. when the water vapor molecules condense in clouds, heat energy is released. this energy gives more force to tropical storms as they form, track to shore, and move inland, or storms that move close to and along a coast. these storms may transition to hurricanes (typhoons, monsoons) with the violent winds that cause destruction, and heavy rainfall that triggers flooding if they move onto land. we recognize that rising sea level means that tropical storms that impact a coast with storm surges have a farther reach inland with their destructive energy that is more pronounced when the surge occurs at high tide. the surges also saturate farmland they reach with salt water that harms crops. they also carry salt water into fresh water marshes and ponds, thus disrupting ecosystems there. the increase in the number of these extreme weather events and the increase in violence and destruction they wreak on land compared with like weather events in the recent past (e.g., during the past 30 years) strongly suggest that they are fueled to a significant degree by global warming.there are two possibilities for adapting to the effects of rising sea level on coastal urban centers, one impractical, the other very costly but doable. the impractical adaptation possibility is to move at-risk population centers inland, out of the reach of the destructive tropical storms. this does not lessen the threat of flooding. the move is possible in some cases where land is available, but such a move is not economically feasible. one practical but costly adaptation to mitigate encroachment from sea level rise and the effects of tropical storm surges is to surround cities at risk within place seawalls 2-3 m higher than recorded high tides or higher depending on historical records and contemporary published data. the walls can have a concave configuration so that surging waves lose energy when their lower parts hit and are curled back on themselves damping some wave energy or there can be a different configuration best for the site(s) to be protected. similarly, gates buried at strategic locations where there is ship access to consider can be built to be hydraulically driven so that they can rise from a near shore seabed site to mitigate the effects of storm surges. both techniques have been used at different global locations.we have read that climate change affects land-based agricultural production, both for crops and animal husbandry. the warming climate at higher mid-hemispheric latitudes and at higher altitudes does not favor the growth and normal yield and/or quality of many crops. depending upon the degree of climate change and the linked change(s) that may follow it, farmers can adapt in several ways to maintain or increase crop yield and nutrition value. for example, when warming starts diminishing the productivity of a traditional crop, farmers can sow crops that are known to grow well in warmer temperature and give a satisfactory economic benefit. however, new groups of weeds, pests, and diseases will migrate to the warmer growth environment and will have to be dealt with in order to protect the new crops.where the effect of global warming reduces water supply for rain-fed agriculture, for crops irrigated with surface waters, and for groundwater-irrigated crops when aquifer recharge does not balances discharge, agriculturalists can adapt in two ways. first is the use of a more efficient irrigation method that delivers water directly to a growing plant (e.g., drip or focused irrigation). this minimizes runoff and loss to evaporation. second and similar to what was mentioned earlier is to sow a crop that needs less water to thrive and that delivers a good yield, good-quality product.another result of global warming for some farmlands is a longer growing season. in this situation, growers can adapt by planting earlier and have the possibility of double cropping. they can also grow a cultivar that is later maturing and that gives a product that brings a good market price. however, switching to new crops in a warmer growth environment means that there will be an invasion of a new set of weeds, pests, and diseases to ward off.in any efficient operation, and as emphasized in earlier chapters, farmers adjust to a changing growth environment for a given cultivar by applying the optimum amounts of fertilizer and other agricultural chemicals as might be needed that nurture and protect it most effectively. this reduces agricultural costs and lessens runoff of these chemicals to ecosystems where they can be harmful.global warming can bring on abnormal weather extremes that affect agricultural productivity. in these cases, farmers have to plan ahead based on recent history of these conditions in their regions. drought, heat waves, and long-term rain or heavy rain in a short time present problems for both cultivars and food animals. periods of less than average precipitation may last months or years. depending on the amount of the deficit precipitation, adaptation can include storing water in reservoirs and cisterns during times of rainfall to be tapped during a drought to sustain food animals and crops during a short-term, not too severe drought. there is also the option of trucking in water to sustain livestock. long-term droughts when precipitation deficits are high take their toll on plants and animals to the detriment of agriculture in a region especially when accompanied by heat waves. they have caused recent disasters for crops and food animals on all continents less antarctica.farmers either wait out the "bad times," change the type of cropping they do, the livestock they tend to, or change careers.the adaptation from crops that have been grown successfully before the effects of global warming reduced yields and quality of a harvest, to those "same" crops that can grow successfully under the advancing warming changes just described generally means that hybridized species have to be developed and used as warming increases at a location and slowly tracks to higher latitudes and higher altitudes. thus, growers turn to plants that are created by hybridization as described in chap. 3: traditional methods and marker-assisted selection methods within the same species, and genetically engineered (-modified, -manipulated) methods using different species. hybridization is a slow process, sped up markedly by genetic engineering, a method that yields foodstuff not accepted by the european union and many nations outside the union, especially in africa. bred species are developed to carry one or more characteristics that favor crop resilience against the effects of climate change. these include resistance to disease, weeds, and pests, and tolerant of drought (water stress), heat, short-term inundation, and short-term saline exposure (see chap. 3). hybrids have also been developed to give higher yields and more nutritious crops. thus far, research has been focused mainly on improving seed for world staples such as rice, maize (corn), wheat, sorghum, and soybean.there have been great successes where hybrid crops were agriculturalists' adaptation so that the possibility exists that we can feed the earth's growing populations and reduce chronic malnutrition. when this is coupled with the opening of additional arable acreage and the use of improved farming methods for seeding, watering, and harvesting, global food security can be strengthened for the existing world population and the future generations on earth. however, this will require economic and technical input by developed nations and international groups. without basic sustenance, people will have less resistance to diseases and there may be local or regional population crashes if diseases evolve into epidemics or pandemics that invade susceptible populations.warming of the open ocean water, enclosed aquaculture operations in ocean waters and on land water bodies has affected marine fisheries and marine and estuarine aquaculture that grow food fish and shellfish, and lakes that sustain fisheries. in marine fisheries worldwide (e.g., in the north atlantic, off the coast of peru, off the coast of the philippines), some food fish or fish captured for other purposes (e.g., to use in pet food, to use to make fertilizer) have migrated to cooler water in ecosystems with conditions conducive to their spawning and growth. in some cases, predators follow fish they prey upon that have migrated to cooler waters, but in other cases they find new prey to sustain them. in other situations, they may become prey for larger fish in an ecosystem. fishing fleets adapt by following the fish they hunt into cooler waters where ideally they capture the hunted species in quantities allotted them by national and international fishery governing body regulations. if the quota system is followed, this will allow recovery of fish populations and sustainable harvesting. aquaculture operations that provide important supplies of food fish worldwide can adapt to warming waters by raising food fish or shellfish that will grow and multiply under the changed range of day/night temperature conditions if the fish they are farming cannot survive in the warmer waters. aquaculturalists also have the option to move their facilities to cooler-temperature waters, but the economic feasibility of doing this has to be evaluated by a benefit to cost analysis. this analysis has to be for the time frame during which the cooler-ecosystem waters are estimated to remain stable within the framework of a time range against global warming/climate change. another adaptation is that food fish currently being raised can be genetically engineered to be resistant to a warmer growth environment without changing their nutrition yield, growth rate, and ability to reproduce.there are diseases that are global threats, others that put regions at risk, and yet others that menace smaller political divisions. humans adapt to the threat of sickness in a population or a sickness itself in several ways. scientists develop methods to eradicate a virus or bacterium health threat, or a chemical/radioactivity threat. failing this, health professionals act to control a disease, to slow or minimize its transmission, and to apply approved therapies and support research to find therapies to treat an illness if one is transmitted. the following discussion draws strongly on the 2013 disease fact sheets put out by the world health organization.vaccines provide a main line of defense against many diseases. smallpox has been eradicated on earth by vaccination. polio has all but been eradicated globally except for a few pockets of the disease in pakistan, afghanistan, and nigeria where, in some cases, religious fundamentalists have beaten and killed health workers tasked with giving the vaccine to children, and in other cases where parents have been warned by the zealots against allowing their children to be vaccinated. recently, 81 polio cases were diagnosed mainly in somalia but also in kenya. this is attributed to the fact that by 2013, 500,000 children in somalia have not received the vaccine and are at risk from this highly contagious disease. it is also attributed to crossborder migration of infected persons into kenya. both governments are stepping up their vaccination programs. there were 59 cases of polio diagnosed in the rest of the world in 2012.measles is a global disease that can be prevented by a vaccine that is safe and cost-effective. measles may soon reach the near-eradication stage. in 1980 and subsequent years, 2.6 million people, mainly children under 5 years of age, died from measles. since 2000, 1 billion children were vaccinated, 225 million in 2011. by 2011, 84 % of the world's children received the measles vaccine, up from 72 % in 2000. from 2000 to 2011, deaths from measles dropped to 71 %, from 548,000 to 158,000. when the vaccination rate reaches 95 %, mainly in low-income countries, the world will have brought another disease close to elimination [6] .seasonal influenza is a global viral illness that afflicts 3-5 million people. the sickness kills 250,000-500,000 people with severe symptoms annually. transmission of the virus takes place when an infected individual coughs or sneezes without covering his/her mouth and releases droplets that can be inhaled by someone up to a meter away. transmission can also be from hands carrying the virus. seasonal influenza affects all age groups, but children less than 2 years old, people over 65, and those with complicating medical problems are most at risk. influenza is a disease to be controlled. the principal control is by safe and effective vaccines that can prevent 70-90 % of influenza cases in healthy adults. secondary controls are obvious for infected persons: cover the mouth when sneezing or coughing, and wash the hands frequently. the influenza vaccine is taken once annually. because strains of the influenza virus change from year to year, adaptation is needed. the adaptation is via a vaccine that is prepared with 3 or 4 strains that scientists determine will be most common during a coming season [7] .other types of influenza and respiratory illnesses have the potential to cause an epidemic or pandemic. they include avian flu and its strains and swine flu if the strains develop the ability for person-to-person transmission after infection, and sars (severe acute respiratory syndrome) and middle east respiratory syndrome (mers) because there is human-to-human transmission of the sicknesses. to the present, the outbreaks of the animal influenza diseases have been contained by quarantining infected people during treatment and by culling flocks and herds, or if available, vaccination of healthy animals. the latter two respiratory illnesses are caused by the coronavirus, and infected people have been in isolation wards. for sars, an illness that broke out in 2003 and spread to 24 countries, isolation of victims and treatment with antiviral drugs and steroids stopped the disease during 2004. mers is a recent (2012/2013) illness that has been confined to jordan, saudi arabia, qatar, and the united arab emirates. the mers virus has been found in camels. infected persons are quarantined in hospitals, but an effective drug treatment is still being sought to complement the normal hospital care-afforded patients.hiv/aids is a global epidemic that killed 25 million people in three decades since 1981. worldwide, in 2011, there were 34 million people with hiv, mainly (33 million or 97 %) in sub-saharan africa and south/southeast asia. the illness is caused by the exchange of body fluids (semen, vaginal excretions, blood, breast milk) from an infected individual with an uninfected person. more than 50 % of the cases of hiv are from heterosexual activity. there is no vaccine against hiv/aids, no cure for it, but there is a cocktail of medicines (antiretroviral treatment) that control viral replication and allow an infected person's immune system to strengthen. this keeps the illness at bay and afflicted people in general good health and productive in their communities. in 2012, only 9.7 million (less than 30 %) of those with hiv in low and middle economies received the antiretroviral treatment. this is changing as more hiv carriers have access to antiretroviral therapy and there are more donations from economically advantaged countries to support hiv stabilization and reduction programs. the number of new cases of hiv is not exploding because more than 50 % of those infected are following protocols that reduce the transmission of the disease.the prevention of transmission methods include access to male and female condoms, blood screening before transfusions, and needle and syringe exchange programs for sterile injections by drug users. hiv testing and education programs and hiv treatment help prevent transmission because individuals in continuous treatment have a very low probability of passing on the disease. male circumcision reduces the infection in men by about 60 %. there is still much progress to be made because there were 2.5 million new cases of hiv in 2011, with 1.8 million of that total in sub-saharan africa. the hiv/aids is a global sickness that is slowly coming under control because of generous donations from governments and foundations in developed countries added to what low-and middle-income countries themselves provide to lower the prevalence and incidence of hiv in their populations [8] .tuberculosis (tb) infected 8.7 million people globally in 2011, killing 1.4 million persons. it is a bacterial disease that spreads among people when infected individuals cough, sneeze, or spit, releasing bacteria into the air where they can be inhaled by others a meter away. although tb occurs worldwide, developing countries carry the largest burden of cases and deaths (95 %). the bulk of new cases are regional in asia (60 %) with sub-saharan africa reporting a large share as well with 2,600 new cases per million inhabitants. there is no vaccination for tb, but the disease can be treated and cured. the treatment is a half-year course of four antimicrobial drugs that must be taken without fail and thus requires continual supervision by healthcare personnel. more than 51 million people have been treated and cured of tb since 1995 and perhaps 20 million lives saved by following the who stop tb strategy protocols including securing adequate, sustained financing, ensuring early reliable detection and diagnosis, and providing approved treatment with a secure effective drug supply. the number of people infected with tb is declining, and from 1990 to 2011, the tb death rate dropped more than 40 %. the success in dealing with tb is muted somewhat because a strain of the bacterium that causes tb has evolved to be multidrug resistant (mdr-tb). in 2011, 310,000 cases of this variant were reported (of the 8.7 million cases worldwide), mainly from india, china, and the russian federation. these are treated with, but do not always respond to, the most effective anti-tb drugs. research into new drugs to deal with this problem is ongoing [9] . there is the question of whether people visiting or immigrating from these countries should be screened before a host country issues them entry visas.regional illnesses threaten the health of 100s of millions of people mainly in tropical and subtropical areas and often affecting children. one of these, the guinea worm disease, is trending toward elimination, if not eradication. this is a parasitic disease caused when people swallow water contaminated with infected water fleas (microscopic copepods) carrying worm larva. the worms release, penetrate the intestines, and move through the body migrating under the skin until they emerge causing swelling and blistering. people infected with guinea worm disease cannot contribute to their communities for months. during the mid-1980s, there were 2.5 million cases mainly in 16 african nations. but attention to where the sources were so that they could be avoided and treated, and assistance in generating clean water, were adaptations that brought the number of cases down to less than 10,000 in 2007. the number of cases continued to decline and was reduced to 542 in 2012 in four african countries: south sudan, chad, ethiopia, and mali. there is no vaccine against guinea worm disease. health officials adapt to counter this sickness in several ways. as noted above, access to clean drinking water is the best way to prevent infection. the prevention or transmission of the worms from infected individuals to healthy persons by proper treatment and hygiene and the use of the larvacide temephos to eliminate the parasite-infected water flea vector and other prevention protocols are important in the control and effort to eliminate/eradicate the disease [10]. the (jimmy) carter institute, atlanta, georgia, usa, has been a principle force since 1986 in the fight to rid the world of guinea worm disease.in tropical and subtropical regions, there are three mosquito-vectored diseases that put millions of people at risk: yellow fever, malaria, and dengue fever. yellow fever is an endemic viral disease in tropical regions of africa and latin america with 200,000 cases reported annually that cause 30,000 deaths. there is no set treatment for afflicted people, but there is an adaptive preventive measure. a vaccine against yellow fever is available that is safe, affordable, and that gives lifelong immunity to the disease with one dose after 7-10 days for 95 % of the people vaccinated. when there is the onset of a yellow fever outbreak where the population lacks vaccination protection, mosquito control is an essential first step in adaptation to prevent or slowdown transmission of the yellow fever virus. spraying insecticides to eliminate breeding sites and kill adult mosquitos is the control used during epidemics to make time for vaccination campaigns in a population and for immunity to take hold. there are limitations to the application of the yellow fever vaccine. first is that babies less than 9 months of age should not be vaccinated or, during an epidemic babies less than 6-9 months of age should not receive the vaccine. second, pregnant women should not be vaccinated except when there is an outbreak of the disease. third, people with a strong allergy to egg protein or those with a marked immunodeficiency or with a thymus problem should not receive the vaccine [11] .malaria is a parasitic disease caused by the bite of an infected mosquito. there is no vaccine against malaria, but one is undergoing a clinical trial in seven african nations with results expected in 2014. a use or no use decision as a control method for malaria will be made in 2015. promising results from an early-stage clinical trial of an unconventional vaccine prepared with live, weakened sporozoites of the malaria parasite were published in 2013. plasmodium falciparum was given to healthy 18-45 year-old volunteers intravenously. the volunteers were grouped to receive 2-6 doses and subsequently exposed to bite by five mosquitoes carrying the parasite. none of the six that received five doses were infected with malaria. three of the 12 that received four doses became infected, whereas 16 of the 17 that received lower doses became infected. of 12 that received no vaccine, 11 became infected. those that became infected were treated with malarial drugs and cured. clearly, higher dosages give protection against infection by malaria [12] . more research and extensive clinical trials are necessary to determine how children respond to the vaccine with adjusted dosages and whether the results from earlystage trial are reproducible in larger volunteer populations. if the results of additional clinical trials go well, the hurdle of producing enough vaccine and adapting it to injection has to be faced.forty percent of the deaths from malaria are of african children in the democratic republic of congo and nigeria. in addition to sub-saharan africa, populations in asia (especially india and the greater mekong region) and latin america suffer from the disease. the effort to deal with the disease that is preventable and curable now centers on control and treatment to reduce the number of cases. in 2010, the who reported that there were 219 million cases and 660,000 deaths (with an uncertainty range of 490,000-836,000). in a 2012 report, researchers suggested that the number of deaths was understated and that their computer model gave a figure for 2010 almost double, 1,238,000 deaths (95 % uncertainty interval of 929,000-1,685,000) [13] . the who stood by its figure stating that much of the data in the cited study were based on verbal testimony of how people had died, not on laboratory diagnosis of samples. either figure represents too many deaths from the disease and have to be reduced. mosquito control is the adaptation that can reduce the transmission of the disease greatly. this includes personal protection by use of proper clothing and/or the application of mosquito repellent, the use of longlasting insecticidal (pyrethroids treated) nets to kill mosquitos and prevent nighttime bites, and indoor residual spraying (remains effective for months). those people infected can be treated with oral artemisinin monotherapy followed by a second drug. failure to complete the treatment as prescribed leaves parasites in a person's blood. no other antimalarial treatment is available so that parasite resistance could become a serious problem. for visitors to a malaria region, antimalarial drugs taken before, during, and after a trip can protect them from the disease. many countries in tropical and subtropical areas have used the above-cited strategies and others to work toward the elimination of malaria. malaria eradication is the goal of the who [14] .dengue fever is a female mosquito-borne virus that infects people with an influenza-like disease in tropical and subtropical regions worldwide. the disease can kill if it evolves to severe dengue. it is endemic in latin america and asia where most cases now occur. since the 1970s, the sickness has spread to more than 100 countries putting about 35 % of the world's 2013 population (2.5 billion people) at risk. dengue fever is especially endemic to urban/semi-urban environments. humans are the main carrier of the virus. after a mosquito bites an infected person, each subsequent bite by the infected mosquito creates another carrier. a mosquito can bite many people each time it feeds. in the americas alone, there were 1.6 billion cases of dengue fever reported in 2010 with 49,000 being severe dengue. there is no vaccination against dengue fever, but research continues to develop one. the main treatment for afflicted persons is to keep them hydrated. adaptation to deal with slowing or stopping the spread of dengue fever involves three main tracks in addition to spraying insecticide to kill mosquitos. the best control method to prevent the transmission of the virus is to deprive mosquitos of sites with shallow, standing water where they can lay eggs and multiply. control can be improved if communities cover and clean water storage containers regularly, and use proven insecticides on them as necessary. finally, individual protection such as the use of mosquito repellants and insecticide-impregnated bed nets can help reduce the incidence of dengue fever as it has with malaria [15] . although controls are known, they are not always applied because of economics and other factors that prevent access to protection methods. the result is that the number of cases of dengue fever reported continues to grow globally. as populations increase in urban locations, the incidence of dengue fever can be expected to increase as well unless strict controls are enforced until a safe and cost-effective vaccine is developed. a positive aspect of the dengue fever problem is that recovery from one serotype of the virus gives immunity for life. however, there are four serotypes of the infectious virus so that recovery from one leaves a person susceptible to the others [15] .chagas is another regional disease. it infects 7-8 million people annually, mostly in 21 latin american countries. it is a parasitic illness that evolves after the bite of a blood-feeding triatomine bug, often on the face, where it defecates close by leaving parasite-bearing feces. parasites access the body when the feces are inadvertently smeared into the bite, the eyes, the mouth, or any skin lesion. the parasites circulate in the blood expressing their presence as a purplish swelling of one eyelid or as a skin lesion. there are several other symptoms as well in this acute stage of the illness, but these may be absent or mild. if diagnosed early during this stage, chagas disease is treatable. the parasite is killed with the medicines benznodazole and nifurtimox taken for 2 months. there are limitations as to who can take these medicines (e.g., not by pregnant women or people with kidney or liver problems). the untreated sickness can cause cardiac alterations and digestive problems that show up 20-40 years after an untreated infection. chagas disease can be spread by blood transfusion and by organ transplant, making blood screening for the parasite essential before a procedure. it can also pass to a fetus from an infected woman. there is no vaccination against the illness so that control of the vector (triatomine sp.) is necessary. the controls adapted by many municipalities include insecticide spraying inside a home, the use of treated bed nets, and hygiene practices that protect food, its preparation, and its storage before eating it [16] . the sickness may recur if control practices become lax. chagas disease is spreading as populations emigrate from latin america to northern countries. blood screening of visitors or immigrants from the countries where chagas is endemic may be necessary, and treatment followed by an infected individual before a host country issues an entrance visa. this would prevent the ingress and possible spread of chagas.outbreaks of diseases in town and cities is most often caused by bacterium-contaminated water or food and poor sanitation. sicknesses such as cholera, typhoid, and various other diarrhea types are examples of such diseases. they are all highly infectious if good hygiene practices are not followed. these diseases are endemic in many countries where populations do not have access to safe water and adequate sanitation. there are vaccinations for some of these sicknesses that may require more than one dose, but they may not be completely effective or long lasting and require revaccination at times specified by medical personnel (e.g., after 2-5 years). otherwise, infected persons can be treated with medicines such as oral rehydration pills or antibiotics. adaptation for prevention is easier called for than realistically available: washing hands with soap and clean water after visiting the toilet, and as noted above, access to safe water and good sanitation. given the millions of people infected by these bacterial diseases and the hundreds of thousand that die from them annually, generally in economically disadvantages countries, there should be an expanding global priority to eliminate the disease-causing conditions, and preparedness to combat an outbreak when it is reported.there are important factors to consider when adopting plans to halt or meliorate the effects of health threats to people in the near and extended future. one is the climate change-driven spread of tropical and subtropical diseases discussed earlier to newly warmer and moister higher-latitude and higher-altitude zones. another is the growth of populations mainly in tropical and subtropical regions in africa, asia, and latin america. together with this latter factor are the increasing populations and population densities in urban centers especially in the regions just cited. an additional factor to consider is whether there is accessibility to populations by healthcare workers or by people to healthcare clinics or hospitals, well-staffed and well-stocked with necessary pharmaceuticals.certainly, future planning has to include funding to support research to develop vaccines for diseases that do not have vaccination as an option against an illness (e. g., malaria, dengue fever) . in addition, improvement of vaccines that are available but that are not completely effective in terms of protection or the length of time they are effective should be a priority in pharmaceutical and biotechnology laboratories.scientists presented a fine review of the status of vaccine research from the design and development of vaccines to discussion of vaccines and infectious diseases (e.g., hiv, malaria, tuberculosis, pneumococcal disease, and influenza) [17] . they also discuss vaccines against enteric infections and viral diseases of livestock as well as vaccines against non-infectious diseases (e.g., cancer) and against chronic noninfectious diseases. continued and repeated education classes on how to prevent the transmission of diseases and free supplies of materials that work to this end (e.g., insecticide-treated bed netting, male and female condoms) are essential to reducing the prevalence and incidence of diseases as are safe water and uncontaminated food. as new medicines or combinations of medicines are developed, tested, and found to be effective in controlling diseases, they become part of the protocol for either curing disease or controlling disease to reduce transmission while allowing persons to carry on with their lives. in these times of easy and rapid migration, one wonders whether screening of visitors or immigrants for diseases known to be endemic or active in the countries or regions from which they come should be required so as to prevent a carrier from infecting others and spreading a disease (e.g., chagas disease, cholera, tuberculosis). this was done at airports during the sars scare for people leaving or entering a country (e.g., china) and likely limited the transmission of the sars virus and spread of the disease.preparedness for a disease outbreak, response to an outbreak, and management of resources during and post-outbreak are the keys to adapting to health threats that could affect future generations. this means developing the capability to extend the reach of health services to regions where climate change brings warmer, moister conditions to higher-latitude and higher-altitude ecosystems that are now reached by disease vectors that have expanded into these formerly cooler and drier environments as a result of global warming. adapting to this reality and planning ahead makes it possible to deal with and stem an incipient outbreak of disease before it is transmitted and spread to the general population. this becomes essential when there is a future disease outbreak in large, dense populations in tropical and subtropical urban centers as well as those in regions warmed and humidified by climate change to subtropical and tropical settings. remember that urban populations worldwide, especially in africa, asia, and latin america, are where much of the global population growth will take place during the next few generations. under these conditions, diseases can spread rapidly in many ways. these include from bites of vectors, by respired droplets after an infected person coughs or sneezes, and by touching surfaces bearing viruses, bacteria, or parasites. diseases are also spread by ingestion of contaminated water and/or tainted food, and by other methods of infection transmission. disease transmission can be checked by rapid response teams with appropriate and sufficient supplies to treat (and perhaps places to quarantine) those in the infected population.lastly, it must be noted that there are many other diseases in addition to those cited previously for which prevention, treatment, and cures are research priorities in laboratories worldwide. in addition, there are addiction diseases that can trigger health problems in important segments of society. these include smoking (e.g., emphysema, lung cancer), alcoholism (e.g., cirrhosis of the liver), drugs (e.g., various psychological and physical ills), and overeating (obesity, diabetes, high blood pressure). adaptation to these health threats involves public education forums through various media outlets, counseling, and sponsored groups with their individual group meeting, and programs are assisting many in breaking from an addiction to the benefit of a healthier life. adaptation to meet the health challenges in the past, and in contemporary times has been a slow, progressive adventure with many successes but with much yet to be done. this is the planned path for the future: meet the challenges of societal health threats, resolve many, and keep researching to resolve others.a special ipcc report in 2012 examines in a general way adaptation to a changing climate as a risk management approach [18] . it uses pre-planning to reduce exposure and vulnerability to extreme hazard events by preparing for them beforehand, responding to their impacts on people, structures, and infrastructure, and having in place recovery systems that can act when a danger condition eases. in this way, there will be an ability of populations to cope with future risks brought on by a changing force with which a hazard impacts a community, changes in the frequency of an occurrence, and extension of the spatial reach of its destructive power. much of this has been discussed in the chapters of the book you are reading.an understanding of what is being done now to adapt to the various problems society faces during the second decade of the twenty-first stimulates proposals of how to adapt to them as global conditions change in the future. to this end, the world bank commissioned a study on the effects global warming as it increased from 0.8°c that exists on our planet now to what can be expected if the warming reached 2°c, a change that many scientists believe we can adapt to, and then reached 4°c as warming continues [19] . the study centered on regions with high population growth and great susceptibility to be negatively impacted by climate changes: (1) sub-saharan africa where food production is at risk: (2) southeast asia where coastal zones and productivity are at risk; and (3) south asia where there could be extremes of water scarcity and excess. the effects of higher temperatures from global warming and climate change included what has been discussed in previous chapters of this book: heat, drought, sea level rise, coastal zones, typhoons, flooding, river runoff, water availability, ecosystem shifts, crop yields, fishing, aquaculture, livestock, health and poverty, and tourism. projections such as those published in the world bank study give impetus to governments, international institutions, multinational companies, private foundations, and ngos to think now, to invest now, and to research now for adaptations that can be realized in good time and that will provide global citizenry with a good quality of life where needed.in this book, we have examined existing human populations and the problems they are experiencing in the second decade of the twenty-first century and have also considered growing populations globally and additional problems future generations will experience. we have discussed strategies on how to cope with manyfaceted threats to citizens. these include how to nourish those who need food and water, how to shelter people safely from natural and anthropogenic hazards, how to provide them with healthcare, education, and employment, and how to prepare them for the evolving global warming and the physical and biological dangers that ensue from climate change. given the present global conditions with about 14 % of our earth's population suffering from malnutrition and more than 21 % not having access to safe water, our capability of nourishing a billion and a half more people by 2035 is in question. also problematical is our capability to provide for an additional billion people 15 years later, or a total of at least 10.3 billion people by the turn of the century, that is, if we reach those population figures or have population crashes such as from pandemics that can kill scores of millions if a disease is not immediately treatable, or an unlikely but possible nuclear conflagration that could do the same. less likely yet is an explosion of a small asteroid or comet in the atmosphere such as happened in a poorly inhabited area of siberia in 1908. here, an exploding mass more than 60 m in size knocked down millions of trees in an area greater than 2,000 km 2 (close to 800 mi 2 ) with energy thought to be 1,000 times greater than the hiroshima atomic bomb. clearly, such an event could kill the population of a megacity if it were to occur.another question is whether national governments are economically strong enough and have the will to set priorities that adopt strategies to protect citizens from natural (e.g., earthquakes) and anthropogenic (e.g., pollution) hazards as well as from extreme weather conditions that are supported by global warming (pollution of the atmosphere) but are naturally occurring. countries can also improve social and economic conditions by investing in health care and education for their citizens in order to form a sound and knowledgeable cadre that would be attractive to investors interested in locating a development project that would provide employment. again, this is in question given limited national economic capabilities and the increasing numbers of people to be accommodated, especially in several developing and less developed countries in africa, asia, latin america, and the middle east.at this point, we must ask, "what is the carrying capacity of the earth?" have we reached it at 7 billion given the billions who are today under served in developing and less developed countries? some scientists will answer yes, whereas others believe that advances in agriculture and technology can allow population expansion although to what point is not defined. can countries that are poisoning their environments do a turn around to save their citizens from grief? can they exert controls on operations that create unhealthy conditions that sicken people, lessen agricultural production, and otherwise disrupt local, regional, and globalcovid-19 (coronavirus disease-2019), the novel and new disease spreads through recent coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2) from wuhan, china (huang et al., 2020) . this disease is characterized by acute respiratory disorder, pneumonia, dry cough, fever and body pain with high rate of mortality, particularly in older people or those with underlying health conditions (lai et al., 2020) . covid-19 has been declared as pandemic by world health organization (who) in march 11, 2020 and till june 25, 2020 confirmed infections are 9110186 with 473061 deaths across 216 countries (who, 2020) . humans are main transmission source of sars-cov-2 through human to human interactions; in case, any infected person with mild or even no symptoms come in contact with healthy person (kratzel et al., 2020) . so far, no medication or vaccine is available to cope with this novel coronavirus and infection rate is increasing drastically across the globe. in current scenario preventive measures and healthy life style with j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f 4 the active reagents of alcohol based hand sanitizers are ethanol or isopropyl alcohol at 60-95% concentration (barrett, 2015) . langer et al. (2004) reported alcohol based solutions with ethanol, 2-propanol and distilled water (softasept®) and disinfectant with octenidine dihydrochloride and phenoxyethanol as the vital reagents (octenisept®). they also considered lavasept® with hexamethylenbiguanide (langer, 2004) . the most popular hand sanitizers such as dettol® contains alcohol denat and purell® includes ethyl alcohol 70% v/v, isopropyl alcohol and aminomethyl propanol.coronavirus pandemic has brought a shortage of hand sanitizers all around the world (suthivarakom, 2020) . world health organization (who) has directed the local manufacturers regarding the preparation of hand sanitizers. who suggested two formulations for lesser volume production; one with ethanol (96%) and the other with isopropyl alcohol (99.8%). final product concentration suggested by who for household or local production is ethanol (80%) v/v, hydrogen peroxide (0.125%) v/v and glycerol (1.45%) v/v for formulation a and isopropyl alcohol (75%) v/v, hydrogen peroxide (0.125%) v/v and glycerol (1.45%) v/v for formulation b (si table 1 -2).hand sanitizer results toxicity that leads to fatal, attributed by accidental ingestion (santos et al., 2017) absorption through dermal contact (leeper et al., 2000) and suicidal ingestion (zaman et al., 2002) .j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f 5 unclear due to lack of up to date research (lachenmeier, 2008) . ingestion or dermal contact with ethanol based hand sanitizer is associated to minimal systematic toxicity (ellis-caleo and burstein, 2017) . different people exhibit different reaction and tolerance level to ethanol that resulted difficulties to determine the degree of toxic dose of ethanol based hand rub. according to kirschner et al. (2007) , the dermal uptake of ethanol with detection limit of 0.5 mg/l were considered insignificant as the serum ethanol concentration was in the range of 1.0-1.5 mg/l after applying 74.1% ethanol-based disinfectant for 10 minutes. in a study conducted by kramer et al. (2007) , 12 volunteers were given hand sanitizers containing 95% (w/w), 85% (w/ w) or 55% (w/w) ethanol. 4ml was applied for 30 seconds over 20 minutes with a minute break in between. 20.95 mg/l, 11.45 mg/l and 6.9 mg/l, respectively were found to be the maximum average absorptions. the amount of absorbed ethanol was 1365 mg (2.3%), 630 mg (1.1%), and 358 mg (0.9%), correspondingly. furthermore, blood acetaldehyde was observed, its peak median was found to be 0.57 mg/l. this study supported the fact that acute exposure is not toxic, however an impaired performance is expected if blood ethanol concentrations reach 200-300 mg/l and above (gerchow, 2005) . according to lachenmeier (2008) , the concentrations of above-mentioned hand rubs studied by kirschner et al. (2007) and kramer et al. (2007) depicted that achieved values are far less than the values acquired for acute toxicity, however chronic toxicity must be accounted for the continuous application of sanitizers in the safety evaluation.j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f 6 months of age. this type of fatal intoxication was also defined by niggemeyer et al. (1964) . skin necrosis and risen blood alcohol level have been noticed in pre-term infants, whose skins are ineffective for toxic compounds such as alcohol (harpin, 1982; al-jawad 1983) . ethanol is not recommended to use on damaged skin and not even in cosmetics (lachenmeier, 2008) .dermal contact of ethanol cause irritation and allergic condition of skin and eyes while prolonged exposure results dryness or cracking of skin with peeling redness or itching (njh, 2016b) . a german study reported that regular use of ethanol is responsible for skin irritation or contact dermatitis (lachenmeier, 2008) . a recent study published in 2018 reported that consistent use of ethanol based hand sanitizer influence the concentration of urinary ethyl glucuronide whereas its production level was observed higher than in normal conditions (without use of ethanol hand rub) and lead to positive analytical results (salomone et al., 2018) . on the other hand, despite of various published studies indicating health threats by ethanol based hand sanitizer, kramer et al, 2007 reported that ethanol-based hand-rubs is safe to use. this study was conducted to evaluate ethanol dermal absorption during hygienic and surgical hand disinfection, and to quantify absorption levels in humans. results above stated publication indicated that dermal absorption was below the toxic level in humans and can be considered safe.acute alcohol toxicity may occur via oral consumption of any household product such as alcohol based hand sanitizers (abhs), mouthwash, cosmetics etc. that contain alcohol (vonghia, 2008) . the clinical symptoms express themselves at a particular blood alcohol concentration as figure 1 exhibited that symptoms started to appear in one hour after ingestion by an hospitalized patient, where hemodialysis was started after (16-22 hours) the peak osmolality was measured.common symptoms that appear after ingestion are; nausea, vomiting, epigastria pain, and varying degrees of central nervous system depression (archer et al., 2007) . ethanol toxicity is also associated with respiratory depression which results into respiratory arrest hypothermia, cardiac dysrhythmias with possible cardiac arrest, hypoglycemia, ketoacidosis and hypotension (gormley et al., 2012) . a 300 mg/dl ethanol level in serum may lead towards increased risk of respiratory depression and arrest while a ≥500 mg/dl level might be responsible for cardiac arrest and death (vonghia et al., 2008) . ethanol exposure can be associated with acute liver damage, myoglobinuria, hypokalemia, hypomagnesemia, hypocalcemia, hypophosphatemia (wilson et al., 2015) j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f isopropyl alcohol occurs mainly due to accidental ingestion of the compound and sometime due to rectal or topical applications. 160-240 ml (ashkar, 1971 ) and 250 ml (mcbay, 1973) considered to be the lethal dose of isopropyl alcohol. there are several studies reported that lead topical application of isopropyl alcohol to unconsciousness (mcfadden, 1969; moss, 1970; wise, 1969; vermeulen, 1966) . according to material safety data sheet by halloa enterprises, acute toxicity in humans occurs at ld50 > 2000 mg / kg (orally), through dermal exposure acute toxicity will occur at ld50 > 2000 mg / kg and via inhalation it will be lc50 > 5 mg / l.concentrations of 1 g/liter of blood or more have been found in fatal poisonings (adelson, 1962) . the fatal dose is about 250 ml (mcbay, 1973) .exposure of minimum dose has not proved any serious health issue while consumption of 20-30 ml (50% isopropanol solution) showed minor signs and symptoms (fuller and hunter, 1927) .results of a case series showed that ingestion of 1 ounce (oz) of isopropanol solution results serious clinical effects in children under age of six years (stremski and hennes, 2000) .approximately 0.5-1 ml/kg of 70% isopropyl alcohol-based sanitizer is considered toxic dose but it may differ from person to person depending on individual tolerance level (matteucci, 2011).possible lethal dose of isopropanol for adults is 240 ml approximately (gosselin et al., 1984) . if orally ingested, isopropyl alcohol absorbs completely within 2 hours, where liver metabolize isopropyl alcohol into acetone and kidney excrete this acetone (zaman et al., 2002) .isopropyl alcohol-a cns depressant, metabolized into acetone which may result into prolonged cns depression, decrease respiratory drive and hypotension (trummel et al., 1996; matteucci, 2011) . isopropyl alcohol also irritates mucosal lining in gastrointestinal tract (slaughter et al, 2014) and contributes to gastritis (matteucci, 2011), associated to cause ketosis (trummel et al., 1996), hypoglycemia (abramson and singh, 2000) , respiratory depression, and j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f 9 increase in the serum cretinine (zaman et al., 2002) . higher dose may cause myocardial depression while its prolonged use contributes to rhabdomyolysis, myoglobinuria, and acute renal failure. death has been linked with ingestion of 100-200ml of 70% isopropyl solution and with ≥400 mg/dl with plasma concentration level (zaman et al., 2002) . a case was reported in 2007 that a 43 years old person get hypotensive and delirious due to isopropyl alcohol consumption (emadi et al., 2007) . dermal absorption of isopropanol can cause irritation of skin and ice, prolonged and frequent exposure results in skin rash, itching, redness and dryness (njh, 2016a).toxicity of hydrogen peroxide is dependent on its concentration with ingestion as common route of exposure (fda, 2003) . it has been recognized that ingestion of low concentration of hydrogen peroxide (3% solution) is not acute hazardous for human health, and is responsible for minor health problems (moon et al., 2006) . in few cases it causes portal vein embolism, gastrointestinal issues, mild mucosal irritation and vomiting (astdr, 2014; sung et al., 2018.) bowel dilation has also been reported to be associated with exposure to 3% hydrogen peroxide (watt et al., 2004; moon et al., 2006) .with tissue catalase and decomposes into oxygen and water. amount of released oxygen is associated with concentration of hydrogen peroxide. 1 ml of 3% hydrogen peroxide is responsible to produce 10 ml of oxygen at standard temperature and pressure which is responsible for gastric distension and gas emboli. when higher amount of oxygen produced within the small lumen for instance stomach, bubbles can forced through epithelial interstices.occur easily in multiple organs (moon et al., 2006) .a study reported 670 cases of 3% h 2 o 2 exposure, revealed that 77% were ingestion cases and about half of 77% were children under age of 6 years. all these exposures cases did not exhibited gas emboli and revealed only mild symptoms such as nausea and vomiting. only a child, which ingested 2-4 oz of 3% h 2 o 2 was affected by gastric ulcer and duodenal erosion, whereas mucosal injury was also indicated in that child through endoscopy (herny et al., 1996) .however, very few cases of ingestion of 3% h 2 o 2 in sanitizer caused death when exposed with higher dose (moon, et al., 2006) . the death of 18 months old child was reported due to ingestion of 8 oz of 3% h 2 o 2 solution caused by fatal air embolism. dermal contact with 3% hydrogen peroxide leads towards mild irritation of skin and mucous membrane (njh, 2016c)most of hand sanitizers are available in brightly hued bottles and have appealing smell like candy or any food flavor which is very tempting to young children. if a child licks a small amount of sanitizer to taste, is probably not going to become sick but ingesting any more than a taste could be at risk of alcohol poisoning (aapcc, 2020). young children including infants are more susceptible to get sick from alcohol intoxication than adolescences. young children have declined liver glycogen stores, which increase their susceptibility to develop hypoglycemia and numerous pharmokinetic factors which make them more prone to alcohol poisoning. recent reports have recognized serious concerns, including apnea, acidosis, and coma in young children who ingested alcohol-based (alcohol) hand sanitizer (santos et al., 2017) .a publication from cdc researchers investigated data that reported to national poison data system (npds) from 2011-14 on exposures to hand sanitizers in children ≤12 years old ( table   journal pre-proof j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f 11 2). analysis was stratified by the age group (0-5 years and 6-12 years). about 70,669 hand sanitizer exposures were reported in this age group, 92% were exposed with alcohol-based sanitizers and remaining 8% with non-alcoholic sanitizers. number of exposers with hand sanitizers in children is given in figure 2 (santos et al., 2017) .after the outbreak of covid-19 in december 2019 usage of hand sanitizer were suggested by who as a preventive measure to control this pandemic, which leads to exponentially increased usage of alcohol based hand sanitizers as hand hygiene. in early five months of 2020, american association of poison control center reported 9504 alcoholic hand sanitizer exposure cases in children under the age of 12 years ( table 3 ) and recognized that even a small amount of alcohol can cause alcohol poisoning in children that is responsible for confusion, vomiting and drowsiness, and in severe cases, respiratory arrest and death (aapcc, 2020).medical experts have started to warn that excessive use of alcohol based hand sanitizer as a preventive measure against coronavirus indirectly increase the risk of infection through skin disorders. too much use of sanitizer against new pneumonia causing virus is responsible for skin damage and reduce its ability to work as a barrier against other harmful viruses (tachikawa, 2020).sanitizers have been frequently used all over the world as a disinfectant for better hand hygiene. excessive use of alcohol based sanitizer increased permeability of skin (schuster, 2014) and deprives oil and water from skin and leads to skin roughness and irritation. dry and damaged skin is hotbed for many diseases causing bacteria with increased risk of virus entry into skin (tachikawa, 2020). research reports have been indicated that overuse of sanitizers in some cases may increase risk of viral outbreaks (vogel, 2011) . previously published report revealed that the journal pre-proof j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f 12 extensive use of alcohol based hand sanitizer results the increased risk of noro-virus outbreak.survey of 160 care facilities was conducted to identify the association between preferential use of alcohol based sanitizer and noro-virus outbreak. out of total surveyed facilities, 91 responded positively in survey with outcomes of 73 outbreaks in which 29 were confirmed for norovirus.staff in facilities that experienced norovirus was likely to use hand sanitizers six times more than soap and water (blaney et al., 2011) .since coronavirus pandemic number of scientists, doctors and government advice community people for the best hygiene practices and protect them from covid-19 by using hand sanitizers (morgan, 2020) . alcohol based sanitizer have been used since last few decades to control many microbial-born diseases worldwide (pidot et al., 2018) . it has been observed that overuse of alcohol based hand sanitizer results antimicrobial resistance, which can put more burdens on already struggling healthcare professionals. repeated exposure of disinfectant, antibiotics or other genotoxic chemicals to microbes tends them to get mutations through natural process that make them resistant to survive from repeated use of hand sanitizer (morgan, 2020) . pidot et al, 2018 published report on antimicrobial resistant in enterococcus faecium against alcohol based hand rubs. alcohol resistance in e. faecium was tested in 139 hospital isolates during 1997 to 2015 and results showed that e. faecium isolates after 2010 were 10 times more resistant to alcohol than older isolates. in early 2000, australian hospitals started to mount more hand sanitizers that caused rise in enterococcal infections with more rapidly. similar outcomes were observed from other parts of the world due to over use of alcohol based hand sanitizer (schreiber, 2018) . it has been reported that e. coli and pseudomonas aeruginosa were 48% and 64%, respectively, resistant against all available sanitizers in market. pnemounia aeruginosa and j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f gram negative bacteria are resistant against cool n cool, safegaurd, purell, fresh up, insta foam sanitizers (hayat and munnawar, 2016) .ethanol has its widespread use in industries and homes and its impacts on humans and environment are still debatable (pendlington, 2001) . aquatic organisms could be directly on the other hand terrestrial animals are less likely to be exposed to ethanol spills as it volatilize or penetrate deeper in the soil or into ground water and biodegrade rapidly. but it is expected that local microbes and other invertebrates may get affected by spill (mass dep, 2011).according to usepa, 2011 ecotox report, wildlife gets affected with different percentage solutions of ethanol.in table 4 benchmark concentrations of ethanol impact on aquatic and wildlife suggested that aquatic life is at greater risk as compared to terrestrial life. hazards associated with ingestion of food containing ethanol are unlikely, as it cause adverse effect due to high volatility of ethanol and no accumulation in fatty tissues. ethanol wildlife benchmarks are shown in si table 3 based on no observed effect levels.if large amounts of isopropanol are spilled on soil, it may get infiltrated and could contaminate the groundwater. isopropanol has the ability to get oxidized by the photo-chemicals in the air which make it least persistent in the atmosphere. it cannot bio-accumulate due to rapid biodegradability. large amounts of spill in aquatic bodies may cause environmental impairment because it has high potency to deplete oxygen in water body (babec, 2001 ). this will ultimately impart adverse impacts on aquatic living system. in a reported data, traces quantities of propanol have also been detected in drinking water samples collected from industrial areas and found nontoxic (hsdb, 2012) . rather than accidental spills, normal isopropanol usage does not have any environmental impact. isopropanol also does not participate to generate ground level ozone and photochemical smog like other volatile organic compounds. ecological toxicity linked with isopropyl alcohol is presented in si table 4 .j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f reaction with other compounds. it degrades in water and soil at fast rate and has no potential to accumulate in food chain. the european (eu) risk assessment for hydrogen peroxide (european commission, 2003) found no abiotic half-life in water or soil because it is a short-lived substance in the environment. the projected half-life in the atmosphere is 24 hours. the eu risk assessment for hydrogen peroxide (european commission, 2003) found short-term toxicity data in fish, invertebrates and algae from aquatic environment. the lowermost extended-term aquatic toxicity test result was noec of 0.1 mg/l for algae. in addition to algal studies, long-term data are available for zebra mussels as well. a quantifiable risk assessment was achieved for aquatic organisms and microorganisms. the assessment accomplishes that no further information or testing is required for hydrogen peroxide (hera, 2005) .frequent and increased use of hand sanitizer results toxicity that leads to fatal; may be attributed by accidental ingestion, absorption through dermal contact and suicidal ingestion.ethanol's potential to cause skin cancer through skin absorption and carcinogenicity is in scientific debate and investigation, though it is still unclear due to lack of up to date research. great focus was placed on consumer purchasing behavior in the early stages of the covid-19 global pandemic. in america, panic buying was heavily covered on the news and social media, with countless outlets reporting shortages in health and cleaning products, such as hand sanitizer and cleaning wipes (telford and bhattarai, 2020, knoll, 2020) . this type of buying, and the related product shortages, have the potential to impact individual health and well-being and the safety of others through product supply chains and overall burden on medical services. the behavior was largely deemed a result of overreaction or greed on the part of consumers, or as a result of intent to resell on the part of some online sellers. although such motives may have stimulated some consumer purchasing, not all rapid purchasing was likely of this variety. instead, some individuals adopted a rapid response to the approaching pandemic to improve their health outcomes. this proactive coping can be viewed as a valuable health-protective behavior in the face of covid-19. currently, the factors predicting the purchasing of health care products at the early stages of a global pandemic are unknown. further, it is unclear what psychological factors are key in motivating such purchasing. the aim of the current study was to obtain information on who engaged in this preparatory purchasing behavior as well as on a key psychological variable that may motivate this behavior.when considering what predicts protective preparatory purchasing, there are a wide array of variables that could be implicated. we began the study of this issue by testing variables known to influence susceptibility to and progress of covid-19: age, income, race, gender, and possessing a health risk factor for covid-19. importantly, these predictors represent actionable points of intervention. it may be possible to change preparatory purchasing behaviors to be more equitable by addressing health disparities or by intervening to ensure risk perceptions are accurate.age has been prominently discussed as a predictor of poor outcomes https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ssci.2020.104894 received 7 may 2020; accepted 15 june 2020 for covid-19. age is associated with a higher risk of both hospitalization (garg et al., 2020) and death (ruan et al., 2020) due to covid-19. this information about age risks has spread widely. also, previous studies have identified older age to be correlated with more preventative health behaviors (deeks et al., 2009 ). this popular understanding of age in relation to covid-19 risk, paired with existing evidence that older individuals engage in more preventative behaviors, suggests that age is a likely predictor or preparatory purchasing behavior.while income level may not directly influence susceptibility to covid-19, those who earn less may struggle to adhere to recommended preventative behaviors, such as social distancing. those in low-income areas are less likely to stay home following directives to do so (chiou and tucker, 2020) , perhaps due to a lack of resources or requirements to physically attend work. thus, it is possible that, due to increased exposure to others, individuals in low-income areas are motivated to engage in more preparatory purchasing. alternatively, it could be that low-income individuals purchase fewer products due to financial constraints. as such, divergent predictions could be made regarding the relationship between income and preparatory purchasing behavior.black communities have been disproportionately impacted by covid-19 in the united states. infection rates are up to three times higher in predominately black communities, and death rates are up to six times higher (yancy, 2020; garg et al., 2020) . other differences in race and ethnicity require further study; however, this initial evidence is reason to consider that race may influence preparatory behaviors, including purchasing health and safety products.gender represents another variable that may play a role in preparatory purchasing. there is emerging evidence that men are disproportionately impacted by covid-19 (garg et al., 2020) , and daily postings of cases and demographic information mean that this information is widely accessible to the public. further, gender differences exist in a variety of health behaviors, including both risky behaviors (e.g., alcohol consumption) and preventative behaviors (e.g., health screening; dawson et al., 2007; lemasters et al., 2014; azevedo et al., 2007) . although these results vary based on behavior, women generally take part in more preventative behaviors than men. further, gender differences are also seen in the utilization of health services (bertakis et al., 2000) , and in shopping and consumer behavior (seock and bailey, 2007; barber et al., 2009) , suggesting that gender may play an important role in health-protective purchasing behavior related to covid-19.covid-19 can infect anyone; however, the severity of the resulting illness is linked to certain medical conditions. it has been established that chronic illnesses, including cardiac illnesses, chronic respiratory illnesses, diabetes, and hiv, place individuals at high risk for complications resulting from covid-19. although some risk factors are clear, others remain unclear. for example, it is not yet known how chronic illnesses, such as hypertension (schiffrin et al., 2020) , affect those with the novel coronavirus. given the variations and uncertainty of objective risk, perceptions of covid-19 risk factors are likely to influence health behaviors like preparatory purchasing. the influence of risk perceptions is a well-established predictor of many protective health behaviors (ferrer and klein, 2015) . thus, it can be anticipated that perceptions of possessing a risk for covid-19 will predict safety-focused acts, such as preparatory product purchasing.if predictors of preparatory purchasing are identified, the question turns to why these variables have such effects. in the present study, we assess the possibility that affect, particularly the emotion of worry, serves as a critical psychological mechanism linking predictors to purchasing behavior. prior research indicates that affect often relates to both objective risk and perceptions of risk (e.g., lipkus et al., 2005) , and affect has been identified as a salient and proximal cue that stimulates health-protective action (williams et al., 2018) . for example, a meta-analysis by mccaul et al. (1996) found both risk for breast cancer and worry about cancer were related to higher levels of preventative breast cancer screening. the current climate around covid-19 has provoked feelings of worry in many individuals. worry over covid-19 likely varies between individuals, and it may be surmised that worry is elevated by the aforementioned predictor variables linked to covid-19. in the present study, it is hypothesized that the state of worry mediates the relationship between risk for covid-19 and preparatory purchasing. this possibility is consistent with other research in which affect served as a mediator between perceived risk and health behaviors (chapman and coups, 2006; zhao and nan, 2016; kiviniemi and eliis, 2014) .to assess preparatory purchasing, a larger range of health-related products were assessed. some products, such as hand soap, are considered health-protective and were assessed. amidst the rapid pace and confusion of the covid-19 pandemic, information about what products provide a health benefit has been contradictory and inconsistent. some unproven products have been recommended in social media and from official sources, including leaders of the american government. assessing a wide array of preparatory purchases presents an opportunity to capture individuals' attempts to engage in self-protective behaviors broadly.participants were contacted using the online participant recruitment system prolific and were provided with monetary compensation for their participation in the study. of the 344 participants, 54.1% identified as women, 43.9% identified as men, and 1.5% identified as another gender or preferred not to disclose their gender. participants ranged in age from 18 to 74 (m = 32.69, sd = 11.60). participants represented 44 of the united states and were 68% white, 16% asian/asian-american, 5% black, 5% latinx, and 6% two or more races.a demographic questionnaire assessed participant age, race/ethnicity (coded as white non-latinx vs. non-white or latinx), gender, and income (coded as above or below $75,000). for purposes of data analyses, the gender variable was recoded to only include those who identified as men or women, as there were not enough "other" responses in order to be included in the analysis (n = 4).in order to simply capture risk related to covid-19 during a time k.s. clemens, et al. safety science 130 (2020) 104894 when new information was regularly being introduced about risk factors and affected groups, a single-item measure was used, reading "do you have any condition that makes you more vulnerable to the coronavirus?" response options included, yes, no, and unsure. preliminary analyses indicated that individuals selecting "yes" and "unsure" responded the same on product purchasing and worry. as such, two groups were created, individuals indicating they did not have a risk factor (n = 241) an those who did or were uncertain (n = 101).as a global pandemic on the scale of covid-19 is unprecedented in modern times, measures to assess worry that capture the full extent of the situation around the coronavirus had not been created. in order to simply assess worry surrounding the situation, a single-item, 7-point, likert-style measure was created, modeled after the worry domains questionnaire (tallis et al., 1992) . this single item reads, "how worried are you about the coronavirus?" with response options ranging from 1 (not worried at all) to 7 (extremely worried).a comprehensive list of 24 types of health and cleaning products was provided to participants under two prompts. in order to include the broadest cut of the population, both conventional and alternative health and cleaning products were included. items were chosen for inclusion based on current recommendations from the united states centers for disease control and prevention and on relatedness to covid-19 symptoms. participants were first provided with the prompt, "which products did you purchase or attempt to purchase in the past 2-3 weeks specifically in preparation for covid-19, the novel coronavirus?" before being shown items specifically for health and cleaning products. these items asked, "in preparation for the coronavirus, which of the following health products/cleaning products did you purchase or attempt to purchase? (please select all that apply)." the ten health products included items such as bleach, clorox/lysol (name-brand commercial cleaning) wipes, hand sanitizer (at least 60% alcohol), natural hand sanitizer (non-alcohol primary ingredient), hand soap, vinegar, and a write-in option. the 14 health products included items such as cold or flu medicine, an extra supply of prescription medication, acetaminophen or ibuprofen, essential oils, herbal supplements, and writein options for other medication, supplements, or vitamins. the total number of preparatory purchases were summed to form the dependent measure (m = 4.30; sd = 3.17).this study was part of a larger project on covid-19 that was approved by the university of toledo institutional review board. all procedures were conducted in compliance with the guidelines of the american psychological association. inclusion criteria included being 18 years old or older and currently residing in the united states. for other purposes, participants first were shown one of five brief handwashing messages. importantly, the variables of interest to the current study, risk factor perceptions, worry, and product purchases, did not differ by the message shown. thus, this handwashing message variable is not discussed further. participants then completed the previously described measures of preparatory purchases, worry, and risk for covid-19.first, an analysis was conducted to determine which variables predicted preparatory purchasing. a between-subjects anova including (1) perceived covid-19 risk factor, and the demographic variables of (2) gender, (3) age (as a covariate), and (4) income as predictor variables revealed that only having or being uncertain about having a covid-19 risk factor predicted preparatory purchasing, f(16, 320) = 4.77, p = .03. specifically, those reporting having, or being uncertain about having, a risk factor purchased more preparatory products (m = 5.24) as compared to those without a risk factor (m = 4.20).next, the relationships between the predictor variables and worry about covid-19 were assessed. a between-subjects anova with the predictors violated the assumption of homogeneity of variance. as such, separate welch's anovas, which does not require the assumption of homogeneity of variance, were used. results indicated that only two variables predicted worry. first, individuals reporting having, or being uncertain about having, a covid-19 risk factor experienced greater worry, f(1, 271.53) = 40.70, p < .001. second, women also reported greater worry than men, f(1, 305.97) = 10.94, p < .001. finally, a correlational analysis also indicated that worry about covid-19 was significantly related to increased preparatory purchases, r = 0.18, p < .001.because of the relationships between risk factor, worry, purchasing behavior, and gender, a moderated-mediation analysis was conducted using process for spss (hayes, 2017) . specifically, the model tested if (1) the relationship between perception of a covid-19 risk factor and preparatory purchasing behavior was statistically mediated by worry, and (2) if the link from worry to preparatory purchasing was moderated by gender. worry completely mediated the relationship between having a risk factor and preparatory purchasing. critically, this mediation effect was moderated by gender, such that it occurred for men (95% ci [0.42, 1.39]) but not women (95% ci [−0.49, 0.51] ). this model resulted in a significant index of moderated-mediation, 95% ci [−1.12, −0.06] (see fig. 1 ).product shortages and difficulties in obtaining health and cleaning supplies present difficulties for individuals and organizations in ensuring the health and safety of those they are responsible for during the spread of a highly contagious disease. preparatory purchasing in response to covid-19 in the united states has been primarily presented as a result of panic or selfishness on the part of the consumer. while there are certainly some newsworthy cases that align with such explanations, the present results suggest a more complex explanation for the widespread purchasing of preparatory products, in that at least some of this product purchasing was by individuals who were most at risk from covid-19, and that this action was driven by worry. those individuals who perceived themselves to be more at risk, or were uncertain about their risk, for covid-19 were more likely to engage in self-protective preparatory purchasing than those who did not view themselves as being at risk. this relationship was statistically mediated through covid-19-related worry. these findings lend support to previous studies, which have shown a mediational relationship between risk factors and affect in health decision making (e.g., kiviniemi and eliis, 2014) . this study also extends these findings by demonstrating that this relationship occurs in the context of an unprecedented global pandemic, when emotions and salience of health decisions are high and individual risk is ambiguous.in a time of rapidly evolving information, it is difficult to always fully capture and portray the factors that put individuals most at risk. clearly communicating these factors are essential in order to prevent under-or overestimation of risk. in terms of preparatory purchasing behavior, accurate risk communication may help prevent those who underestimate their risk from being unable to purchase needed supplies at a later date. encouraging accurate perceptions of risk may help to ensure access to needed supplies for all people, which may, in turn, help to reduce the spread of disease and reduce the burden on the healthcare system.gender was found to significantly moderate the relationship between worry and preparatory purchasing. specifically, possessing a risk factor for covid-19 was related to increased worry, which in turn, was linked to more preparatory purchasing, but this only occurred in men. women were less influenced by having a covid-19 risk factor, which may be due to their overall higher level of worry about covid-19. these results have implications for future health behavior research as they suggest that worry may be an effective motivator for individuals with low levels of worry, such as men with many health-protective behaviors.these findings should be understood in light of the limitations of the present study. self-report measures were used to assess preparatory purchasing behavior. while the items asked participants to report on items they purchased or intended to purchase, it is possible that the unique situation of resource shortages may add to the difficulty in respondents accurately reporting their purchases or attempted purchases. further, while care was taken to ensure the chosen products were related to covid-19 or its symptoms, the lists of potential health and cleaning products were not exhaustive. perceived risk and worry were also assessed after products had already been purchased.in light of the current public health crisis, it is more important than ever before that governments and health organizations are prepared for pandemics. encouraging the public to engage in appropriate, but not excessive, preparatory purchasing of protective goods is critical to ensuring the public health and safety. the present findings have important implications for understanding how individuals engage in self-protective behavior when confronted with a public health emergency. the results suggest that possessing a risk factor leads to greater preparation, and this occurs because of greater levels of worry. this relationship, however, relates to more preparatory purchasing primarily for individuals who are at greater risk but are not yet worried (in this case, men with a risk factor). other variables, such as income and race, did not relate to preparatory purchasing. finally, consistent with recent research comparing affective and cognitive pathways for health behavior, the mediation results suggest that the link between risk factor status and preparatory purchasing was due to feelings of worry.this first chapter primarily focuses on the processes used to destroy microbiological life. microbiological life, microbes, or pathogens in food contribute to food spoilage, disease, illness, and even death. similarly, microbes in a health care environment may cause disease, infections, sickness, illness, and death. the elimination, killing, or control of microbes is therefore critically important. the processes used for microbe control can affect the properties of materials, especially plastics. that effect is the subject of the bulk of this book. this introductory chapter will be split up into three parts. first will be background on the biology and types of microbes. then the processes used to control microbial life in the food supply are discussed. that is followed by the control of microbes in the health care environment.sterilization processes are intended to deal with contamination of food, surfaces, or equipment by potentially harmful life forms. these life forms are primarily bacteria, viruses, and endospores, but could also include parasites, prions, molds, fungi, yeasts, protozoa, etc. organisms that cause disease are called pathogens. this section briefly summarizes what these life forms are, which leads to a better understanding of how sterilization processes kill or control them.bacteria consist of only a single cell. bacteria fall into a category of life called the prokaryotes. prokaryotes' genetic material, or dna, is not enclosed in a cellular compartment called a nucleus as it is in eukaryotes. not all bacteria are harmful. however, the subject of this book implies the killing of harmful bacteria. most people know harmful bacteria best because of the diseases they cause. some of these diseases are produced when bacteria attack directly the tissues of a plant or animal. for example, fruits and vegetables that become discolored as they are growing may be under attack by bacteria, though discoloration may also be the result of oxidation.bacteria also attack cells by releasing chemicals that are poisonous to plants and animals. such poisons are known as toxins. as an example, clostridium botulinum releases a toxin that causes the most severe form of food poisoning, botulism.some forms of dangerous bacteria live on the human skin, but cause no harm unless they are able to enter the body. among these bacteria is staphylococcus, responsible for the potentially fatal toxic shock syndrome and gastroenteritis. the bacteria may enter the bloodstream through a break in the skin or the digestive tract through contaminated food. and although escherichia coli is helpful within the digestive system, if it is ingested it may cause cramping and diarrhea. if it enters the bloodstream, it causes fever, hypotension, altered mental status, and possibly death.a diagram of a typical bacterium is shown in fig. 1.1 and a micrograph of cholera bacteria is shown peptidoglycan, also known as murein, is a polymer consisting of sugars and amino acids that forms a mesh-like layer outside the plasma membrane of bacteria forming the cell wall. the periplasm is a space bordered by the two selective permeable biological membranes, which are the inner plasma membrane and the outer membrane in gram-negative bacteria.there is no periplasmic space in gram-positive bacteria because there is only one biological membrane, but a region called inner wall zone has been observed between the cytoplasmic membrane and the bacterial cell wall.the two types of bacteria may respond differently to sterilization processes. sterilization processes that kill bacteria usually do so by:causing damage to the physical structure, particularly rupture of the cell walls altering the membrane permeability damaging the proteins within the cells damaging the nucleic acids in the dna or rna. a virus is a small infectious agent that can replicate only inside the living cells of organisms. they are too small to be seen with a light microscope. viruses are not plants, animals, or bacteria, but they are more like parasites. they are parasites because without a host cell, they cannot carry out their lifesustaining functions or reproduce. although they may seem like living organisms because of their reproductive abilities, viruses are not living.the average virus is about one-hundredth the size of the average bacterium. all viruses contain nucleic acid, either dna or rna (but not both), and a protein coat, which encases the nucleic acid. viruses come in a wide diversity of shapes and sizes called morphologies. 2 viruses are inactive when outside of a living cell, but their nucleic acid once entering the cell can take over the cells' activities, which is primarily to reproduce and break out of the cell to infect other cells. figure 1 .5 shows electron micrographs of two different viruses. the micrograph of the virus on the right side clearly shows the dna and cell wall structure.an endospore is a dormant, tough, and temporarily nonreproductive structure produced by certain bacteria. it is a stripped-down, dormant form to which the bacterium can reduce itself when conditions are not right for the bacterium to thrive. it is very resistant to harsh environments and can remain viable for very long periods of time, only to spring back to life when conditions are right.the structure and a micrograph of an endospore are shown in fig. 1.6 . the endospore consists of the bacterium's dna and part of its cytoplasm, surrounded by a very tough outer coating. the coating consists of multiple layers. the outermost layer is the exosporium, which is a thin protein covering. the next layer is the spore coat which is comprised of spore-specific proteins. an outer membrane surrounds the cortex. the cortex is composed of peptidoglycan containing some dipicolinc acid and calcium ions that cross-link. this creates a highly impenetrable layer that provides the heat resistance properties of the endospore. the core contains the cell wall and cytoplasmic membrane, nuclear material, some ribosomes, rna molecules, and enzymes. the core contains much less water than the bacterial cell.endospores are highly resistant to hostile physical and chemical conditions. they allow a bacterium to survive suboptimal environmental conditions. because these spores are resistant to heat, radiation, disinfectants, and desiccation, they are difficult to eliminate (but not impossible) from medical and pharmaceutical materials and are a frequent cause of contamination.there are other infectious agents may require control. these are listed in the next few sections.a prion is an infectious agent, rather than a life form, composed of protein in a misfolded form. the group of fatal neurodegenerative diseases are called transmissible spongiform encephalopathies that include bovine spongiform encephalopathy (also known as "mad cow disease") in cattle and creutz-feldtejakob disease (cjd) in humans. they occur in animals (dogs, cows, and primates) as well as humans and are rapidly fatal once symptoms develop. prions propagate by transmitting a misfolded protein state. when a prion enters a healthy organism, it induces existing, properly folded proteins to convert into the disease-associated, prion form. it acts as a template to guide the misfolding of more protein into prion form. this altered structure is extremely stable and accumulates in infected tissue, causing tissue damage and cell death. cjd poses a unique infection prevention problem because prions, which are protein-containing infectious agents, can survive many common sterilization processes.a parasitical organism is a life form that lives off the host. helminthes or parasitic worms are a division of eukaryotic parasites. they are wormlike organisms that live and feed off living hosts, receiving nourishment and protection while disrupting their hosts' nutrient absorption, causing weakness and disease. those that live inside the digestive tract are called intestinal parasites. figure 1 .7 shows one of these parasitic worms. they can live inside humans as well as other animals. the helminthes not only reside in the digestive tract. they may reside in other tissues. trichinosis is a well-known example. trichinosis is infection with the microscopic roundworm trichinella spiralis. a micrograph of the trichinosis parasites in muscle tissue is shown in a fungus is a eukaryotic organism. fungal cells have cell walls that contain chitin, unlike the cell walls of plants, which contain cellulose. chitin is a polymer of n-acetylglucosamine. molds are fungi that grow in the form of multicellular filaments called hyphae, such as shown in fig. 1 thrush.as such, there is a need to control or kill fungi in the food-processing and in the medical environment.protozoa are unicellular eukaryotes, meaning that they have characteristic organelles. they are relatively large and some are visible with the naked eye. not all protozoa are of concern to public health.those that are pathogens include:toxoplasma isospora cryptosporidium cyclospora sarcocystis plasmodium giardia cryptobia speciespleistophora species.however, there have been rare infections by amoeba, naegleria fowleri, in the news recently. the news media have called these "brain-eating amoeba." for the infections in the news, the amoeba entered the brain after contaminated warm water entered the nose, though there were also cases caused by head trauma. a biofilm is an aggregate of microorganisms in which cells adhere to each other on a surface. dental plaque, the slimy coating that fouls pipes and tanks, and algal mats on bodies of water are examples of biofilms. biofilms can form on solid or liquid surfaces as well as on soft tissue in living organisms. they are typically resistant to conventional methods of disinfection. these adherent cells in a biofilm are frequently embedded within a self-produced matrix of extracellular polymeric substance (eps). biofilm eps, which is also referred to as slime (although not everything described as slime is a biofilm), is a polymeric conglomeration generally composed of extracellular dna, proteins, and polysaccharides. biofilms may form on living or nonliving surfaces and can be prevalent in natural, industrial, and hospital settings.biofilms have been found to be involved in a wide variety of microbial infections in the body. biofilms have been implicated in common problems such as urinary tract infections, catheter infections, middleear infections, formation of dental plaque, gingivitis, and coating contact lenses. though less common but more lethal, biofilms have also been implicated in health problems such as endocarditis, infections in cystic fibrosis, and infections of permanent implanted devices such as joint prostheses and heart valves.concern over food-borne diseases is high. these are the illnesses contracted from eating contaminated foods or beverages. these illnesses include foodborne intoxications and infections and are often incorrectly referred to as food poisoning. there are more than 250 different food-borne diseases and they are caused by viruses, bacteria, parasites, toxins, metals, and prions. according to the us center for disease control (cdc), 31 pathogens are known to cause 20% of the food-borne illnesses, with 80% being caused by unknown agents. studies by the cdc in 2010 estimated that food-borne diseases each year cause roughly one in six americans (or 48 million people) to get sick; 128,000 are hospitalized, and 3000 die of food-borne diseases. symptoms of food-borne illness range from mild gastroenteritis to life-threatening neurologic, hepatic, and renal syndromes. some of these illnesses are well known and include: botulism, brucellosis, campylobacter enteritis, e. coli, hepatitis, listeriosis, salmonellosis, shigellosis, toxoplasmosis, viral gastroenteritis, teniasis, and trichinosis. food-borne diseases pose a widespread threat to human health and they may lead to reduced economic productivity. economic losses associated with such food-borne diseases are high estimated between us $6500 million and $33,000 million.eight known pathogens account for the vast majority of illnesses, hospitalizations, and deaths. tables 1.1e1.3 list the top five pathogens causing illness, hospitalization, and death.beyond the illnesses, there is the economic cost of high food losses from infestation, contamination, and spoilage caused by insects and bacteria. killing the microbes and insects that cause these losses by food irradiation can help reduce these losses.even though there have been ways to preserve foods for centuries, if not millenia, the cause was not understood until the mid-nineteenth century.as mentioned in the introduction of this chapter, the killing of microbes in food is a large-scale or bulk process. heat is one of the best ways to kill microbes, but it is not often desirable to cook the foods prior to sale. the irradiation processes using gamma, electron beam (or beta), infrared (ir), and microwave are used. however, the problem of food preservation has long been accepted and over time have ways have been developed to preserve food. the history of food preservation is interesting.many primitive and tedious methods of food preservation have been used. some of these were developed thousands of years ago and are still used today. these include:drying e drying was and still is used to preserve fruit, vegetables, meats, and fish. foods can be dried in the sun (as the ancients did), in an oven or in a food dehydrator by using the right combination of warm temperatures, low humidity, and air current. drying removes the moisture from the food, so bacteria, yeast, and mold that need water cannot grow and spoil the food. chemical pickling e food for pickling is placed in an edible liquid that inhibits or kills bacteria and other microorganisms. there are many pickling agents including brine (high in salt), vinegar, alcohol, and vegetable oil (particularly olive oil). many chemical pickling processes also involve heating or boiling so that the food being preserved becomes saturated with the pickling agent. in fermentation pickling, the food itself produces the preservation agent, typically by a process that produces lactic acid. this is commonly used to preserve vegetables. salting e salting has been used extensively for pork, beef, and fish. the origins of salt-preserving food can be traced back to at least ancient egypt, where they used salt as part of the embalming process, as well as in food preservation. sugaring e sugaring is used to preserve fruits for the winter, producing jams and jellies. sugaring is the process of desiccating a food by first dehydrating it and then packing it with pure sugar . the  sugar can be crystalline table or raw sugar, or it can be a high-sugar-density liquid such as honey, syrup, or molasses. "cold storage" e root cellars, ground burial, and iceboxes were cold storage methods used before the development of refrigeration.smoking e smoking is the exposure of cured meat and fish products to smoke for the purposes of preserving them and increasing their palatability by adding flavor and imparting color. the drying action of the smoke tends to preserve the meat, though many of the chemical species present in wood smoke (e.g. formaldehyde and certain alcohols) are natural preservatives as well.smoking is one of the oldest of food preservation methods.canning e canning is a method of preserving food in which the food contents are processed and sealed in an airtight container. canning was developed around 1810 by nicolas appert in paris. it revolutionized food preservation.blanching e also known as parboiling, blanching is the method by which foods are partially cooked as a way to preserve their color, texture, and flavor.antoine-henri becquerel (1852e1908) is known for his discovery of radioactivity in 1895, for which he received the 1903 nobel prize for physics jointly with marie curie and pierre curie. x-rays were also discovered in 1895 by w.k. roentgen. ionizing radiation was found to be lethal to living organisms soon after these discoveries. the idea of using ionizing radiation in food preservation almost immediately followed. the suggestion to use ionizing energy to destroy pathogenic and spoilage microorganisms in food was published in a german medical journal the same year. however, the cost and quantity of this radiation inhibited commercial development until much, much later. the basic history of food irradiation follows 5 :1905 e scientists receive patents for a food preservative process that uses ionizing radiation to kill bacteria in food. 1921 e us patent is granted for a process to kill trichinella spiral in meat by using x-ray technology. 1953e1980 e the us government forms the national food irradiation program. under this program, the us army and the atomic energy commission sponsor many research projects on food irradiation. the us army's interest is feeding soldiers during wartime. 1958 e the food, drug, and cosmetic act is amended and defines sources of radiation intended for use in processing food as a new food additive. 1976 e the us army contracts with commercial companies to study the wholesomeness of irradiated ham, pork, and chicken. 1980 e usda inherits the us army's food irradiation program. 1985 e fda approves irradiation at specific doses to control trichinella spiral is in pork. fda approves irradiation at specific doses to delay maturation, inhibit growth, and disinfect foods, including vegetables and spices. the federal meat inspection act is amended to permit gamma radiation to control trichinella spiral is in fresh or previously frozen pork. law is administered by usda. 1990 e fda approves irradiation for poultry to control salmonella and other food-borne bacteria. 1992 e usda approves irradiation for poultry to control salmonella and other food-borne bacteria. 1997 e fda's regulations are amended to permit ionizing radiation to treat refrigerated or frozen uncooked meat, meat by-products, and certain food products to control food-borne pathogens and to extend shelf life. 2000 e usda's regulations are amended to allow the irradiation of refrigerated and frozen uncooked meat, meat by-products, and certain other meat food products to reduce the levels of food-borne pathogens and to extend shelf life. fda's regulations are amended to permit the irradiation of fresh shell eggs to control salmonella.the radiation dose for food irradiation and sterilization generally is measured using the conventional unit rad or the si unit gray (gy). the rad, which stands for radiation absorbed dose, was the conventional unit of measurement, but it has recently been replaced by the gy; 1 gy is equal to 100 rad. the prefix kilo (k), for 1000â, is commonly used with the gray unit, kgy. mega (m) for 1,000,000â is often used with the rad unit (mrad). this is summarized in table 1 .4.there are other radiation measures: curie (ci), becquerel (bq), roentgen (r), coulomb/kg (c/kg), the rem (rem), and sievert (sv). however, these are used for other purposes.electron beam irradiation is sometimes referred to as beta irradiation. beta particles are high-energy, high-speed electrons or positrons emitted by certain types of radioactive nuclei such as potassium-40. beta particles are subatomic particles ejected from the nucleus of some radioactive atoms. they are equivalent to electrons. the difference is that beta particles originate in the nucleus and electrons originate outside the nucleus.electron beam radiation breaks the dna or damages other critical molecules in bacteria, either killing them or preventing them from reproducing.the procedure for electron beam irradiation is relatively simple. in practice, a continuous process is used to improve the economics of the process. the source of electron beams is an "accelerator." the accelerator converts electricity through a tungsten filament source.accelerators generate and accelerate electrons and direct them toward the food product needing irradiation. an accelerator (see fig. 1 .11) consists of four major systems:1. voltage generator 2. acceleration tube and electron gun 3. scan chamber and scan horn 4. a control system.each segment plays a key role and is briefly described. low voltage power, typically three-phase, 440 v ac, is converted to high-frequency (100 khz) radio frequency (rf) power by an oscillator. a number of rectifiers in series along with an rf resonant transformer convert the rf power into ultra high voltage (2e5 mm v) direct current (dc) power. the dc voltage is sent to the acceleration tube. this tube is a hollow vacuum cylinder made from glass and metal. glass rings are positioned as insulation rings in between metal rings, called dynodes. an electron gun is positioned at the entry point of the tube. a tungsten filament is the source of electrons that are emitted by heating the filament. the continuous electron stream is accelerated through a vacuum tube, supplying a high-energy beam with a diameter of 2e3 cm. the accelerated beam is transmitted through an oscillating magnetic field with a frequency of 200 hz that converts the tight beam cone into a wide curtain of electrons with a width of 1e2.5 m. a thin titanium window acts as a window or a filter before the beam reaches the food to be irradiated. a control system monitors all the functions of the various systems of accelerator to insure proper and consistent operation. an accelerator operates based on a number of factors including voltage (electron energy), beam current, and beam power. because electrons have mass, they can only penetrate about 1.5 inches (3.8 cm) into a typical food product or about 3.5 inches (8.9 cm) if the food product is irradiated on both sides. electrons also have an electric charge. this charge allows the stream of accelerated electrons to be scanned by magnets to track across the product. a commercial food electron beam irradiator accelerates the electrons to an energy of up to 10,000,000 electron volts [10 million electron volts (mev)]. electron beam irradiators typically use massive concrete, steel, or lead shielding. electron beam accelerators can be turned on and off. safety interlocks ensure that a person cannot enter the radiation chamber where the food is being irradiated when the accelerator is "on." product is usually passed through the scanned "beam" on roller-type conveyors as shown in fig. 1.12 . a picture of the electron beam scan horn and conveyor system in the irradiation area is shown in fig. 1 .13.gamma radiation, signified by the greek letter g, is one of the three types of natural radioactivity. gamma rays are electromagnetic radiation, like x-rays, except even more energetic. they have enough energy to ionize matter and can damage or destroy living cells, which is of course why they are useful for sterilization. the source of gamma rays in a gamma irradiator is cobalt-60. cobalt-60 radioactively beta decays to nickel-60 and emits two gamma rays with energies of 1.17 and 1.33 mev. 6 cobalt-60 is not found in nature. it is a synthetic radioactive isotope made by neutron activation of cobalt-59. cobalt-60 is produced off site in nuclear reactors and transported in special shipping containers (casks) to the sterilization facility. cobalt-60 is a solid radioactive metal molded into a cylindrical slug as shown in fig. 1 .14. the slugs are loaded into "sealed source" pencils made of stainless steel. the stainless steel sealed source contains the "radioactive" cobalt-60, but allows the gamma photons (radiation) to pass through the steel. the pencils are arranged into flat panel arrays. cobalt-60 continuously emits radiation and cannot be turned "off." the arrays are stored in a deep water pool, which prevents gamma radiation from escaping. the shielding water does not become radioactive.large-scale gamma irradiators come in two configurations. in one configuration, the cobalt arrays are hoisted out of the water into a radiation chamber that typically has shields made out of massive concrete or steel. this is shown in fig. 1 .15. the concrete walls are typically 2-feet thick or more. when the irradiators are out of the protective storage pool, all workers are outside the thick walls. hanging carriers, totes, or roller conveyors are typically employed to move the product through the chamber for irradiation. a typical product container can be 60 cm â 50 cm â 150 cm, and some irradiators are designed to irradiate entire pallets of product measuring 120 cm â 100 cm â 150 cm. because cobalt-60 photons have no mass, they can penetrate more than 24 inches (60 cm) of food product if irradiated on both sides.in the second configuration, unlike a radiation chamber irradiator, an underwater irradiator stores the cobalt-60 permanently at the bottom of a pool of water. instead of raising the cobalt-60 into a shielded chamber, the product, placed in water-free containers, is lowered to the bottom of the pool adjacent to the cobalt-60 to receive a dose of radiation. no above-ground shielding or radiation chamber is present. typically, the product is loaded into water-free containers and the containers are lowered/raised using a hoist mechanism.x-rays are photons and have similar properties to gamma rays emitted by cobalt-60. however, x-rays are generated by using an electron beam accelerator and converting the electron beam (up to 7.5 mev) to photons by accelerating the electrons into a highdensity material such as tungsten, steel, or tantalum. the sudden deceleration of the electrons generates x-rays and waste heat. the shielding and product conveyance are similar to that of a chamber-type gamma irradiator ( fig. 1.15 ). the advantages of x-rays over electron beams are that they have good product penetration (over 24 inches or 60 cm of food product if irradiated on both sides). the advantage of x-rays over gamma irradiators is that they do not require a shielding storage pool. however, there is a substantial loss of energy during the conversion process. thus, it suffers a severe cost disadvantage when compared to other types of irradiators for the same product volume throughput. for food irradiation, x-ray machines can have a maximum energy of 5 mev.ultraviolet (uv) is the part of the electromagnetic spectrum between visible light and x-rays. the uv spectrum can be broken down into four parts as shown in table 1 .5. the specific portion of the uv spectrum between 185 and 400 nm (also known as uv-c) has a strong germicidal effect, with peak effectiveness at 265 nm. at these wavelengths, uv kills microorganisms by penetrating their cell membranes and damaging the dna or rna, making them unable to reproduce and effectively killing them. ultraviolet germicidal irradiation (uvgi) is a sterilization method that uses uv light. it is used in a variety of applications, such as food, air, and water purification. it is effective in destroying the nucleic acids in these organisms so that their dna is disrupted by the uv radiation. this removes their reproductive capabilities and kills them.the application of uvgi to sterilization has been an accepted practice since the mid-twentieth century. it has been used primarily in medical sanitation and sterile work facilities. figure 1 .16 shows the use of uv irradiation in a laboratory. uvgi technology is particularly suited to the beverage, bottled water, and food processing sectors. the design of these systems is simple as shown in fig. 1.17 . uvgi disinfection has many advantages over alternative methods. unlike chemical biocides, uvgi does not introduce toxins or residues into the process (which themselves have to be subsequently removed) and does not alter the chemical composition, taste, odor, or ph of the product.uvgi is employed to sterilize drinking and wastewater, as the holding facilities are enclosed and can be circulated to ensure a higher exposure to the uv. uv sterilizers are commonly used in aquarium circulation systems and hot tub circulation systems.in recent years, uvgi has found renewed application in air sanitization.mode of action: uv photons of different energies have various effects on dna. the most important damage to dna is the formation of pyrimidine dimers, which form between two adjacent pyrimidine basesdcytosine (c) and/or thymine (t) as shown in fig. 1 .18. this abnormal link distorts the shape of the dna double helix and blocks its copying by the dna replication or rna transcription machinery. a block in either of these important processes would be very dangerous for a cell; as little as one dimer per cell in fact can be lethal. dimers are formed in dna most efficiently by uv-c, less efficiently by uv-b, and very little by uv-a action. the chemical structural changes are shown in fig. 1.19 . uv-a light creates mostly free radicals that lead to indirect dna damage. 7microwave sterilization 8 is primarily a thermal process. the heat is generated as microwaves interact with polar water molecules and charged ions. the water molecules align rapidly in alternating the electromagnetic field induced by the microwaves; the friction resulting from the oscillating molecules generates the heat within food. the temperature achieved is limited to about that of boiling water, unless the food is being held under pressure. because the heat is produced directly in the food, the thermal processing time is sharply reduced compared to processes applying external heat. the food is not necessarily cooked because the times are short. for commercial food applications, this is a developing technology. the microwave sterilization technology developed at washington state university uses the combination of 915 mhz microwave and conventional heating to improve heating uniformity. commercial systems performing microwave pasteurization and/or sterilization of foods are currently available in europe 9 (e.g. top's foods); however, the use of microwaves in the united states to produce prepackaged shelf-stable foods is pending upon fda acceptance.consumers have been able to use their microwaves to sterilize baby bottles in time as short as 90 s. one such unit is shown in fig. 1 .20. steam from boiling water does the sterilizing.mode of action: the mechanism of germicidal action is essentially heating. other possible nonthermal mechanisms have been proposed. one of these is electroporation, cell membrane damage and rupture, and direct electromagnetic energy coupling leading to cell lysis (the destruction of cells by disruption of the bounding membrane, allowing the cell contents to escape). however, scientific support for these mechanisms is not entirely convincing. inactivation mechanism by ir heating may include dna damage in addition to thermal effect. thermal inactivation can damage dna, rna, ribosome, cell envelope, and proteins in microbial cells.radiation breaks the dna or damages other critical molecules in bacteria, either killing them or preventing them from reproducing. irradiation is a process that employs ionizing energy. radiation energy ionizes a very small number of the molecules within the food product and any bacteria within the food product. when a molecule is ionized, it effectively breaks. if a dna molecule of a bacterium is ionized, it is damaged or destroyed, preventing the bacteria from being able to reproduce.if a water molecule within a bacterium cell is ionized, it can form peroxide and act as a disinfectant within the bacterium itself. this is covered later in this chapter. these molecular level changes destroy the bacteria by preventing their reproduction. only a very small fraction of the molecules within a living organism, such as a bacterium, need to be damaged to have this effect. because only a small fraction of food product molecules are ionized, minimal adverse effects, such as changes in taste, occur.radiation dose is the quantity of radiation energy absorbed by the food as it passes through the radiation field during processing. international health and safety authorities have endorsed the safety of irradiation for all foods up to a dose level of 10,000 gy (10 kgy). the bactericidal efficacy of a given dose of irradiation depends on the following 10 :the kind and species of the organism (a few are listed in table 1 .6). the numbers of organisms (or spores) originally present. the more organisms there are, the less effective a given dose will be. the composition of the food. some constituents may be protective. compounds that combine with the sh groups would be sensitizing. the presence or absence of oxygen. the effect of free oxygen varies with the organism, ranging from no effect to sensitization of the organism. undesirable "side reactions" are likely to be intensified in the presence of oxygen and to be less frequent in a vacuum. the physical state of the food during irradiation. both moisture content and temperature affect different organisms in different ways. the condition of the organisms. age, temperature of growth and sporulation, and state (vegetative or spore) may affect the sensitivity of the organisms.the success of radiation processing of food depends to a large extent on the ability of the irradiation processor:to measure the absorbed dose delivered to the food product (through reliable dosimetry) to determine the dose distribution patterns in the product package (through process qualification procedures) to control the routine radiation process (through process control procedures).this subject is well documented in the literature and will not be discussed further here. 11 until the latter half of the nineteenth century patients undergoing even the most routine operations were at very high risk of infection because surgery was not performed under sterile conditions. the operating room, the surgeon's hands, and the surgical instruments were laden with microbes, which caused high levels of infection and mortality. at the time bad or contaminated air was believed to be the cause of infection. it was not until french scientist louis pasteur demonstrated that invisible microbes caused disease, that elimination of them in medical facilities was recognized by numerous doctors.ignaz philipp semmelweis was a hungarian physician now known as an early pioneer of antiseptic procedures. described as the "savior of mothers," semmelweis discovered that the incidence of puerperal fever could be drastically cut by the use of hand disinfection in obstetrical clinics. puerperal fever, also known as childbed fever, is a bacterial infection contracted by women during childbirth or miscarriage. it can develop into puerperal sepsis, which is a serious form of septicemia. it was often fatal in mid-nineteenth century hospitals with mortality at 10e35%. semmelweis proposed washing with chlorinated lime solutions in 1847. he published a book of his findings: etiology, concept, and prophylaxis of childbed fever.heinrich hermann robert koch was a german physician who became famous for isolating bacillus anthracis (1877), the tuberculosis bacillus (1882), and vibrio cholerae (1883) and for his development of koch's postulates, which were four criteria to identify the causative agent of a particular disease. he is considered one of the founders of microbiology, inspiring such major figures as paul ehrlich and gerhard domagk. joseph lister is often considered to be the father of modern surgery, who promoted the idea of sterile surgery while working at the glasgow royal infirmary. until lister's studies of surgery, most people believed that chemical damage from exposure to bad air, "miasma," was responsible for infections in wounds. hospital wards were occasionally aired out at midday as a precaution against the spread of infection via miasma. hands or a patient's wounds were not washed. while he was a professor of surgery at the university of glasgow, lister read a paper published by the french chemist louis pasteur, which showed that rotting and fermentation could occur under anaerobic conditions if microorganisms were present. pasteur suggested three methods to eliminate the microorganisms responsible for gangrene: filtration, exposure to heat, or exposure to chemical solutions. lister confirmed pasteur's conclusions with his own experiments and decided to use his findings to develop antiseptic techniques for wounds. lister successfully introduced carbolic acid (now known as phenol) to sterilize surgical instruments and to clean wounds, which led to reducing postoperative infections and made surgery safer for patients.therefore, lister tested the results of spraying instruments, the surgical incisions, and dressings with a solution of it. lister found that carbolic acid solution swabbed on wounds remarkably reduced the incidence of gangrene. in august 1865, lister applied a piece of lint dipped in carbolic acid solution onto the wound of an 11-year-old boy at glasgow infirmary, who had sustained a compound fracture after a cart wheel had passed over his leg. after 4 days, he renewed the pad and discovered that no infection had developed, and after a total of 6 weeks, he was amazed to discover that the boy's bones had fused back together, without the danger of formation or discharge of pus. at that time, the mortality rate of a compound fracture was about 60%. he instructed surgeons under his responsibility to wear clean gloves and wash their hands before and after operations with 5% carbolic acid solutions. instruments were also washed in the same solution and assistants sprayed the solution into the air in the operating theatre.as the germ theory of disease became more widely accepted, it was realized that infection could be better avoided by preventing bacteria from getting into wounds in the first place. this led to the rise of sterile surgery. some consider lister "the father of modern antisepsis." in 1879, listerine mouthwash was named after him for his work in antisepsis. also named in his honor is the bacterial genus listeria, typified by the food-borne pathogen listeria monocytogenes.hospitals and other medical treatment facilities are now concerned about sterilization. what is sterilization? according to the cdc (centers for disease control and prevention), "sterilization means the use of a physical or chemical procedure to destroy all microbial life, including highly resistant bacterial endospores." the processes used to kill microbiological life can affect the materials that are exposed to these processes. for example, when food is irradiated it is often packaged in plastic materials. how does the irradiation process affect the properties of the packaging? when medical devices and facilities are sterilized those processes may affect the plastics used in providing medical care. the plastics may be implants, surgical tools and supplies, or packaging for these items. this book is focused on characterizing and understanding how materials change when they are irradiated or sterilized.medical sterilization is a much broader field than food irradiation. three terms are often used when talking about this subject and they are: sterilization, disinfection, and asepsis. sterility and asepsis refer to different conditions. sterility indicates the elimination (death) of all viable life forms and their germinative elements such as eggs, spores and endospores. sterility is absolute; there is no such thing as an object being "partially sterile." asepsis generally means that only certain types of life forms have been removed, excluded or neutralized (rendered nonviable), while the presence of other organisms may be tolerated or even promoted. for example, pasteurization of food does not kill all microorganisms in the food; it does dramatically reduce the number of microorganisms, with the intent that the pasteurized material is stored in conditions that will maintain that low number, such as refrigeration. disinfection refers to a process whereby many or all pathogenic microorganisms are neutralized or removed. unlike sterilization, disinfection can be achieved at varying levels as defined by the cdc:high-level disinfectants are chemical sterilants that may be used for a shorter exposure period than would be required for sterilization to kill all microorganisms with the exception of high numbers of bacterial spores. intermediate-level disinfectants will kill mycobacteria (causes of tuberculosis and leprosy), vegetative bacteria, most viruses (such as poliovirus), and most fungi but do not kill all bacterial spores. low-level disinfectants kill most vegetative bacteria, some fungi, and some viruses such as staphylococcus species, pseudomonas species, salmonella species, hiv virus, herpes simplex virus, hepatitis b, hepatitis c, and many common cold viruses.there are hundreds of items that are routinely sterilized or disinfected. in terms of health care/ medical items they are often classified by spaulding's classification: critical, semi-critical, and noncritical, as shown in table 1 .7.disinfection and sterilization are both decontamination processes. while disinfection is the process of eliminating or reducing harmful microorganisms from inanimate objects and surfaces, sterilization is the process of killing all microorganisms. sterilization also destroys the spores of various organisms present on surfaces, in liquids, in medication, or in compounds such as biological culture media. such "extreme" forms of decontamination are needed during critical times like surgery, or in environments like industrial, laboratory or hospital. it is more practical to use disinfection in everyday life.disinfection is usually carried out using chemicals, often solutions, but also vapors and gases. when chemicals are used to destroy all forms of microbiologic life, they can be called chemical sterilants. these same germicides used for shorter exposure periods also can be part of the disinfection process (i.e. high-level disinfection).sterilization falls into the following three basic categories of which there are several options in each category:1. high temperature/pressure sterilization (autoclave) 2. chemical sterilization 3. radiation sterilization.each of these and several less common methods are discussed in later sections.heat is one of the oldest and cheapest ways to sterilize food, tools, equipment, etc. there are several basic ways to utilize heat and these are described in the following sections.the steam autoclave is the oldest, safest, most widely used and most cost-effective method of sterilization in the medical equipment industry. steam is generated in a pressure chamber so that it reaches a temperature 121e148 c (250e300 f) at 15 p.s.i. the time items are kept exposed is dependent on the temperature and size of load and usually ranges from 10 to 60 min. there are two main types of steam autoclaves, gravity displacement and pre-vacuum cycle. gravity displacement autoclaves remove air from the chamber by gravity displacement as steamentering chamber near the top exerts pressure on air forcing it out of the bottom as shown in fig. 1.21 . a photo of an industrial-size steam autoclave is shown in fig. 1.22 .the high-speed pre-vacuum sterilizers are similar to the gravity displacement sterilizers except they are fitted with a vacuum pump (or ejector) to ensure air removal from the sterilizing chamber and load before the steam is admitted. the advantage of using a vacuum pump is that there is nearly instantaneous steam penetration even into porous loads. table 1 .8 summarizes the processing parameters for each cycle of the two types of steam autoclaves:like all sterilization processes, steam sterilization may have some damaging effects on some materials. at constant temperatures, sterilization times vary depending on the type of item (e.g. metal versus rubber, plastic, items with lumens), whether the item is wrapped or unwrapped, and the sterilizer type.mode of action: moist heat destroys microorganisms by the irreversible coagulation and denaturation of enzymes and structural proteins. in support of this fact, it has been found that the presence of moisture significantly affects the coagulation temperature of proteins and the temperature at which microorganisms are destroyed. uses: steam sterilization is used whenever possible on all critical and semi-critical items that are heat and moisture resistant (e.g. steam sterilizable respiratory therapy and anesthesia equipment), even when not essential to prevent pathogen transmission. steam sterilizers also are used in health care facilities to decontaminate microbiological waste and sharps containers but additional exposure time is required in the gravity displacement sterilizer for these items. steam sterilizers are common in dental facilities. flash sterilization is often called immediate-use steam sterilization. 12 "immediate use" is broadly defined as the shortest possible time between a sterilized item's removal from the sterilizer and its aseptic transfer to the sterile field. it is used for sterilizing cleaned patient-care items that cannot be packaged, sterilized, and stored before use. it also is used when there is insufficient time to sterilize an item by the preferred package method. "flash" steam sterilization was originally defined by underwood and perkins as sterilization of an unwrapped object at 132 c for 3 min at 27e28 lbs of pressure in a gravity displacement sterilizer.often flash sterilization equipment is located very close to operating rooms to handle urgent needs. however, care must be taken to avoid burns to both the medical staff and the patient. burns may be prevented by either air cooling the instruments or immersion in a sterile liquid such as saline.uses: flash sterilization should not be used for reasons of convenience. it is not recommended for implantable devices except where unavoidable.dry heat is effective at inactivating microorganisms, but in general, the temperatures required are higher than is required for steam sterilization to achieve an equivalent level of germicidal action. this method should be used only for materials that might be damaged by moist heat or that are impenetrable to moist heat (e.g. powders, petroleum products, sharp instruments).there are two types of dry heat sterilizers: the static-air type and the forced-air type. the differences are like two types of ovens common in everyday home kitchens. the static type is like a conventional oven and the forced-air type is like a convection oven. the static-air type has heating coils in the bottom of the unit cause the hot air to rise inside the chamber via convection. this type of dry heat sterilizer is much slower in heating, requires longer time to reach sterilizing temperature, and is less uniform in temperature control throughout the chamber than is the forced-air type. the forced-air or mechanical convection sterilizer is equipped with a motor-driven blower that circulates heated air throughout the chamber at a high velocity, permitting a more rapid transfer of energy from the air to the instruments.common timeetemperature relationships for sterilization with hot air sterilizers are: 170 c (340 f) for 60 min 160 c (320 f) for 120 min 150 c (300 f) for 150 min. the main disadvantage is time. dry heat penetration and microbial killing is time consuming by this method. in addition, the high temperatures are not suitable for most materials.mode of action: the primary lethal process is considered to be oxidation of cell constituents.glass bead "sterilization" uses small glass beads (1.2e1.5 mm diameter) and high temperature (217e232 c) for brief exposure times (e.g. 45 s) to inactivate microorganisms. they are typically used on metal surgical instruments as shown in fig. 1 .23. these devices have been used for several years in the dental profession. fda believes there is a risk of infection with this device because of potential failure to sterilize dental instruments and their use should be discontinued until the device has received fda clearance.microwaves are used in medicine for disinfection of soft contact lenses, dental instruments, dentures, milk, and urinary catheters for intermittent selfcatheterization. however, microwaves must only be used with products that are compatible (e.g. do not melt). microwaves are radio frequency waves, which are usually used at a frequency of 2450 mhz. the microwaves produce friction of water molecules in an alternating electrical field. the intermolecular friction derived from the vibrations generates heat and some authors believe that the effect of microwaves depends on the heat produced while others postulate a nonthermal lethal effect. the initial reports showed microwaves to be an effective microbicide. the microwaves produced by a "home-type" microwave oven (2.45 ghz) completely inactivate bacterial cultures, mycobacteria, viruses, and geobacillus stearothermophilus spores within 60 s to 5 min depending on the organism. another study confirmed these results but also found that higher power microwaves in the presence of water may be needed for sterilization. microwaves used for sterilization of medical devices have not been fda cleared.an ir radiation prototype sterilizer was investigated and found to destroy bacillus atrophaeus spores. ir heating can be effectively used for enzyme inactivation. ir heating can be used to inactivate bacteria, spores, yeast, and mold in both liquid and solid foods. efficacy of microbial inactivation by ir heating depends on the following parameters: ir power level, temperature of food sample, peak wavelength, bandwidth of ir heating source, sample depth, types of microorganisms, moisture content, and types of food materials. 13 some of the possible advantages of ir technology include short cycle time, low energy consumption, no cycle residuals, and no toxicological or environmental effects. this may provide an alternative technology for sterilization of selected heat-resistant instruments but there are no fda-cleared systems for use in health care facilities. there are many liquid chemical disinfectants available. 14,15 some of these may be used in vapor form and that approach is discussed in the next section. all disinfectants act by harming microorganisms in some manner. the different disinfectants have different mechanisms of action. these mechanisms of harm include:membrane disruption nucleic acid damage inhibition of metabolism.it is commonly defined as any noncovalent change in the structure of a protein. this change may alter the secondary, tertiary, or quaternary structure of the molecules. for those proteins that are enzymes, denaturation can be defined as the loss of enough structure to render the enzyme inactive, see fig. 1 .24.the bacterial cytoplasmic membrane is composed of a phospholipid bilayer. it has all the general functions of a cell membrane such as acting as a permeability barrier for most molecules and serving as the location for the transport of molecules into the cell. membrane disruption by chemical disinfectants is the breakdown of that membrane, which means loss of the permeability barrier and death to the microorganism.nucleic acid damage dna damage affects the primary structure of the double helix; that is, the bases themselves are chemically modified. these modifications can in turn disrupt the molecules' regular helical structure by introducing nonnative chemical bonds or bulky adducts that do not fit in the standard double helix:hydrolysis of bases, such as deamination, depurination, and depyrimidination.an enzyme inhibitor is a molecule that binds to enzymes and decreases their activity. since blocking an enzyme's activity can kill a pathogen or correct a metabolic imbalance.many liquid chemical sterilants are discussed in the following sections. generally for each sterilant, a chemical description or structure is provided. the mode of action is noted and described. typical uses of the sterilants are listed as are the advantages and disadvantages to it use are summarized.in the health care setting, "alcohol" refers to two water-soluble chemical compoundsdethyl alcohol and isopropyl alcohol. fda has not cleared any liquid chemical sterilant or high-level disinfectant with alcohol as the main active ingredient. these alcohols are rapidly bactericidal against vegetative forms of bacteria, fungicidal (an agent that destroys fungi), and virucidal (capable of neutralizing or destroying a virus). alcohols do not destroy bacterial spores. their cidal activity drops sharply when diluted below 50% concentration, and the optimum bactericidal concentration is 60e90% solution in water (volume/volume).mode of action: the most feasible explanation for the antimicrobial action of alcohol is denaturation of figure 1 .24 denaturation of a protein can change its shape, which can destroy its function.proteins. protein shape is critical to performance of the protein. that shape is maintained by intermolecular forces such as hydrogen bonding (see section 2.8.1). an example is shown in fig. 1 .25 which shows the hydrogen bonding between two amino acids.microbiocidal activity: methyl alcohol (methanol) has the weakest bactericidal action of the alcohols and thus seldom is used in health care. the bactericidal activity of various concentrations of ethyl alcohol (ethanol) and isopropanol ranges from 10 s to hours depending on the microorganism.uses: a 70% alcohol solution is used as a disinfectant on the skin. this concentration of alcohol is able to penetrate the bacterial cell wall and denature the proteins and enzymes inside of the cell. a 95% alcohol solution merely coagulates the protein on the outside of the cell wall and prevents any alcohol from entering the cell. alcohols are not recommended for sterilizing medical and surgical materials principally because they lack sporicidal action and they cannot penetrate protein-rich materials. alcohols have been used effectively to disinfect oral and rectal thermometers, hospital pagers, scissors, and stethoscopes. alcohol towelettes have been used to disinfect small surfaces such as rubber stoppers of multiple-dose medication vials or vaccine bottles. furthermore, alcohol occasionally is used to disinfect external surfaces of equipment (e.g. stethoscopes, ventilators, and manual ventilation bags), cardiopulmonary resuscitation (cpr) manikins, ultrasound instruments or medication preparation areas. alcohols may damage coatings, plastics, and elastomers.chlorine's disinfecting effects are well known as it has been used to disinfect drinking water for many years. many chlorine compounds release chlorine and are used in the health care setting. the advantage of these compounds over the hypochlorites is that they retain chlorine longer and so exert a more prolonged bactericidal effect. some of these are discussed in the next sections.hypochlorites, the most widely used of the chlorine disinfectants, are available as liquid (household bleach, sodium hypochlorite) or solid (common pool chlorine, calcium hypochlorite). the hypochlorite figure 1 .25 denaturation of hydrogen bonding between two amino acids (aspartic acid, tyrosine) in a protein by ethanol. 16 ion, also known as chlorate (i) anion, is clo à . household bleach is an aqueous solution of 5.25%e 6.15% sodium hypochlorite.hypochlorites have a broad-spectrum of antimicrobial activity. they do not leave toxic residues, are unaffected by water hardness, are inexpensive and fast acting. they remove dried or fixed organisms and biofilms from surfaces and have a low incidence of serious toxicity.one danger is the release of toxic chlorine gas when mixed with ammonia or acid (e.g. household cleaning agents). the microbicidal activity of chlorine is attributed largely to undissociated hypochlorous acid (hocl). the dissociation of hocl to the less microbicidal form (hypochlorite ion oclà) depends on ph. the disinfecting efficacy of chlorine decreases with an increase in ph that parallels the conversion of undissociated hocl to oclà.chlorine dioxide (cd, clo 2 ) is greenish yellow and is an oxidizing agent with a chlorine-like odor. clo 2 is effective against bacteria, yeasts, molds, and viruses. the rapid sterilizing activity of clo 2 is present at ambient temperature and at relatively low gas concentration, 1e30 mg/l.traditionally, chlorine dioxide for disinfection applications is made where it is to be used by one of three methods using sodium chlorite or the sodium chloriteehypochlorite method:or the sodium chloriteehydrochloric acid method:mode of action: chlorine dioxide acts as an oxidizing agent and reacts with several cellular constituents, including the cell membrane of microbes. the potency of chlorine dioxide is attributable to the simultaneous, oxidative attack on many proteins thereby preventing the cells from mutating to a resistant form.uses: drinking water, poultry process water, swimming pools, and mouthwash preparations. it is used to sanitize fruit and vegetables as well as equipment for food and beverage processing. it is used in the life sciences industry to decontaminate animal research facilities. it is also employed in the health care industries to decontaminate rooms, pass-throughs, isolators, and also as a sterilant for product and component sterilization.sodium dichloroisocyanurate is used as a disinfectant in water. its structure is shown in fig. 1 .26. it is considered to be a halogen donor, a chemical that releases active chlorine. after release, the halogen reaction is similar to that of chlorine or bromine from other sources. chlorine donor chemicals do not release the active chlorine all at once, but make it slowly available.chloramine-t, the structure of which is shown in fig. 1 .27, is available in tablet or powder form and has to be dissolved before use. it is sprayed on a surface and allowed to stand for at least 15 min before being wiped off or allowed to dry.mode of action: the molecular structure of chloramine-t is similar to para-aminobenzoic acid which is an intermediate in bacterial metabolism. chloramine-t disrupts bacterial metabolism inhibiting growth. the hypochlorite moiety can destroy the dna structure via oxidation and thereby prevents microbes from reproducing."superoxidized water" has been examined as a disinfectant. the concept of electrolyzing saline to create a disinfectant or antiseptics is appealing because the basic materials of saline and electricity are inexpensive and the end product (i.e. water) does not damage the environment. 17 the main products of the electrolysis are hypochlorous acid (e.g. at a concentration of about 144 mg/l) and chlorine. as with any germicide, the antimicrobial activity of superoxidized water is strongly affected by the concentration of the active ingredient (available free chlorine). one manufacturer, puricore, generates the disinfectant at the point of use by passing a saline solution over coated titanium electrodes at 9 amps. the product generated has a ph of 5.0e6.5 and an oxidatione reduction potential (redox) of >950 mv. although superoxidized water is intended to be generated fresh at the point of use, when tested under clean conditions, the disinfectant was effective within 5 min when 48 h old. unfortunately, the equipment required to produce the product can be expensive because parameters such as ph, current, and redox potential must be closely monitored. the solution is nontoxic to biologic tissues.in october 2002, the fda cleared superoxidized water as a high-level disinfectant (fda, personal communication, september 18, 2002) .mode of action: the exact mechanism by which free chlorine destroys microorganisms has not been elucidated. inactivation by chlorine can result from a number of factors: oxidation of sulfhydryl enzymes and amino acids, ring chlorination of amino acids, loss of intracellular contents, decreased uptake of nutrients, inhibition of protein synthesis, decreased oxygen uptake, oxidation of respiratory components, decreased adenosine triphosphate production, breaks in dna, and depressed dna synthesis. the actual microbicidal mechanism of chlorine might involve a combination of these factors or the effect of chlorine on critical sites.uses: hypochlorites are widely used in health care facilities in a variety of settings.formaldehyde is used as a disinfectant and sterilant in both its liquid and gaseous states. the gaseous method is discussed in a later section of this chapter. formaldehyde is sold and used principally as a water-based solution called formalin, which is 37% formaldehyde by weight. the aqueous solution is a bactericide, tuberculocide, fungicide, virucide, and sporicide.mode of action: formaldehyde is an extremely reactive chemical that interacts with proteins, dna, and rna.formaldehyde inactivates microorganisms by alkylating the amino (enh 2 ) and sulfhydral (eseh) groups of proteins and ring nitrogen atoms of purine bases. this is shown in fig. 1 .28. the interaction with protein results from a combination with the primary amide as well as with the amino groups. formaldehyde acts as an alkylating agent by reaction with carboxyl (ec¼o), sulfhydryl (-sh), and hydroxyl (-oh) groups. formaldehyde also reacts extensively with nucleic acid. two of the four bases in nucleic acids, adenine 2 and guanine, 3 are purines. in dna, these bases form hydrogen bonds with their complementary pyrimidines, thymine and cytosine, respectively. this is called complementary base pairing. in rna, the complement of adenine is uracil instead of thymine.uses: although formaldehydeealcohol is a chemical sterilant and formaldehyde is a high-level disinfectant, the health care uses of formaldehyde are limited by its irritating fumes and its pungent odor even at very low levels (<1 ppm). it is also a suspected human carcinogen linked to leukemia, nasopharyngeal, and lung cancers. formaldehyde is used in the health care setting to prepare viral vaccines (e.g. poliovirus and influenza), as an embalming agent, and to preserve anatomic specimens, and historically has been used to sterilize surgical instruments, especially when mixed with ethanol.glutaraldehyde is a saturated dialdehyde that has gained wide acceptance as a high-level disinfectant and chemical sterilant. its chemical structure is shown in fig. 1.29 . aqueous solutions of glutaraldehyde are acidic and generally in this state are not sporicidal. only when the solution is "activated" (made alkaline) by use of alkalinating agents to ph 7.5e8.5 does the solution become sporicidal. once activated, these solutions have a shelf life of minimally 14 days because of the polymerization of the glutaraldehyde molecules at alkaline ph levels. this polymerization blocks the active sites (aldehyde groups) of the glutaraldehyde molecules that are responsible for its biocidal activity.mode of action: like formaldehyde, the biocidal activity of glutaraldehyde results from its alkylation of sulfhydryl, hydroxyl, carboxyl, and amino groups of microorganisms, which alters rna, dna, and protein synthesis.uses: glutaraldehyde is used most commonly as a high-level disinfectant for medical equipment such as endoscopes, spirometry tubing, dialyzers, transducers, anesthesia and respiratory therapy equipment, hemodialysis proportioning and dialysate delivery systems, and reuse of laparoscopic disposable plastic trocars. glutaraldehyde is noncorrosive to metal and does not damage lenses in instruments, rubber, or plastics. good germicidal activity has been ascribed to hydrogen peroxide; it has bactericidal, virucidal, sporicidal, and fungicidal properties. the fda website lists cleared liquid chemical sterilants and highlevel disinfectants containing hydrogen peroxide and their cleared contact conditions.mode of action: hydrogen peroxide works by producing destructive hydroxyl-free radicals that can attack membrane lipids, dna, and other essential cell components. catalase, produced by aerobic organisms and facultative anaerobes that possess cytochrome systems, can protect cells from metabolically produced hydrogen peroxide by degrading hydrogen peroxide to water and oxygen. this defense is overwhelmed by the concentrations used for disinfection. it acts on the microorganisms through its release of nascent oxygen. hydrogen peroxide produces hydroxyl-free radical that damages proteins and dna. iodine solutions or tinctures long have been used by health professionals primarily as antiseptics on skin or tissue. iodophors, on the other hand, have been used both as antiseptics and disinfectants. an iodophor is a preparation containing iodine complexed with a solubilizing agent, such as a surfactant or povidone. the structure of povidoneeiodine (pvp-i) is shown in fig. 1.30 . a well-known pvp-i product is betadine ò . the result is a water-soluble material that releases free iodine when in solution. iodine is the active ingredient.mode of action: iodine can penetrate the cell wall of microorganisms quickly, and the lethal effects are believed to result from disruption of protein and nucleic acid structure and synthesis.free iodine, the active ingredient in pvp-i, is rapidly lethal to bacteria, fungi, viruses, and protozoa. these microbial effects are the result of cell wall penetration, oxidation, and substitution of microbial contents with free iodine. it has strong oxidizing effects on the functional groups of amino acids and fatty acids, particularly the -nh 2 and -sh groups of amino acids and the double bonds of fatty acids. iodine reaction with these groups leads to rapid damage to bacterial and fungal cells.uses: besides their use as an antiseptic, iodophors have been used for disinfecting blood culture bottles and medical equipment, such as hydrotherapy tanks, thermometers, and endoscopes. iodophors formulated as antiseptics contain less free iodine than do those formulated as disinfectants.ortho-phthalaldehyde (opa) is a high-level disinfectant that received fda clearance in 1999. it contains 0.55% 1,2-benzenedicarboxaldehyde (opa), the structure of which is shown in fig. 1.31 . opa solution is a clear, pale blue liquid with a ph of 7.5. one popular commercial formulation is cidex ò opa. 19 mode of action: preliminary studies on the mode of action of opa suggest that it interacts with amino acids, proteins, and microorganisms. however, opa is a less potent cross-linking agent that glutaraldehyde. however, the lipophilic aromatic nature of opa allows its uptake through the outer layers of mycobacteria and gram-negative bacteria. opa appears to kill spores by blocking the spore germination process.uses: it is used to sterilize a wide range of medical devices.advantages:odor not significant excellent materials compatibility claimed does not coagulate blood or fix tissues to surfaces claimed.stains skin, mucous membranes, clothing, and environmental surfaces repeated exposure may result in hypersensitivity in some patients with bladder cancer more expensive than glutaraldehyde eye irritation with contact slow sporicidal activity. peracetic, or peroxyacetic acid (paa, see fig. 1.32) , is characterized by rapid action against all microorganisms. the sterilant, 35% peracetic acid, and an anticorrosive agent are supplied in a single-dose container. special advantages of peracetic acid are that it lacks harmful decomposition products (i.e. acetic acid, water, oxygen, hydrogen peroxide), enhances removal of organic material, and leaves no residue. it remains effective in the presence of organic matter and is sporicidal even at lowtemperatures. it is considered unstable, particularly when diluted; for example, a 1% solution loses half its strength through hydrolysis in 6 days, whereas 40% peracetic acid loses 1e2% of its active ingredients per month. one of the common formulations is envirotech's perasan ò .mode of action: little is known about the mechanism of action of peracetic acid, but it is believed to function similarly to other oxidizing agentsdthat is, it denatures proteins, disrupts the cell wall permeability, and oxidizes sulfhydryl and sulfur bonds in proteins, enzymes, and other metabolites. provides procedure standardization (constant dilution, perfusion of channel, temperatures, exposure) paa breaks down in food to safe and environmentally friendly residues (acetic acid and hydrogen peroxide) and therefore can be used in nonrinse applications.potential material incompatibility (e.g. aluminum anodized coating becomes dull). peracetic acid can corrode copper, brass, bronze, plain steel, and galvanized iron but these effects can be reduced by additives and ph modifications. used for immersible instruments only biological indicator may not be suitable for routine monitoring one scope or a small number of instruments can be processed in a cycle more expensive (endoscope repairs, operating costs, purchase costs) than high-level disinfection serious eye and skin damage (concentrated solution) with contact point-of-use system, no sterile storage.as shown in fig. 1 .32, peracetic acid may be at equilibrium with hydrogen peroxide and acetic acid. formulations of the three ingredients are blended and used.uses: the combination of peracetic acid and hydrogen peroxide has been used for disinfecting hemodialyzers. the effect of sterilization on plastics and elastomers advantages:odor or irritation not significant.materials compatibility concerns (lead, brass, copper, zinc) both cosmetic and functional limited clinical experience potential for eye and skin damage.phenol is probably the oldest known disinfectant as it was first used by lister, when it was called carbolic acid. however, there are many phenol-based materials used as disinfectants. phenol derivatives originate when a functional group (e.g. alkyl, phenyl, benzyl, halogen) replaces one of the hydrogen atoms on the aromatic ring.o-phenylphenol is often used instead of phenol since it is somewhat less corrosive. the primary use of 2-phenylphenol is as an agricultural fungicide. it is generally applied postharvest. it is a fungicide used for waxing citrus fruits. chloroxylenol (4-chloro-3,5-dimethylphenol) is the principal ingredient in dettol, a household disinfectant and antiseptic. hexachlorophene, also known as nabac, is a phenolic that was once used as a germicidal additive to some household products but was banned due to suspected harmful effects. thymol, derived from the herb thyme, is the active ingredient in some "broad-spectrum" disinfectants that bear ecological claims. this antibacterial activity is caused by inhibiting growth and lactate production and by decreasing cellular glucose uptake. amylmetacresol is found in strepsils, a throat disinfectant.the chemical structures of these materials are shown in fig. 1.33 .the antimicrobial properties of these compounds and many other phenol derivatives are much improved over those of the parent chemical. phenolics are absorbed by porous materials, and the residual disinfectant can irritate tissue.mode of action: in high concentrations, phenol acts as a gross protoplasmic poison, penetrating and disrupting the cell wall and precipitating the cell proteins. low concentrations of phenol and higher molecular weight phenol derivatives cause bacterial death by inactivation of essential enzyme systems and leakage of essential metabolites from the cell wall. phenolics generally have poor effectiveness against endospores.uses: many phenolic germicides are epa registered as disinfectants for use on environmental surfaces (e.g. bedside tables, bedrails, and laboratory surfaces) and noncritical medical devices. phenolics are not fda cleared as high-level disinfectants for use with semi-critical items but could be used to preclean or decontaminate critical and semi-critical devices before terminal sterilization or high-level disinfection.quaternary ammonium compounds (quats), such as benzalkonium chloride (see fig. 1 .34 for the chemical structure), are a large group of related compounds. some concentrated formulations have been shown to be effective low-level disinfectants. typically, quats do not exhibit efficacy against difficult-to-kill nonenveloped viruses such as norovirus, rotavirus, or poliovirus. newer synergous, low-alcohol formulations are highly effective broadspectrum disinfectants with quick contact times (3e5 min) against bacteria, enveloped viruses, pathogenic fungi, and myco-bacteria.the quaternary ammonium compounds are widely used as disinfectants. some of the chemical names of quaternary ammonium compounds used in health care are alkyl dimethyl benzyl ammonium chloride, alkyl didecyl dimethyl ammonium chloride, and dialkyl dimethyl ammonium chloride. the newer quaternary ammonium compounds (i.e. fourth generation), referred to as twin-chain or dialkyl quaternaries (e.g. didecyl dimethyl ammonium bromide and dioctyl dimethyl ammonium bromide), purportedly remain active in hard water and are tolerant of anionic residues.mode of action: the bactericidal action of the quaternaries has been attributed to the inactivation of energy-producing enzymes, denaturation of essential cell proteins, and disruption of the cell membrane. evidence exists that supports these and other possibilities. the mechanism of bactericidal/ microbicidal action is thought to be due to disruption of intermolecular interactions. quaternary ammonium compounds are not effective against endospores.uses: the quaternaries commonly are used in ordinary environmental sanitation of noncritical surfaces, such as floors, furniture, and walls. epa-registered quaternary ammonium compounds are appropriate to use for disinfecting medical equipment that contacts intact skin (e.g. blood pressure cuffs).surfacine development company has introduced surfacine, a persistent antimicrobial agent that may be used on animate or inanimate surfaces. it incorporates a water-insoluble antimicrobial-drug compound (silver iodide) incorporated in a surfaceimmobilized coating (a modified polyhexamethylene biguanide). microbial contact with the surface results in transfer of the silver directly from the coating to the organism. microorganisms contacting the coating accumulate silver until the toxicity threshold is exceeded; dead microorganisms eventually lyse and detach from the surface.advantages: it is persistent and has demonstrated vancomycin-resistant enterococcus species, methicillin-resistant staphylococcus aureus, and clostridium difficile. 20biofilm was mentioned in section 1.2.5 of this chapter. studies have shown that routine biocides such as chlorine, quats, peracetic acid, chlorine dioxide, and other oxidizers are ineffective against bacteria that live in biofilm. while these agents may be able to kill freeswimming pathogens, these dangerous bacteria will inevitably form biofilms and become resistant to conventional treatment methods.there are many other sterilization techniques that use gas. technically, steam could be included as a gas or vapor. some of the methods discussed in this chapter are used to sterilize medical devices that are already packaged. these may be called terminally sterilized medical devices. iso 11607-1 details the fundamental attributes required of materials and preformed systems intended for use in packaging systems for terminally sterilized medical devices. iso 11607-2 describes the validation requirements for forming, sealing, and assembly processes. the development and validation of packaging processes are crucial to ensure that sterile barrier system integrity is maintained until opened by the users of sterile medical devices.goals of a terminally sterilized medical device packaging system include:allow sterilization through the packaging. for gaseous sterilants, this means the gas must be able to permeation rapidly through the packaging. provide physical protection during handling, storage, and distribution maintain sterility to the point of use for a specific amount of time allow aseptic presentation so in these cases, the effect of the sterilant on both the packaging and the device must be considered.ethylene oxide (eto) sterilization is mainly used to sterilize medical and pharmaceutical products that cannot support conventional high temperature steam sterilization e such as devices that incorporate electronic components, plastic packaging or plastic containers.eto gas infiltrates packages as well as products themselves to kill microorganisms that are left during production or packaging processes. this gas, mixed with air at a ratio of at least 3% eto gas, forms an explosive mixture. the pure eto gas boiling point is 10.73 c at atmospheric pressure. most of the time, it is mixed with nitrogen or carbon dioxide (co 2 ).most eto sterilization lines involve three different stages. first, products need to go through a preconditioning phase to make microorganisms grow. the batch load goes through a dwell time under a controlled environment of temperature and humidity. this is often done in an environmentally controlled room. this part of the process insures the sterilization process will be reproducible.then the load goes through a long and complex sterilization cycle. requirements of such a system are:accurate temperature control accurate pressure and vacuum control.the sterilization phases are:1. initial vacuum phase air must be removed or purged from the sterilization chamber because mixtures of eto and air can be explosive. for those items that can withstand very low pressure, a vacuum is drawn on the chamber at a controlled rate. being that many of the items being sterilized are inside a package, a slow evacuation rate is used when that packaging is not very permeable to the components in air. for those devices, components and packaging that are not designed to withstand deep vacuums and/or high pressures, a different approach to air remove is done. a shallow vacuum with nitrogen gas purge is used. an initial shallow vacuum is drawn followed by a nitrogen injection. the combination of the vacuum and nitrogen injection is called a nitrogen wash. the nitrogen wash is repeated several times to assure an adequate removal of air from the vessel.2. humidification e when the initial evacuation phase of the process is performed, the product can lose a significant amount of moisture. moisture is required for the eto to sterilize properly. the lost moisture must be replaced prior to introducing the ethylene oxide. this is accomplished by adding humidity in the form of steam injections. the amount of steam required is calculated to yield a predetermined relative humidity. after the addition of steam, the product is allowed to dwell or soak for the amount of time required to replace the moisture lost from the evacuation phase.3. liquid ethylene oxide is first heated into a gaseous phase and then injected into the chamber. it is often "diluted" with a carrier gas such as freon [hydrochlorofluorocarbon (hcfc)]. common dilutions are 8.6% eto/91.4% hcfc, 10% eto/ 90% hcfc, and 8.5% eto/91.5% co 2 . the amount of gas or gas concentration is dependent on two primary factors that are addressed during cycle design but it is usually 450e1200 mg/l. the most important factor is to assure that the minimum gas concentration required to achieve sterility within the product is attained. this minimum concentration must be balanced against the second factor, which is the maximum amount of gas that can be injected before difficulties arise due to high levels of poststerilization eto residuals (eto remaining in the items being sterilized). additionally, the chamber is kept at a temperature of 37e63 c and the relative humidity is 40e80%. exposure time to eto gas is typically 1e6 h.4. after the eto exposure phase of the process, all gas must be removed from the chamber until the levels of eto fall below the flammable limit for the gas (3% or 30,000 ppm). this is accomplished by performing a series of postvacuums, each followed with a nitrogen backfill (wash).5. after the process, removal of residual eto is required. this is often done by aeration at elevated temperature. depending on the substrate materials can take 8e12 h or more. sometimes this is done in a special room but that may require 7 days if the temperature is around 20 c.the microbicidal activity of eto is considered to be the result of alkylation of protein, dna, and rna. alkylation or the replacement of a hydrogen atom with an alkyl group, within cells prevents normal cellular metabolism and replication. ethylene oxide acts more strongly against bacteria, especially grampositive bacteria, than against yeast and fungi. the disinfectant effect of ethylene oxide is similar to that of sterilization by heat, but because of limited penetration, it affects only the surface.uses: eto is used in health care facilities to sterilize critical items (and sometimes semi-critical items) that are moisture or heat sensitive and cannot be sterilized by steam sterilization. hydrogen peroxide solutions have been used as chemical sterilants for many years. however, the vaporized hydrogen peroxide (hpv or vhp ò ) approach was not developed for the sterilization of medical equipment and spaces until the mid-1980s. one method for delivering hpv uses a deep vacuum to pull liquid hydrogen peroxide (30e35% concentration) from a disposable cartridge through a heated vaporizer and then, following vaporization, into a sterilization chamber or space. a second approach to hpv delivery is the flow-through approach in which the vhp is carried into the sterilization chamber or space by a carrier gas such as air using either a slight negative pressure (vacuum) or slight positive pressure.applications of this technology include vacuum systems for industrial sterilization of medical devices and atmospheric systems for decontaminating for large and small areas, such as laboratory workstations, isolation and pass-through rooms, and even aircraft interiors. vhp offers several appealing features that include rapid cycle time (e.g. 30e45 min), lowtemperature, environmentally safe by-products (water, oxygen), good material compatibility, and ease of operation, installation, and monitoring. vhp has limitations including that cellulose cannot be processed, nylon becomes brittle, and vhp penetration capabilities are less than those of eto. vhp has not been cleared by fda for sterilization of medical devices in health care facilities.mode of action: see section for a discussion on the mode of action of hydrogen peroxide.new sterilization technology based on plasma was patented in 1987 and marketed in the united states in 1993. 21 gas plasmas have been referred to as the fourth state of matter (i.e. liquids, solids, gases, and gas plasmas). gas plasmas are generated in an enclosed chamber under deep vacuum using rf or microwave energy to excite the gas molecules and produce charged particles, many of which are in the form of free radicals. the five stages of the process consist of: the sterilization chamber is evacuated to 0.3 mmhg pressure. hydrogen peroxide solution is injected from a cassette and is vaporized in the sterilization chamber to a concentration of 6 mg/l. the hydrogen peroxide vapor diffuses through the chamber for about 50 min and exposes all surfaces and initiates the inactivation of microorganisms. at the completion of the diffusion phase, the chamber pressure is reduced to 0.5 torr. an electrical field created by an rf is applied to the chamber to create a gas plasma, which lasts for 15 min. microbicidal free radicals are generated in the plasma. the excess gas is removed and in the final stage of the process the sterilization chamber is returned to atmospheric pressure by introduction of high-efficiency filtered air. the vapor purged from the chamber is vented to the atmosphere through a catalytic filter to decompose all remaining traces of hydrogen peroxide into water and oxygen vapor. the by-products of the cycle (e.g. water vapor, oxygen) are nontoxic and eliminate the need for aeration. the process operates in the temperature range of 37e44 c and has a cycle time of 75 min.multiple plasma cycles are sometimes used. advanced sterilization products' sterrad ò systems utilize this technology.mode of action: gas plasmas generate charged particles and radicals (hydroxyl and hydroperoxyl free radicals). a free radical is an atom with an unpaired electron and is a highly reactive species. the proposed mechanism of action of lowtemperature hydrogen peroxide gas plasma is the production of free radicals within a plasma field that are capable of interacting with essential cell components such as enzymes and nucleic acids. this disrupts the metabolism of microorganisms.uses: materials and devices that cannot tolerate high temperatures and humidity, such as some plastics, electrical devices, and corrosion-susceptible metal alloys, can be sterilized by hydrogen peroxide gas plasma. this method has been compatible with most (>95%) medical devices and materials tested.advantages:safe for the environment paraformaldehyde, a solid polymer of formaldehyde, can be vaporized by heat for the gaseous decontamination of laminar flow biologic safety cabinets when maintenance work or filter changes require access to the sealed portion of the cabinet. this is shown in fig. 1.35 .mode of action: see section 1.3.3.3.low-temperature steam with formaldehyde is used as a low-temperature sterilization method in many countries, particularly in scandinavia, germany, and the united kingdom. the process involves the use of formalin (aqueous solution of formaldehyde, i.e. 37% by weight), which is vaporized into a formaldehyde gas that is admitted into the sterilization chamber. a formaldehyde concentration of 8e16 mg/l is generated at an operating temperature of 70e75 c. the sterilization cycle consists of a series of stages: cycle time for formaldehyde gas is faster than that for eto the cost per cycle is relatively low.disadvantages:eto is more penetrating and operates at lower temperatures than do steam/formaldehyde sterilizers formaldehyde is a mutagen and a potential human carcinogen, and osha regulates formaldehyde the formaldehyde steam sterilization system has not been fda cleared for use in health care facilities.ozone has been used for years as a drinking water disinfectant. ozone is produced when oxygen is energized and split into two monatomic molecules. the monatomic oxygen molecules then collide with o 2 molecules to form ozone, which is o 3 . the additional oxygen atom makes ozone a powerful oxidant that destroys microorganisms but is highly unstable (i.e. half-life of 22 min at room temperature).a new sterilization process, which uses ozone as the sterilant, was cleared by fda in august 2003 for processing reusable medical devices. the sterilizer, introduced by tso3 inc. (quebec city, qc, canada), creates its own sterilant internally from uspgrade oxygen, steam-quality water, and electricity; the sterilant is converted back to oxygen and water vapor at the end of the cycle by a passing through a catalyst before being exhausted into the room.the ozone sterilization process uses two identical half-cycles. after the chamber is loaded with instruments, the door is closed, and the cycle begins. 5 . a final ventilation phase is used to remove ozone from the chamber and the packaging within it, the residual ozone is catalytically converted to oxygen.the duration of the sterilization cycle is about 4 h and 15 min, and it occurs at 30e35 c.claimed cost per cycle is very low employee safety can used sterilized items immediately.several metals may not be used.combined hydrogen peroxide and ozone systems have been introduced.a gaseous chlorine dioxide system for sterilization of health care products was developed in the late 1980s. chlorine dioxide is not mutagenic or carcinogenic in humans. the process is:1. precondition: raising of relative humidity levels to between 60% and 75%. increased humidity levels are necessary for all spore reduction.2. condition: hold time once relative humidity set point has been reached. this is to allow spores to swell and crack due to humidity prior to gas introduction.3. charge: generation and delivery of chlorine dioxide gas.4. exposure: hold time once chlorine dioxide gas concentration set point has been reached.5. aeration: removal of chlorine dioxide gas from chamber.mode of action: chlorine dioxide (clo 2 ) acts as an oxidizing agent and reacts with several cellular constituents, including the cell membrane and proteins of microbes.the sporicidal activity of peracetic acid vapor at 20%, 40%, 60%, and 80% relative humidity and 25 c was determined on bacillus atrophaeus spores on paper and glass surfaces. appreciable activity occurred within 10 min of exposure to 1 mg of peracetic acid per liter at 40% or higher relative humidity. no vaporized peracetic acid system is fda cleared.sterilization by ionizing radiation, primarily by cobalt-60 gamma rays or electron accelerators, is a low-temperature sterilization method that has been used for a number of medical products (e.g. tissue for transplantation, pharmaceuticals, and medical devices). gamma and electron beam (or beta) radiation is discussed in detail in the earlier sections on the irradiation of food. the radiation process is not any different for medical items, but in general only disposable or one-time use items are sterilized by these methods because the facilities large and expensive and are not located on hospital grounds. major advantages of gamma and electron beam irradiation are that there are no residuals and no radioactivity remaining. as soon as the delivered dose of radiation is verified, products may be released for shipment.there are no fda-cleared ionizing radiation sterilization processes for use in health care facilities. because of high sterilization costs, this method is an unfavorable alternative to eto and plasma sterilization in health care facilities but is suitable for large-scale sterilization.the wavelength of uv radiation ranges from 328 nm to 210 nm (3280 å to 2100 å ). its maximum bactericidal effect occurs at 240e280 nm. mercury vapor lamps emit more than 90% of their radiation at 253.7 nm, which is near the maximum microbicidal activity. inactivation of microorganisms results from destruction of nucleic acid through induction of thymine dimers. this is discussed in section 1.2.8. uv radiation has been employed in the disinfection of drinking water, air, titanium implants, and contact lenses. bacteria and viruses are more easily killed by uv light than are endospores.the application of uv radiation in the health care environment (i.e. operating rooms, isolation rooms, and biologic safety cabinets) is limited to destruction of airborne organisms or inactivation of microorganisms on surfaces. there are two examples of airborne use of uv. figure 1 .36 shows that uv lights may be mounted within air ducts to destroy airborne organisms; such an application might be found in operating room ventilation. figure 1 .37 shows an example of uv use in an isolation room. table 1.9 shows the uv dose required to reduce the populations of various organisms.bioterrorism is also a constant threat that the public really learned about in september of 2001, when anthrax spores were intentionally sent through the postal system, causing 22 cases of anthrax, including 5 deaths, and forever changing the realm of public health. 24 mail to government offices was irradiated to prevent anthrax infections and contaminated rooms and buildings were fumigated by methods discussed in this chapter.the principal means of decontamination of facilities experiencing an anthrax attack is fumigation with chlorine dioxide gas. delivery of anthrax has been by mail in the past. irradiation of mail is an effort to disinfect it. the most notable instance of mail irradiation occurred in response to the 2001 anthrax attacks; the level of radiation chosen to kill anthrax spores was so high that it often changed the physical appearance of the mail. a facility in bridgeport, nj, operated by sterigenics international, uses a rhodotron continuous wave electron beam accelerator built by iba industrial to irradiate the mail. a few facilities were planning to use cobalt-60 sources, though it is unclear whether this was ever done. during irradiation, an intense stream of electrons (or x-rays if x-ray technology is used) strikes the mail and any anthrax spores it may contain. the radiation dose is very high, about 56 kgy of radiation, which is approximately 2 million times more than a chest x-ray. water safety threats (e.g. vibrio cholerae, cryptosporidium parvum).these third highest priority agents include emerging pathogens that could be engineered for mass spread in the future because: this chapter reviewed briefly dozens of sterilization methods. the effect of sterilization processes on plastic materials is important because most food and many medical supplies are already packaged before being processed for microbe elimination. packaging is usually made from polymeric plastics. if the sterilization processes weaken the plastic films, they could affect shelf life and damage losses.the effect of all these methods on plastics is not covered in the data chapters. this is because the effect of many is minimal on the plastic properties. the most commonly used processes get the focus in the data chapters. appendix a, guidelines for component sterilization based on material and process, does contain guidelines on the general suitability of many of the processes on various plastics.the current covid-19 pandemic, "when the destructive effects of natural or man-made forces overwhelm the ability of a given area or community to meet the demand for health care" [1] , demands the best disaster/mass casualty incident (mci) response. during mcis, preserving financial and human resources is crucial. a good organization and a preventive approach are mandatory in the phase of mci response called mitigation. in order to minimize resource exhaustion, the use of surgical appliances and staff must be well pondered and balanced [2] . surgeons and sub-specialized workers in general are a valuable resource during mci. infection or death of sub-specialized staff must be minimized to preserve the ability to face surgical emergencies and associated activities that will continue to occur or perhaps increase during mci. in fact, any lack of specialized teams occurring during a pandemic cannot be easily addressed by reintegrating retirees or replenishing the ranks with new staff, which would also be inevitably associated with a lowered standard of care, hence, the requirement to skeletonize surgical activities during a pandemic. when possible, all surgical procedures on all suspected covid-19 patient should be postponed until confirmed infection clearance. minimal staff should be involved when deferral is not possible. if a large number of senior surgeons is exposed to infected patients, the possibility for them to become infected and require self-isolation is real and could potentially result in a dangerous shortage of senior expertise within surgical teams. resource usage should be carefully considered when planning scheduled procedures, particularly with regard to materials, staff, devices, intensive care beds, blood components, etc. caring for resource-intensive patients might be controversial during mcis.this manuscript is the result of a collaboration between the major italian surgical and anesthesiologic societies: acoi, sic, sicut, sico, sicg, sifipac, sice, and siaarti. we aim to describe recommended clinical pathways for covid-19-positive patients requiring acute non-deferrable surgical care.all known or suspected covid-19-positive patients requiring surgical intervention must be treated as positive until proven otherwise in order to minimize infection spread. protocolized clearly defined pathways must be available to healthcare professionals caring for these patients. allocating dedicated senior staff to key management roles is crucial to minimize covid-19 spread. all staff must be specifically trained to don, doff, and dispose of personal protection equipment (ppe) including masks (level 2 or 3 filtering face piece (ffp) depending on the aerosol-generating risk level), eye protection, double non-sterile gloves, gowns, suites, caps, and socks (table 1) .in-transit surgical patients proceeding through the theater block must not stop in the anesthetic bay, recovery room, or any place other than the covid-dedicated operating room (or). they must be taken directly to a designated or that must be adequately marked with clearly visible door signs. in the event that the scheduled surgical procedure does not require a general anesthetic and if the clinical situation allows, patients should continue to wear a protective mask for the entire duration of the procedure (fig. 1) .it is important to underline how all non-covid patients must be protected. established separate pathways must exist to keep suspected/infected patients apart from non-covid ones. ppes or at least masks must be enforced for all non-covid patients during all inhospital transfers in order to minimize infection risk in the event that they cross the path or come in proximity of a covid patient. careful planning and segregation of infected patients may help minimize staff shortages related to uncontrolled viral spread.designated covid operating areas (coa) must be allocated to covid patients' urgent/emergent operating. the or closest to the entrance of the theater block entrance should be the first one designated to covid patients.when multiple procedures must be simultaneously performed, operating rooms must be utilized in order of proximity to the theater block entrance in order to minimize environmental contamination in the theater block.patient transit to and from the coa must be as quick as possible. a pre-defined direct path must be kept as short as possible and away from other patients and people in general within the hospital in order to minimize the chances of infection. if inter-hospital patient transfer or transfer from other buildings within the hospital is required, a dedicated vehicle should be used. transfer personnel should be specifically trained and equipped with ppes. the patient's compartment in the transport vehicle is ideally kept separate from the driver. a biocontainment unit may be utilized. if a patient is taken to the coa from any adjacent premise, a stretcher might be used for transport. all precautionary measures apply to the use of the stretcher and to the personnel responsible for the transfer ( table 1 , fig. 1 ) both during and after transport is completed, with immediate sanitization required (tables 2 and 3 ). utilized lifts must be sanitized. if any unexpected contamination occurs during transport (i.e., patient vomiting or else), adequate dedicated sanitization should take place. a dedicated specifically trained 24/7 cleaning team from the local contracted cleaning service might prove a valuable resource.any non-intubated patient must wear a surgical mask, disposable waterproof gloves, disposable cap, and shoe covers during transport. when possible, the patient's hands should be sanitized before transport. transport operators must sanitize hands and wear ppes before transfer and should minimize contact with patients. coded routes should be followed and hospital public areas avoided. anyone crossing the path of an infected patient should be preemptively alerted in order to minimize contact. well-organized logistics will contribute to minimizing disposables wastage. dedicated wellidentifiable containers for infectious-risk health waste (irhw) should be used for potentially infected disposables. lastly, covid patients should be transported in the most professional and confidential way possible in order to minimize unjustified alarmism. dedicated areas allocated to infected patients awaiting transfer to the coa must be preemptively identified in the emergency department. the patient's transfer from the emergency department to the coa should be streamlined in order to avoid all unnecessary contacts. each hospital should provide a step by step, well-defined path pre-allocating some corridors and elevators to covid patients.it is important to minimize the total number of operators working in the designated coa. whenever possible, it is important to minimize to number of people working on a single infected case; ideally, this should also apply to cases spanning over multiple shifts. operations for covid patients might be organized with a dedicated on-call shift. this might require overnight or out of hours activities to optimize resource usage. this approach might facilitate segregation between covid and non-covid patients, who will continue to require surgical care. ppes and stock required for hand hygiene must be constantly replenished within the coa. a specifically allocated filter area designed for covid patients to enter the coa must be equipped with ppes, hand hygiene station, and a dedicated irhw bins. handling of potentially infected linen should be adequately managed too. the use of machinery intended to facilitate moving and transferring patients should be minimized. all coa doors must be kept closed (including accessory rooms, sterilization spaces), and any equipment not necessary for the intervention must be moved away from covid patients transit route.special attention should be given to what, in non-covid times, is routine practice. staff taking responsibility for positive or suspected infected patients must be limited to those who need to be primarily involved in each operation. a record must be kept of all operators involved in procedures on potentially infected patients. personnel equipped with full ppes must receive the patient in the coa, transfer the patient to the operating room minimizing environmental contamination and, after time-out, proceed to move the patient on the operating table in the allocated or. all non-intubated patients must wear a surgical mask. medical records must remain outside the or and must be consulted and updated there after adequate doffing. intraoperative document consultation is discouraged and should be minimized.negative pressure ors would be ideal to minimize infection risk [3, 4] . however, ors are normally designed to have positive pressure air circulation. a high air exchange cycle rate (≥ 25 cycles/h) contributes to effectively reduce the viral load within ors [2] . equipment kept in each or must be minimized to what is strictly necessary on a case to case basis. once the operation starts, all efforts must be made to use what is available in the room and minimize staff transiting in and out the or, in order to minimize infection risk. standard anesthetic trolleys should be replaced with dedicated pre-prepared ones with minimal but adequate stock. all required surgical material (i.e., stitches, scalpel blades) must be preemptively prepared in a sterilizable steel wire basket. dedicated irhw containers must be used for infected and sharp disposable instruments. alcoholic solution for hand hygiene must always be available. avoiding non-strictly necessary commonly used non-disposable devices is recommended. disposable material in general should be preferred, including linen. all operators (i.e., surgeon, anesthetist, nurses, technicians) should enter the or timely, aiming to minimize time spent within the or itself. once in the or, they should not leave until the operation is completed, and once out they should not re-enter.all operators must wear the required ppe before meeting the infected patient. the patient's receiving personnel inside the coa filter area must perform hand hygiene and wear full ppe.while taking care of infected patients, gloves should be changed immediately after contact with infected material (objects, surfaces, etc.) or if any damage occurs. operator with a beard should exert special attention to the fit of the mask ensuring adequate protection.some procedures likely to generate aerosolized particles have been associated with increased coronavirus transmission: tracheal intubation, non-invasive ventilation, tracheostomy, cardiopulmonary resuscitation, and manual ventilation before intubation and bronchoscopy [5, 6 ]. an ffp3 mask should be therefore worn by operators working closer to the patient during these procedures.given the conjunctiva's susceptibility to viral transmission, it is important to wear visors or goggles to protect the eyes from potential exposure of viral particles [7] .careful anesthesiologic planning is recommended to minimize any infection potentially associated with unexpected complex endotracheal intubation procedures. a more liberal use of intubation might be justified in patients with acute respiratory failure, bypassing noninvasive ventilation techniques (e.g., cpap or bipap) in order to minimize the transmission risks [5] . disposable airway equipment should be preferred. medical and nursing staff must be equipped with ffp3 filters during laryngoscopy and intubation [5] . intubations techniques with the highest chance of first-time success should be preferred to avoid repeated airway instrumentation [4, 5] . awake intubation techniques should be avoided. at the end of these procedures, all staff directly performing the procedure must immediately replace the first pair of gloves and other ppes in case heavy contamination risk exists (i.e., in the event that vomiting, coughing, or else has occurred). fiberscope intubation, unless specifically all suspected or infected patients must be managed with the maximum attention.all personnel in contact with the patient must wear ppe.transfers must be protected.infected patients must be moved as little as possible through the hospital.transfer routes must be precisely planned and be as short as possible.the covid operating area should be in a dedicated and possibly separate area.covid operating room must be dedicated and as close as possible to the entrance of the theater block.disposable material should be preferred.transport personnel should be the same from transport origin to destination.once the patient has entered, the or doors must be closed.operators (i.e., surgeon, anesthetist, nurses, technicians) should enter the or in a timely manner to minimize exposure to infected patients.personnel involved in the intervention should not leave the or during the procedure.clinical documentation must remain outside the or at the end of each intervention all disposable materials must be disposed of and all surfaces and electromedical devices accurately cleaned and disinfected. ppe must be removed and disposed of outside the or in dedicated doffing areas ensuring the virus is not transmitted to the healthcare worker.or and surrounding donning/doffing areas must be sanitized as soon as possible after each procedure.after each procedure, all involved personnel, whenever possible, should shower.recovery phase after surgery must be done in or, before transfer the ward/icu. indicated, should be avoided as it may generate aerosolization [5] . rapid sequence intubation (rsi) should be considered to avoid manual ventilation and potential aerosolization. if manual ventilation is required, small current volumes should be used. if available, a closed suction system should be preferred during airway aspiration. disposable covers should be used whenever possible to reduce equipment contamination. if a patient is transferred directly from the intensive care unit, a dedicated transport ventilator should be utilized. in order to reduce aerosolization risks, the gas flow should be turned off and the endotracheal tube clamped with forceps when switching from the portable device to the or ventilator [4] . when possible, a dedicated ventilator should be used in the or for general anesthesia in positive or suspected positive covid-19 patients. invasive procedures like for example the placement of intercostal catheters, central venous catheters, or similar should be performed at the patient's bedside, rather than in the or. when a general anesthetic is required, a hepa (high-efficiency particulate air) filter should be connected to the patient end of the breathing circuit and another one between the expiratory limb and the anesthetic machine [2, 6] . alternatively, for pediatric patients or other patients in whom additional dead space or the weight of the filter may be problematic, the hepa filter must be placed at the expiratory end of the circuit (before the exhalation re-enters the ventilator). the gas sampling tube must also be protected by a hepa filter. both hepa filters and soda lime must be changed after each case [4] . at the end of the surgery, during the recovery phase, the patient must be assisted directly in the or until ready to be transferred back to the inpatients place of stay. the time patients spend returning to wards must be reduced in order to minimize contact between covid-positive patients and the surrounding environment.the or door must be kept closed at all times and clear signs should discourage unnecessarily entering the room. supplying materials to the or during surgery should also be discouraged. the scout nurse, in collaboration with the operating surgeon, should anticipate what is needed during the operation before the same starts. surgeons should preferably perform the operation with what is available in the or once the operation started. any essential retrieval of necessary equipment should be done by staff outside the or. personnel present in the or during surgery must not leave the room. electromedical devices (i.e., ultrasound) and surfaces must be used with adequate protective cover and adequately sanitized at the end of the operation. the surgical team will drape the patient according to the surgical procedure, replacing the surgical mask with ffp2 filter and wearing long shoe covers before doing so. all personnel in direct contact with the patient must wear a double pair of gloves at all times, even while operating. after the patient left the or, logistics should allow as much time as possible before the next procedure takes place, to reduce possible air contamination. this time depends on the number of air exchanges/hour of the specific room. air exchange cycles should be increased whenever possible to ≥ 25 exchanges/h [2] . after the case, all areas at risk of contamination must be cleaned and disinfected ( table  2 ). efforts should be made to minimize the contamination risk associated with specimens sent to the pathology department. no data currently exist on covid-19 viral load in bodily fluids or tissue samples.staff not directly involved in the patient's care should leave the or at the end of the operation and remove all ppes in a dedicated doffing area following the sequence described below. a clean area should be accessed only after the doffing procedure is complete. all used ppes must be disposed of through irhw containers. scrubs must be replaced after each procedure following showering, whenever possible. personnel responsible for transferring the patient away from the operating room must follow separate access routes and wear ppes different from the ones worn in the or.the healthcare professional must take all care not to become infected while removing ppe; this must be done through an adequate procedure preventing recontamination of the operator's clothing and hands. the first pair of gloves is likely to be heavily contaminated and must be removed first. all other ppes must be considered infected as well and removed with care during the doffing procedure, especially if the patient had a cough. protective suite, shoe cover, and head cap must be subsequently removed. face mask and glasses must be then removed, taking care to handle the face mask by the ear laces and without touching its external side. the second pair of gloves must be removed as the very last ppe and hands disinfection with hydro-alcoholic solution must be accurately performed immediately after.the or and surrounding exchange areas must be sanitized as soon as possible after each procedure, with particular attention to all objects used when caring for infected patients. similarly, all areas where covid patients have transited must be carefully sanitized too. all personnel must contribute to maintain a clean environment including floors and surfaces in general. all potentially infected single-use materials should be disposed of through irhw containers. reusable materials should be decontaminated, washed, dried, and or disinfected/sterilized, based on the likelihood of infection. electromedical equipment (i.e., ventilator, radiological equipment) must be cleaned with chloro-derivate solution, rinsed and dried, and then disinfected with chloroderivate solution in a concentration ≥ 0.1% or 1000 ppm (parts per million) with contact time superior to 1 min [8, 9] (table 2) . full ppe must be worn during the sanitizing procedure. disposable materials only (i.e., double gloves, paper towel) should be used for cleaning. anything disposable kept inside the or during the operation must be disposed of through irhw containers, even if not used.it is advisable to set up a dedicated container for hazardous medical waste immediately outside the or, to immediately dispose of all contaminated disposable material and ppes. containers should be closed and sealed before being transferred to the collection point. all sharps should be disposed of in a dedicated rigid plastic container. ppe should be worn when closing and transporting containers and removed immediately after. any visibly damaged or contaminated container must be promptly replaced.linen can be contaminated and must therefore be handled and transported with care, aiming to prevent infection spread. disposable laundry should be preferred, when possible. all linen (sheets, pillowcases, crossbars, etc.) should be handled wearing ppe during collection, not placed on surfaces or floors, but directly inside dedicated containers. these must be sealed and immediately sent for cleaning and sterilization, limiting them being left outside the or.instituting precise well-established plans to perform undeferrable surgical procedures and emergencies on covid-19-positive patient is mandatory. hospitals must prepare specific internal protocols and arrange adequate training of the involved personnel. the novel coronavirus disease 2019 (covid-19) caused by severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2) was initially diagnosed from wuhan, hubei province (mainland china), has already taken on pandemic proportions, affecting whole world in the minuscule of time [1, 2, 3] . as of april 30, 2020, >3.3 million cases of covid-19 cases had been confirmed resulting in 234,139 deaths worldwide [4] . in reciprocation to the outbreak, world health organization (who) declared it as a public health emergency of international concern and called global imperative efforts to prevent the escalation [5] . sars-cov-2 is an enveloped rnaβ -coronavirus with an outer fringe of envelope proteins resembling like crown, which has a phylogenetic genome similarity with highly pathogenic and transmissible with another known coronavirus i.e. sars-cov- 1 (2003) and mers-cov (2012) [6, 7, 8, 9] . studies suggest the basic reproduction number (r 0 ) of sars-cov-2 be around 2.2 or more upto 6 [10], making the virus propagate at an alarming rate and proving to be very expeditious and erratic [11, 12] .india is a country of vast socio-cultural diversity; health inequalities and economic disparity presents with challenges and threat by the growing pandemic of covid -19. enforcement of immediate lockdown, which was praised by who as "tough and timely" and cluster containment to break the chain transmission are effective approach [13, 14] . india is the second-largest internet user in the world with >560 million from 1.39 billion gross population [15] . one threat to the covid-19 response in india is the ubiquitous spread of misinformation by raising falsehoods like rinsing the nose with saline, spraying of alcohol and chlorine or 5g mobile networks inhibiting the spread of the virus, during the crisis is dangerous because it can mislead and confuse the public [16] . over 3 billion posts and 100 billion interactions are present on covid-19 making infodemic spread faster than a pandemic [17] . the most important factor in preventing the spread of the virus locally is the empowered citizens with the right information and taking advisories being issued by the ministry of health & family welfare, government of india regularly. to guarantee the final success, people's adherence to these control measures is essential, which is largely affected by their knowledge, attitudes, and practices (kap) towards covid-19 in accordance with kap theory [18, 19] .to address the gap, the study was carried out with the following objectives:• primary objective -to assess the kap regarding covid-19 among the general population of india.• secondary objective -to assess the factors associated with the level of kap regarding the covid-19 outbreak.this is a cross-sectional survey conducted via snowball sampling technique from 10 th march to 18 th april 2020 in india. as community-based survey was not feasible due to nationwide lockdown in india. a 19-item questionnaire was developed using google forms. information published in literature including publications available on who and the centers for disease control and prevention (cdc) [20, 21, 22, 23] was utilised at large. a pilot study was conducted to understand the barriers faced by participants and the chronology of the questionnaire. the questionnaire was made available to the participants through emails and social networking platforms such as whatsapp, linkedin, instagram, and facebook. the cover page of the questionnaire includes a consent form, a declaration of confidentiality, and anonymity. participants with age more than 18 years who can understand the content of the survey and willing to participate were included.the a total of 8075 questionnaires were retrieved, of which 97 questionnaires were excluded as the participants declined to give consent. the remaining 7978 questionnaires were completed with an overall response rate of 98.79%. the details of demographic characteristics were presented in (table 2) . a large proportion of male respondents (52.4%) were found. the leading age band was 18-30 years, accounting approximately 54.2% of both the genders.additionally, total of 5588 (70.04%) subjects holds a degree of graduate or above, 3232 (40.5%) pursues as a student or unemployed and 5108 (64%) were single. knowledge score related to covid-19 as to knowledge, the mean was 11.36 ± 1.2 (range 0-13) suggesting an overall 80.64% correct rate of knowledge. univariate analysis with knowledge level significantly varies across age, gender, education, and occupation. 89.4% agreed that isolation and quarantine are an important step to stop the spread of novel coronavirus and only 83.19% of respondents were aware of pregnant women are more at risk towards covid-19. whereas, only 37% believed eating citrus fruit and gargling with salt water cannot help in preventing infection with the nobel coronavirus (table 3 ). in multiple linear regression analysis, male (β=0.036: p<0.001), urban population (β=0.006:p<0.002), higher education (β=0.029:p<0.001), higher occupation (β=0.002:p=0.05) have associated significantly with high knowledge score. there is no evidence of multicollinearity between independent variables (range of vip 1.102 and 1.287) ( table 4 ).the overall correct rate in attitude was 97.33%. majority of population 97.6% had not been any populated place. nearly respondents (98.33%) believed that covid-19 can be successfully controlled. moreover, 96.01% agreed with the idea of lockdown to prevent the spread of covid-19. univariate analysis is significantly associated with age, gender, marital status, area of residence, education, and occupation (table5). in multiple linear regression analysis, female(β=-0.006:p=0.008), middle-age person (β=-0.011:p<0.001), higher education (β=0.025:p<0.001), higher occupation (β=0.020:p<0.001) have associated significantly with good attitude score. there is no evidence of multicollinearity between marital status, geographical area, and attitude (range of vip = 1.102 and 1.052 p>0.05) ( table 6 ) practice score related to covid-19 based on results overall response rate was 83.8 %. in the study, most males (72.7%) denied the idea of grocery stocking in contrast, 55.2% of females agree with this idea of grocery stocking. both the gender (90.7%) males and (97.1%) taking proper preventive measures while leaving home (table 7) in multiple regression, male (β=0.093:p<0.001), old age (β=0.030:p<0.001), single and other (β=0.113:p<0.001), lower education (β=-0.007:p=0.007) have associated significantly with good practice. however, there is no evidence of multicollinearity of geographical area and occupation with practice score (range of vip =1.052 and 1.310 respectively p<0.05) ( table 8) .there was positive significant correlation between knowledge-attitude, knowledge-practice and attitude practice with strongest relation identified between practice and attitude. express by pearson's correlation, the knowledge score correlation with attitude (r=0.023:p<0.01) and practice (r=0.019:p<0.01). moreover, practice score positive correlation with attitude (r=0.361:p=0.03). (table 9) since the outbreak, corona virus had brought chaos to lives and economics around the world. as of now, india is facing biggest health emergency since the country has gained independence. encouragement of public to adopt precautionary behaviours for containment strategies as knowledge attitude and practice is foreground for public cooperation and backbone for implementing any health policy. countries have reported community response to covid-19 from china and middle east [20, 24] . from the aspect of attention, this is the unique paper from india including 7978 subjects analysed towards covid-19.based on our findings, the study significantly consists males, single and well-educated population. the overall 80.64% of knowledge score was higher and unanticipated. essentially because the online survey was after the ubiquitous mass media coverage on rampant caused by covid-19 to global giants i.e (america, europe, china) and through effective health communication for sustainable adoption of preventive measures by ministry of health & family welfare, government of india [25, 26] . furthermore, sample characteristics: consisting participants with higher education holds the predication of knowledge score which is similar to chinese study but varied with iranian study [20, 24] , participants were aware regarding clinical symptoms, transmission, prevention and control of disease contrast to myth busters questions. more than one -third participants agreed about eating citrus fruits and gargling salt water can help prevent infection. according to who gargling warm or saltwater and consuming citrus fruits will not kill novel-corona virus [27] . 14% out of hundred think alcohol drinking can kill novel coronavirus. alcohol are highly inflammable substance as well as strong disinfectants, it can be used as a cleansing agent for surfaces [28] . no evidence supports alcohol consumption can kill the virus, whereas intake of excessive alcohol can cause health related complications. robust association between gender and knowledge score regarding covid-19 was found in the present study. multivariate analysis showed confounding factors (education level and occupation) as strong indicator of knowledge domain regarding covid-19 which postulates the combination of better access to information and high education level leads to appropriate apprehension and comprehension of information on covid-19, consequent to better knowledge on covid-19. therefore, government and public health policy-makers should recognize target populations for covid-19 prevention and health education.our study has strong association of knowledge significantly with positive attitude and practice. in recent, majority of population (97.6%) have taken optimistic measures by avoiding going to crowded places. this practice is primarily due to strict measures taken by government to prevent overwhelmed wave of new infection whereas secondly due to awareness, acceptance and action of people with good knowledge. unfortunately, 3.6% males are going to crowded place because of two potential reason: first in india men are likely to expose in outwork exposing them to crowded place, secondly according to studies men and adolescents have more risk-taking behaviour which suggestive of dangerous practice towards covid-19. similar findings were obtained in previous studies conducted in china [20] . massive agreement was found towards the idea of lockdown in india, which has helped to prevent potential rise in cases. according to icmr (indian medical council of research): reproduction factor (ro) of sars-cov-2 is 2.5. one person can infect 406 peoples in 30 days, if the lockdown and social distancing are placed properly one sick person can only infect 2.5 persons. successful containment of pandemic is social distancing which is already proven by millennial example in pandemics of influenza [29,30,31].lack of information, imprecise information, deception can lead to hysteric and fuel behavioural outcomes for example -panic buying [32] . according to recent studies, panic buying is having detrimental impact on health supply chains leading to shortage of essentials like sanitizers, masks and pain relievers [33] . in our study, 55% of females and 27.3 % males agreed with idea of grocery and medicine stocking. multiple linear regression suggested married and age significantly associated in stocking practice. as panic buying disturbs the balance of demand and supply in goods supply chain system [34] , no research was found to establish relation between association of marital status and gender in grocery and medicine . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 9, 2020. . stocking. mental health is another major issue that is becoming critical in managing covid-19 pandemic. social chaos and arbitrary relationship are destroyed due to panic and fear, thus superseding evidence and psychologically, change in environment makes us feel unsafe, scared and anxious. family and friends are major source to mental ability by reassurance well-being and high spirits [35, 36] . in our study predominant population experience connected with family and friends [37] .strength of the study is large sample size during the critical period of nationwide lockdown and covid-19 outbreak. our sample was perfectly balanced as both the genders were recruited which really made us to take effort as in india more telecom users are males considering that educational attainment and occupation are frequently considered proxy measures od socio-economic status. significant association between demographics variables and kap towards covid-19, due to which we have overestimated rates of preventive practice and attitudes with the actual practice.due to limited access of internet and proper health related resources rural people and aged adults with unskilled occupation have poor knowledge. another limitation to the study is limited question in attitude and practice due to limited time for developing questionnaire.to conclude, majority of indian population demonstrated preceded good knowledge, positive attitude and good practice regarding covid-19 pandemic. furthermore, due to systemic approach and health communication strategies significant awareness and apprehension in knowledge, preventive strategies and optimistic attitude was assimilated general population. other than that, government policy makers has worked well in targeting grass-root population having low level of education and non-professional workers and managed proactively the concept of "social distancing" in covid-19.noteworthily india in unison with strengthen health systems measures and cooperation with public-health policy makers will fight back this pandemic with optimistic control and empowered knowledge. . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 9, 2020. .available from-https://economictimes.indiatimes.com/news/politics-and-nation/covid- is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 9, 2020. .april 2020 ;cited on 2020,20 april ) available from-https://www.foodnavigator.com/article/2020/03/27/panic-buyingamid-coronavirus-fears-how-much-are-we-spending-and-why-is-it-a-problem . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 9, 2020. . is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 9, 2020. . is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 9, 2020. is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 9, 2020. is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 9, 2020. is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 9, 2020. is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 9, 2020. is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 9, 2020. on june 2, 2020, the new york times reported, "summer is almost here, states are reopening and new coronavirus cases are declining or, at least, holding steady in many parts of the united states. at least 100 scientific teams around the world are racing to develop a vaccine. that's about it for the good news. the virus has shown no sign of going away: we will be in this pandemic era for the long haul, likely a year or more. the masks, the social distancing, the fretful hand-washing, the aching withdrawal from friends and family -those steps are still the best hope of staying well, and will be for some time to come." 1, 2 for many americans, the most demanding of the recommended coronavirus precautions is social isolation -"the aching withdrawal from friends and family." there are innumerable reports of people choosing to ignore this recommendation. yet evidence shows, say the experts from the centers for disease control and prevention (cdc), "limiting face-to-face contact with others is the best way to reduce the spread of coronavirus disease 2019…." 3 what does social distancing involve? the cdc says that social distancing, also called physical distancing, means keeping space between yourself and other people outside of your home. to practice social or physical distancing:• stay at least 6 feet (about 2 arms' length) from other people • do not gather in groups • stay out of crowded places and avoid mass gatherings an ancient practice social isolation may sound modern, but this is not the case. isolation during illness is ancient. it eventually became known as the quarantine, a term derived from the17 th -century italian word quarantina, meaning "forty days." but as kelly drews reports in her brilliant 2013 article "a brief history of quarantine" in the virginia tech undergraduate historical review, "quarantines have been employed for thousands of years as safeguards against the spread of disease. early in the history of civilizations, isolation and confinement of ill persons were the predecessors of quarantine." 4 drews' astute observations inform much of what follows.microbes were not known by humankind thousands of years ago. what were our ancestors trying to protect against?microscopic pathogens were discovered during the period 1665-83 by two fellows of london's royal society, robert hooke and antoni van leeuwenhoek. in micrographia (1665), hooke presented the first published description of a microganism, the microfungus mucor. leeuwenhoek, a few years later, actually observed and described microscopic protozoa and bacteria while employing his improvements on the recently invented microscope. 5 a key figure in the evolution of our understanding of the spread of infections was louis pasteur, whose findings were published in 1861. fifteen years later, the german physician robert koch traced the life history of the microbe responsible for anthrax in cattle and sheep. six years after that, in 1882, koch worked out the cause of tuberculosis. it was the first microbial disease in humans for which this had been accomplished. 4 although a monumental achievement, it was not until the 20 th century that germ theory became a standard part of scientific and medical knowledge. most of koch's contemporaries persisted in believing that the major culprits were bad air (miasmas) and undisciplined lifestyles, and had nothing to do with tiny living organisms. 6the incubation period is the interval from the time the pathogen enters the body until the time it first causes symptoms. because of the incubation period, an individual may carry a disease-causing pathogen without being symptomatic. when symptoms occur, they may be minimal, such as a low-grade fever, which reflects the body's attempt to kill or control the spread of the harmful microbe."throughout much of early epidemiological history, isolation, not quarantine, was the primary method of halting the spread of pandemics, because people did not understand the concept of an incubation period," drews states. 4 therefore, before microbes were discovered in the nineteenth century, people understood that social isolation worked but they did not know why. they only understood that sick people should be separated from well individuals.this type of uncertainty persists in many areas of medical science. we have often known that something works before we understand how it works. a classic example is general anesthetics, whose effectiveness was unquestioned before we had a clue about the physiological mechanisms that were involved.drews finds an early form of semi-isolation the biblical book of leviticus, the third book of the jewish torah, thought to have been written between the fifth and eighth centuries bce. instructions occur in the thirteenth chapter for the isolation of those suffering from a skin disease, most likely leprosy.nearly a thousand years later in 541 ce, the first recorded outbreak of what came to be known as bubonic plague or the black death was reported by the byzantine historian procopius. 7 this outbreak was also called the plague of justinian or the justinian plague, after the roman emperor. it afflicted the entire mediterranean basin, europe, and the near east. constantinople, the seat of the roman empire at the time, was severely affected. 8 the justinian plague raged from 541 to 549 ce and destroyed up to an estimated 40 percent of the population in the affected regions. justinian contracted the plague but did not die from it. he instituted burial customs and control measures. they included efforts to control the movements of people believed responsible for the disease, including jews, pagans, heretics, and homosexuals.drews is unsparing in her criticism of justinian's response to the plague. she states, "justinian's discriminatory laws created a sort of quarantine, though he had no knowledge of what caused the disease to spread. people who were considered different from the christians of constantinople were accused of causing the terrible outbreak. as a result, justinian attempted to halt their movement. these minorities were no guiltier in their role as plague carriers than the christians who had the disease, but racism and aggression against dissident groups of justinian's reign played a major role in their branding as the source of the epidemic. the quarantine enacted by justinian proved virtually useless and did nothing to stop the spread of the plague. however, it still qualifies as a quarantine technology, a failed technology, but a technology nonetheless." 4 in drews' piquant description, "originally appearing in the far east, the disease that would come to be synonymous with plague first emerged in europe as nothing more than a rumor in 1346. over the next five to ten years the plague exploded onto the western world, killing millions and altering the fabric of every society it touched." 4 the use of quarantine expanded during the fourteenth century as the epidemics of black death continued.what did the plague look like? drews cites the description of the illness recorded by italian author boccaccio (1313-1357) in his decameron: "[i]ts earliest symptom, in men and women alike, was the appearance of certain swellings in the groin or armpit, some of which were egg-shaped whilst others were roughly the size of the common apple…. against these maladies, it seemed that all the advice of physicians and all the power of medicine were profitless and unavailing…few of those who caught it ever recovered, and in most cases death occurred within three days from the appearance of the symptoms we have described, some people dying more rapidly than others, the majority without any fever or other complications." 9as i write, there are almost 400,000 confirmed deaths worldwide from coronavirus infection (https://ourworldindata.org/coronavirus-data). these are tragic numbers, but they are small compared to what our ancestors endured. by the time the black death subsided after 1351, "20 million people had died in europe alone, reducing the population to 80 million people. the epidemic completely halted the rise in human population begun in 5,000 bce; it killed so many people that it would take europe more than 150 years to return to its former population." 4 today people complain about isolation, facemasks, business closures, and restricted movement. compare these inconveniences with those imposed during fourteenth-century europe during the plague years. drews: "by the late fourteenth century, the effects of the plague were so bad that italian city-states resorted to desperate measures in an attempt to preserve public health. without definite knowledge of what caused the disease, italian health commissioners fell back on a common theory that the air itself was infected. in their view, the only way to stop the epidemic was to somehow clean the air. …in their pursuit of corruption-free air, commissioners inspected wine, fish, meat, and water supplies; they worried about sewage; they regulated burials, and decreed the destruction of the clothing of the deceased…. these measures may have saved lives by cutting down on secondary sources of infection. but besides burning the clothing of the deceased, they did little to curb the rampant spread of the plague… . more extreme measures were taken by viscount bernabo of reggio, who ordered, 'every person with plague be taken out of the city in to the fields, there to die or recover.'" 4, 10by the mid-1370s, modern quarantine procedures began to take shape in italy. drews reports, "in 1374, both genoa and venice began determining the ports of origin of incoming ships, and turned away any coming from infected areas. ...ultimately, the italian city-states extended their quarantine time requirement to forty days. originally termed trentino, the adjustment to forty days of quarantine caused the name to be modified to quarantino, a term derived from the italian word quaranta, which means 'forty'. some suggest this was based on the hippocratic belief that the 40th day distinguished acute diseases from chronic. other authors contend that it was changed due to christian practices, such as the observation of lent, the length of the great flood of noah, or the length of jesus' stay in the wilderness. regardless of the reason, the increased quarantine time offered an improvement; it better insured that the ships in question did not pose a health risk to the city." 4 if any deaths occurred or if anyone fell sick during the voyage or during the time the quarantine was being observed, the quarantine would be extended "for 50 or 60 days according to the danger and circumstances," and the goods on board would be "sent to the pesthouse" to be "purified." 4 in addition to establishing a maritime quarantine for incoming ships, italian health officials began to restrict infected persons and their families and contacts to their homes as a means of preventing further spread of disease. often the authorities would assign individuals to guard the homes of the quarantined in order to insure they did not escape. isolation sometimes amounted to captivity and imprisonment. in milan, where cases of the plague were first discovered, all the occupants of the three houses concerned, dead or alive, sick or well, were walled up inside and left to perish. this extreme action appeared to have worked, as out of all the large italian city-states, milan was the least afflicted with the black death. 11 some forms of isolation and quarantine amounted to banishment. drews reports that in 2007 archaeologists discovered a mass grave of more than 1,500 victims of the bubonic plague while working on the small island of lazzaretto vecchio in italy's venetian lagoon. during the plague years, those in venice who caught the plague were sent to this island. they were treated until they either survived or perished by "physicians brave or foolish enough to tend to the infected," drews states. lazzaretto vecchio may have been the world's first lazaret, or quarantine colony. 4, 12 england's major cities also suffered severely during the plague years. poor sanitation and massive overcrowding guaranteed a hideous death toll. "the last in a long series of pandemics, the great plague of london in 1665, killed between 75,000 and 100,000 of the capital city's citizens. during the summer months the death rates rose, peaking in september" when 7,165 londoners died in one week. 13 in the united states an epidemic of yellow fever struck philadelphia, then the nation's capital, in august 1793. the disease killed around 5,000 citizens and caused 20,000 to flee the city. in response, the lazaretto station was established on the delaware river in tinicum township in 1799. it was a 10-acre compound consisting of a hospital, offices, and residences that processed ships, cargo, and passengers sailing for the port of philadelphia. it operated for nearly a century. 14 in 1832, a cholera epidemic swept over new york city. it was part of a pandemic that began in asia in 1824, eventually spreading to england and canada over the next eight years. in 1832, learning that the disease had spread to quebec and the city of montreal, new york city mayor walter browne instituted a quarantine in an effort to protect his city. immigrants continued to enter new york city from england via canada, however, and the quarantine collapsed. around 3,500 new yorkers died, while 70,000 fled the city. they carried cholera into america's interior, spreading the disease as far south as new orleans and mexico. 15quarantines and isolation have been used to stem disease for 3,000 years. as drews summarizes, "as human understanding of disease transmission grew, quarantine sophistication and efficacy improved, until it became standard practice in combating epidemics. though not always successful, quarantines delayed or contained outbreaks by removing all potential pathogen carriers from the populace. at first lightly used against leprosy and plagues of antiquity, quarantine, as a technology, expanded rapidly in the western world during the black death epidemic. its initial success against the plague established quarantine as a standard procedure to stopping the spread of epidemics and pandemics." 4 for three millennia our predecessors have struggled to find ways of stemming illness and death from diseases that have been largely defanged by sanitation, vaccines, medications, and the knowledge of the behavior of microbes. some of the early forms of isolation were draconian as we've seen, such as walling up the sick, confining them to islands, or sending them into fields to get well or die.against this painful historical backdrop, perhaps we might be more tolerant of the preventative precautions issued by contemporary health authorities such as the cdc. most of our ancestors who faced plague, cholera, and yellow fever would likely trade places with us without hesitation. they would probably look with disbelief on our complaints of being inconvenienced by social isolation, social distancing, and wearing masks and gloves in public. they would probably laugh at the current complaint that individual liberties and freedoms are being sacrificed by the preventative measures aged in our fight against covid-19, when far more lethal diseases killed them by millions and depopulated their cities.every death from our coronavirus pandemic is tragic. but remembering what our ancestors endured, and their courage as well as mistakes, can perhaps soften the blow.executive editorfour of the six coronaviruses (covs) that have made the transition from mammalian/avian hosts to humans are endemic in the human population, and typically associated with mild, self-limiting respiratory illness [1] . however, the remaining two human covs cause severe respiratory syndromes and are associated with considerable mortality [1] . in 2003, the severe acute respiratory syndrome (sars)-cov caused a disease outbreak that claimed nearly 800 lives [2] , and for the second consecutive decade this century, a new human cov has emerged. the middle east respiratory syndrome (mers)-cov was first isolated from a 60-year-old man in saudi arabia in june 2012 [3] . three years later, it has been responsible for the infection of more than 1300 individuals in 26 countries, and more than 480 related deaths [4] .of all the cases of mers-cov reported to date, three quarters have occurred within the source country of saudi arabia (table 1) [4] . infection in the index case followed recent travel to saudi arabia, qatar, uae and bahrain [5] . an international health regulations emergency committee has highlighted five main factors contributing to the spread of mers-cov in the republic of korea [6] .briefly, these were (1) a lack of awareness among healthcare workers and the general public; (2) suboptimal infection prevention and control measures in hospitals; (3) crowded emergency rooms and multi-bed hospital rooms; (4) the practice of patients seeking care at multiple hospitals; (5) multiple visitors staying with infected patients in hospital rooms.overall, clinical experience with mers-cov indicates that its spread within the human population requires close contact; the majority of cases have resulted from human-to-human transmission in healthcare settings [7] . there is good potential for outbreaks to be contained, given suitable levels of awareness and hygiene.the latest outbreak in korea, however, is testament to the cost of neglecting these basic requirements. a recent study by our group demonstrated impressive, rapid virucidal activity of povidone iodine (pvp-i) against the ebola virus (ebov) [8] . pvp-i was also effective against the european reference virus (modified vaccinia virus ankara; mva), which was determined to be a suitable surrogate test agent, facilitating the safe testing of the virucidal activity of antiseptic products against hazardous pathogens, including enveloped viruses such as ebov [8] . pvp-i is a broad-spectrum antimicrobial, used globally in the medical field-including the middle eastas a disinfectant for skin, hands and mucosal surfaces as well as for wound treatment and eye applications [9] . three pvp-i antiseptic products were tested in this study: 4% pvp-i skin cleanser, 7.5% pvp-i surgical scrub and 1% pvp-i gargle/mouthwash, each with the brand name betadine, manufactured by mundipharma (limburg, germany). this article does not contain any new studies with human or animal subjects performed by any of the authors.methodology for propagation of mva was as described in [8] . calculations of viral titer (in cases of no virus or low viral count) were as detailed in [8] . the titers of mers-cov present in the control samples ranged from 6.00 to 6.50 log 10 tcid 50 / ml under clean and dirty conditions. mers-cov viral titers were reduced between 4.30 and 4.97 log 10 tcid 50 /ml after 15 s (table 2) , which corresponds to a reduction in a practical measure applicable to both of these issues is the implementation of effective hand hygiene practice. standard hand hygiene includes either washing hands with soap and water or the use of an alcohol-based hand rub [16] . randomized, controlled trial data are available to support the effectiveness of pvp-i and alcohol hand rubs over plain soap hand wash for hand decontamination, based on post-hygiene colony-forming unit count [17] .in the context of virucidal activity, pvp-i has demonstrated superiority over ethanol-based sanitizers in inactivating murine norovirus on a modified finger pad test [18] . in an evaluation of the effectiveness of nine different hand sanitizers against feline calicivirus (a surrogate for norovirus), antiseptics containing 10% pvp-i achieved a greater viral reduction rate than any of the alcohol-based sanitizers, non-alcoholic sanitizers or antimicrobial soaps [19] . pvp-i has demonstrated virucidal activity against a range of enveloped and non-enveloped viruses. perhaps most relevant in the context of the mers-cov is the evidence for effective inactivation of the sars-cov to below detectable levels within 2 min of exposure [20] .effective hand hygiene is crucial in minimizing viral transmission from the contaminated hands of an infected individual, either through direct person-to-person contact, or indirectly via contamination of surfaces. however, respiratory viruses are also subject to airborne (particles b5 lm in size) or droplet ([5 lm) transmission, in which infected material is released by the infected individual breathing, coughing or sneezing [21] . gargling represents an effective personal hygiene measure against airborne/droplet transmission, as it can reduce the microbe count at the pharynx [22] . together with hand washing and mask use, it has been proposed that gargling is one of the three major personal hygiene protection measures against common airborne and droplet-transmitted infections [22] . specialists advise that the criteria for selecting mouthwashes should include effectiveness of the antiseptic agent in killing pathogens [22] . highly cytotoxic in cell culture [27] . research in social and administrative pharmacy journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/rsap the pandemic of covid-19 and its implications for the purity and authenticity of alcohol-based hand sanitizers: the health risks associated with falsified sanitizers and recommendations for regulatory and public health bodies a b s t r a c t with the beginning of the pandemic of covid-19 throughout the world, the demand and consumption of hand sanitizers has increased, which had led to a sharp crunch in these products at all levels. this shortage has led to an increase in the prevalence of falsified alcohol-based hand sanitizers, including the illegal addition of methanol to hand sanitizers and the production of hand sanitizers with an alcohol concentration of less than 60%. these findings indicate that regulatory and public health bodies should take an active role in ensuring the safety and quality of antimicrobial products such as alcohol-based hand sanitizers at every stage of the products' lifecycle, including distribution, manufacture and import.the emergence of novel virus strains has always posed a serious challenge for the global community. severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 or sars-cov-2, more commonly and simply known as coronavirus and the cause of covid-19, first emerged at the close of 2019 in wuhan, a city in central china. 1 sufferers may be asymptomatic or suffer mild to life-threatening respiratory symptoms. in mid-march 2020, the disease's spread across the globe was such that the world health organization (who) officially labelled the covid-19 outbreak a pandemic. 2 to control the spread of the virus, it is essential to implement strict preventative measures, including repeated hand-washing with water and soap.in healthcare settings and within communities, alcohol-based hand sanitizers are a popular alternative to washing one's hands with water and soap. in the context of the covid-19 pandemic, routine use of hand sanitizer is a favoured method of cleaning one's hands and stopping the spread of infection. 3, 4 a range of sanitizers is available, but alcohol-based sanitizers are the most effective and enjoy a higher rate of compliance for use in healthcare contexts. made with n-propyl alcohol, isopropyl alcohol, ethanol, or a combination of alcohol types, these sanitizers are also less irritating to the skin and can be applied quickly. 3, 5 given the popularity of hand sanitizers and their importance in preventing the spread of covid-19, falsified alcohol-based sanitizers pose a significant public health risk.there are two key types of falsified alcohol-based hand sanitizers: 1) sanitizers that contain methanol, an additive that would typically not be listed as an ingredient 5 ; and 2) sanitizers with an alcohol content below 60%. first, methanol should not be used in hand sanitizers because it is highly toxic and can cause severe reactions when exposed to the skin, lungs or mouth. 7 exposure to methanol can result in systemic toxicity and, in some cases, death. [8] [9] [10] [11] [12] [13] [14] the substance's elevated intrinsic toxicity, its ready availability and its widespread use make poisoning from undeclared methanol in hand sanitisers an important public health concern. 15 second, a hand sanitizer that contains less than 60% alcohol would be ineffective as a germicide and offer users no biocidal effect, leaving the public vulnerable to contracting and spreading covid-19.recently, inspections to authenticate antimicrobial product safety (including alcohol-based hand sanitizers available locally) have been carried out by the dubai municipality. in this safety survey, 6 of the 102 alcohol-based hand sanitizers tested were found to contain undeclared/ unlisted methanol, while others were found to have an alcohol content of less than 60% despite their labels claiming an alcohol content of 70%. 6 the above discussion identifies falsified alcohol-based hand sanitizer as a serious public health risk, especially in the context of the outbreak of covid-19. the popularity of alcohol-based sanitizers in healthcare and community settings coupled with the risk of methanol poisoning and ineffective hand antisepsis posed by falsified sanitizers demands a response. it is recommended that regulatory and public health bodies take an active role in ensuring the safety and quality of antimicrobial products such as alcohol-based hand sanitizers at every stage of the products' lifecycle, including distribution, manufacture and import. specifically, the following recommendations are made:1 the introduction of regulatory and monitoring mechanisms throughout the manufacturing process to verify the purity of alcohol-based hand sanitizers. 2 the use of good manufacturing practice (gmp), research, reporting (of usage and any adverse effects), education and regulatory control to increase inspection and oversight of alcohol-based hand sanitizers' quality and safety. infectious diseases vary by geographic region and population, and they change over time. increasingly, humans are moving from one region to another, thereby becoming exposed to a variety of potential pathogens and also serving as part of the global dispersal process.1 microbes picked up at one time and in one place may manifest in disease far away in time and place. because many microbes have the capacity of persisting in the human host for months, years or even decades, the relevant time frame for study of exposures becomes a lifetime. furthermore, microbes also move and change and reach humans via multiple channels.caring for patients in today's world requires an understanding of the basic factors that underlie the geography of human diseases and events that cause shifts in the distribution and burden of specific diseases. current technology contributes to massive population movements and rapid shifts in diseases and their distributions, but it also provides communication channels that can aid clinicians who care for patients with unfamiliar medical problems. this chapter reviews the factors that shape the global distribution of infectious diseases and the forces that are expected to shift distributions in the future. several examples are used to illustrate the broad range of factors that affect the distribution and expression of infectious diseases.2 many authors have traced the origins and spread of specific infectious diseases through human history. a century and a half ago, john snow noted that epidemics of cholera followed major routes of commerce and appeared first at seaports when entering a new region. yersinia pestis, the cause of plague, accompanied trade caravans and moved across oceans with rats on ships. exploration of the new world by europeans introduced a range of human pathogens that killed one-third or more of the local populations in some areas of the americas. the plants and animals introduced as a result of this exploration have also had profound and long-lasting consequences for the ecology and economics of the new environment.3 the speed, reach and volume of today's travel are unprecedented in human history and offer multiple potential routes to move biologic species around the globe. pathogens of animals and plants are being transported as well, and this can affect global food security.4 establishment of arthopod vectors, such as mosquitoes that are competent to transmit human pathogens, in new geographic areas can expand the regions that are vulnerable to outbreaks of some vector-borne infections. this chapter focuses only on pathogens that directly affect human health and on their sources (table 101.1 ). when thinking about geography of human infections, it is useful to consider both the origin of the organism and the conveyor or immediate source for the human (fig. 101.1 ).this chapter addresses three key issues:•factors influencing geographic distribution: why are some infectious diseases found only in focal geographic regions or in isolated populations?•factors influencing the burden of disease: why does the impact from widely distributed infections vary markedly from one region or one population to another? and•factors influencing emergence of disease: what allows or facilitates the introduction, persistence and spread of an infection in a new region and what makes a region or population resistant to the introduction of an infection? many microbes require a specific arthropod vector for transmission or an animal reservoir host and hence inhabit circumscribed regions and may be unable to survive in other habitats. malaria is a vector-borne infection that cannot become established in a region unless a competent vector is present. the presence of a competent vector is a necessary but not sufficient condition for human infection. the mosquito must have a source of malarial parasites (gametocytemic human or rarely other species), appropriate bioclimatic conditions and access to other humans. the ambient temperature influences the human biting rate of the mosquito, the incubation period for the parasite in the mosquito and the daily survival rate of the mosquito. prevailing temperature and humidity must allow the mosquito to survive long enough for the malarial parasite to undergo maturation to reach an infective state for humans. competent vectors exist in many areas without malaria transmission, because the other conditions are not met. these areas are at risk of the introduction of malaria, as illustrated by several recent examples in the usa and elsewhere.7, 8 an estimated 77% of the world population lived in areas with malaria transmission in 1900. today about 48% live in at-risk areas, but because of population growth and migration the total global population exposed to malaria today has increased by 2 billion since 1900.9 malaria was endemic in many parts of the usa into the 20th century (fig. 101.2 ), with estimates of more than 600 000 cases in 1914. even before extensive mosquito control programs were instituted, transmission declined. demographic factors (population shifts from rural to urban areas), improved housing with screened doors and windows, and the availability of treatment were among the factors that contributed to this decrease.the distribution of onchocerciasis in africa is notable for its association with rivers.10 the reason becomes clear by understanding that the vector of this filarial parasite, the black fly (genus simulium), lays her eggs on vegetation and rocks of rapidly flowing rivers and usually inhabits a region within 5–10 km on either side of a river. another name for onchocerciasis, river blindness, describes the epidemiology as well as one consequence of infection.some pathogens have a complex cycle of development that requires one or more intermediate hosts. distribution may remain relatively fixed, even when infected humans travel widely, if other regions do not supply the right combination and geographic proximity of hosts (fig. 101.3 ). although persons with schistosomiasis visit many regions of the world, the parasite cannot be introduced into a new region unless an appropriate snail host is present, excreted eggs (in urine or feces) are released into water where they reach the snail hosts and humans subsequently have contact with the untreated water.11 local ecologic changes and climate change, however, can be associated with expansion of transmission in endemic areas or increased intensity of transmission, as has been projected as a possible consequence of warming temperatures in china.12 many hantaviruses exist worldwide with distributions that are still being defined. each hantavirus seems to have its specific rodent reservoir with which it has evolved. as with many zoonoses, humans are incidental to the survival of the virus in rodents, yet humans can develop severe and sometimes fatal disease if they enter an environment where they are exposed to the virus. undoubtedly, other rodent-associated viruses and other pathogens (as well as pathogens associated with other animals or insects) with the capacity to infect humans will be identified as humans enter unexplored environments in the future. ebola and marburg viruses are other viruses that have focal distributions but have caused dramatic human outbreaks with high mortality. they also infect nonhuman primates and threaten the survival of great apes.13 recent studies suggest that bats may be the reservoir hosts.14, 15 because these infections can be spread from person to person, secondary household and nosocomial spread in several instances has amplified what began as an isolated event. lack of adequate resources in hospitals in many developing regions contributes to the spread of infections within hospitals and to persons receiving outpatient care, such as those receiving injections.cultural practices can lead to unusual infections in isolated areas. residents of the highlands of papua new guinea developed kuru after ingestion (or percutaneous inoculation) of human tissue during the preparation of the tissues of dead relatives.thus, the presence of a pathogen in a region may reflect the biologic properties of the organism, its need for a certain physicochemical environment or its dependence on specific arthropods, plants or animals to provide the milieu where it can sustain its life cycle (table 101.2 ). the presence of a pathogen in a region does not necessarily equate with human disease, because mechanisms must exist for the pathogen to reach a susceptible human host for human disease to occur. sometimes it is only with exploration of new regions or changes in land use that humans place themselves in an environment where they come into contact with microbes that were previously unidentified or unrecognized as human pathogens. preferences for specific foods, certain preparation techniques or cultural traditions may place one population at a unique risk for infection.among the infectious diseases that impose the greatest burden of death globally, most are widely distributed: respiratory tract infections (e.g. influenza, streptococcus pneumoniae and others), diarrheal infections, tuberculosis, measles, aids and hepatitis b.16 most of these infections are spread from person to person. the world health organization estimated that about 65% of infectious diseases deaths globally in 1995 were due to infections transmitted from person to person (table 101.3 ).16  burden from these diseases is unevenly distributed across populations and among different countries. poor sanitation, lack of clean water, crowded living conditions and lack of vaccination contribute to the disproportionate burden from many of these infections in developing regions of the world. in industrialized countries, pockets of high risk persist. disadvantaged populations have higher rates of tuberculosis, hiv and many other infectious and noninfectious diseases. rates of reported cases of tuberculosis vary widely by region (table 101.4 ).17 variation also exists within countries. figure 101.4 shows the effect of crowded living conditions on rates of tuberculosis in england and wales in 1992.18 among welfare applicants and recipients addicted to drugs or alcohol in new york city, the rate of tuberculosis was 744 per 100 000 person years or more than 70 times the overall rate for the usa.19 the impact of an infection derives not only from the risk of exposure but also from the access to effective therapy. for example, treatment of a patient with active tuberculosis can cure the individual and eliminate a source of infection for others in the community. diphtheria, controlled in many parts of the world through the use of immunization, resurged in new independent states of the former soviet union in the 1990s, a reminder of the tenuous control over many infectious diseases. populations in other countries also felt the impact as cases related to exposures in the russian federation were reported in poland, finland, germany and the usa. serologic studies in america and europe suggest that up to 60% of adults may be susceptible to diphtheria.travelers to tropical and developing regions of the world can pick up geographically focal, often vector- or animal-associated infections (such as malaria and dengue),20 but travelers most often acquire infections with a worldwide distribution that are especially common in areas lacking good sanitation.21 food- and water-borne infections are common and lead to travelers’ diarrhea, which is caused by multiple agents (including escherichia coli, salmonella, shigella and campylobacter spp., and others), typhoid fever and hepatitis a. respiratory tract infections may be acquired from other travelers from all over the globe during the crowding that occurs in travel (e.g. in buses, airplanes, terminals and on cruise ships) as well as from persons in the local environment. tables 101.5 and 101.6 note factors that influence the types and abundance of microbes in a community and the probability of exposure to pathogens.hepatitis a virus remains a common cause of infection in developing regions of the world although it is not considered a major cause of morbidity or mortality in those regions where most persons are infected at a young age and become immune for life. the presence and severity of symptoms are related to the age at which a person becomes infected. infection in young children is typically mild or inapparent. persons living in areas of high transmission may be unaware of the presence of high levels of transmission, although nonimmune, older people (such as travelers) who enter the environment may develop severe, and occasionally fatal, infection. some countries with an improving standard of living have noted a paradoxic increase in the incidence of disease from hepatitis a virus as the likelihood of exposure at a young age decreases, shifting upward the age of infection to a time when jaundice and other symptoms are more likely to occur.travelers may also contribute to the spread of infectious diseases and influence the global burden of these diseases.22, 23 neisseria meningitidis, a global pathogen, occurs in seasonal epidemics in parts of africa – the so-called meningitis belt (fig. 101.5 ).24 irritation of the throat by the dry, dusty air probably contributes to invasion by colonizing bacteria. pilgrims carried an epidemic strain of group a n. meningitidis from southern asia to mecca in 1987. other pilgrims who became colonized with the epidemic strain introduced it into sub-saharan africa, where it caused a wave of epidemics in 1988 and 1989. using molecular markers, investigators were able to trace the spread of the epidemic clone to several other countries.25 in 1996 in africa, major outbreaks of meningococcal meningitis occurred(>185 000 reported cases with a case fatality rate of ∼10%) caused by n. meningitidis serogroup a, clone iii-1.26 a virulent group c, et-15 strain of n. meningitidis spread in canada and was associated with an increased case fatality rate and a higher proportion of cases in persons over the age of 5 years.27 in these examples, the virulence of the microbe and travel and trade acted synergistically to change the epidemiology and burden of disease. in the spring of 2000 serogroup w135 n. meningitidis caused an outbreak of infection in pilgrims to the hajj and subsequently spread to their contacts and others around the world. studies using serotyping, multilocus sequence typing, multilocus dna fingerprints and other techniques found identical w135 isolates in multiple countries. pilgrims are required to receive a meningococcal vaccine but before this outbreak, pilgrims from many countries received a vaccine that protected against serotype a but not w135. the vaccine reduces risk of disease but does not prevent oropharyngeal carriage of n. meningitidis.28 organisms that survive primarily or entirely in the human host and are spread from person to person (e.g. by sexual or other close contact or by droplet nuclei) can be carried to any part of the world. the spread of hiv in the past three decades to all parts of the world is a reminder of the rapid and broad reach of travel networks. although the infection has also spread via blood and shared needles, it has been the human host engaging in sex and reproduction who has been the origin for the majority of the infections worldwide. person-to-person spread accounted for the rapid worldwide distribution of severe acute respiratory syndrome (sars), a coronavirus infection, in the spring of 2003, after the virus emerged from an animal reservoir, most likely bats.33 drugs or vaccines injected by reused inadequately sterilized needles and syringes have been and continue to be an important means of spread of blood-borne infections, such as hepatitis c, hepatitis b and hiv, in some parts of the world.34 multidrug-resistant (mdr) tuberculosis has continued to increase, with world health organization estimates of 500 000 new cases of mdr annually (now about 5% of all new tb cases each year).35 extensively drug-resistant tuberculosis, which is virtually untreatable, had been reported in 45 countries by 2007. it is not only the pathogens carried by humans that are relevant. humans also carry resistance and virulence factors that can be transferred to and exchanged with other microbes.36 (see healthmap.org for outbreaks of dengue fever)dengue fever is a mosquito-borne viral infection that has now spread to most tropical and subtropical regions of the world and continues to increase in incidence and severity. viremic humans regularly enter regions infested with aedes aegypti, the principal vector of dengue, transporting the virus for new outbreaks. infection can spread rapidly and outbreaks are sometimes massive, involving >30% of the population. because four serotypes of dengue virus exist and infection with one serotype does not confer lasting immunity against other serotypes, a person can be infected more than once. the risk of developing severe dengue (e.g. dengue shock syndrome or dengue hemorrhagic fever, dss or dhf) after repeat infection is 82–103 times greater than after primary infection.37 in an outbreak in cuba, 98.5% of cases of dss or dhf were in persons with a prior dengue infection. the rate of dss or dhf was 4.2% in persons with prior dengue infection who became infected with a new serotype.38 geographic regions where multiple serotypes are circulating have continued to expand, setting the stage for more severe consequences of infection. factors that have aided the spread of dengue include increasing (and rapid) travel to and from tropical regions; expansion of the regions infested with aedes aegypti; increasing urbanization, especially in tropical areas, which has provided large, dense populations; the use of nonbiodegradable and other containers that make ideal breeding sites for the mosquito; and lack of support for vector control programs.most of the world population growth globally is in urban/periurban areas in tropical and developing regions. the expectation is that more urban areas in tropical regions will reach the critical population size, perhaps somewhere between 150 000 and 1 million people, to permit sustained transmission of dengue, and to increase the risk of the severe forms of infection, dengue hemorrhagic fever and dengue shock syndrome.in 2001 the vector that was implicated in an outbreak of dengue in hawaii39 was aedes albopictus, a mosquito species that has been newly introduced into many new regions in recent decades, probably primarily by shipping.40 on phylogenic analysis the virus responsible for the hawaii outbreak was similar to dengue, isolates from tahiti, suggesting that viremic travelers introduced the virus from the south pacific.it is instructive to ask not only where dengue occurs but also where it does not. although large dengue epidemics occurred in the usa in the 20th century, only a handful of cases have been acquired in the usa in recent years, despite the presence of epidemic disease in adjacent areas of mexico and the presence of a competent vector (aedes aegypti) in south-eastern usa (fig. 101.6 ).24 it is possible that the presence of screened dwellings and air conditioning may make an area relatively resistant to the introduction of infection, even if a competent vector infests a region, though serologic studies have also documented that unrecognized dengue infections are occurring in texas.41 (see healthmap.org for outbreaks of chikungunya)chikungunya, a mosquito-borne alphavirus originally isolated in tanzania in 1953, has spread from africa, causing massive outbreaks in the indian ocean islands and india since 2005. although it has typically been considered an infection of tropical regions, in the summer of 2007 an outbreak caused hundreds of cases (175 laboratory confirmed) in north-eastern italy. the index case was a visitor from india. of note, the vector implicated was aedes albopictus, which had been first documented in italy in 1990 and was postulated to have been introduced via used tires.42 mutations in the virus may have enabled it to replicate more efficiently in the mosquito vector. chikungunya virus can be transmitted by aedes aegypti and aedes albopictus mosquitoes, which are now both widely distributed, so many regions of the world are vulnerable to introduction of this virus by viremic travelers.(see healthmap.org for outbreaks of cholera)cholera illustrates the complex interactions between microbe, environment and host.43 epidemics are seasonal in endemic regions. vibrio cholerae lives in close association with marine life, binding to chitin in crustacean shells and colonizing surfaces of algae, phytoplankton, zooplankton and water plants. v. cholerae can persist within the aquatic environment for months or years, often in a viable but dormant state, nonculturable by usual techniques. environmental factors, including temperature, salinity, ph and sea-water nutrients, affect the persistence, abundance and viability of the organisms, and hence have a striking influence on human epidemics.under conditions of population crowding, poor sanitation and lack of clean water, cholera can have a devastating impact, as was shown by the massive outbreak of el tor cholera in rwandan refugees in goma, zaire, which caused 12 000 deaths in july 1994.44 the organism can be carried by humans, who sometimes have few or no symptoms, and introduced into new regions. trade probably also plays a critical role. ballast water, picked up by boats in multiple locations and discharged at another time and place, carries a wide range of species, including many that have no direct impact on human health.45, 46 in studies of the ballast and bilge of cargo ships in the usa gulf of mexico, researchers were able to identify v. cholerae identical to the strains causing epidemic disease in latin america.47 (see healthmap.org for outbreaks of food-borne disease)the globalization of the food market means pathogens from one region can appear in another; some are common pathogens with a worldwide distribution but others are not. an outbreak of cholera in maryland, usa, was traced to imported, contaminated commercial frozen coconut milk.48 alfalfa sprouts grown from contaminated seed sent to a dutch shipper caused outbreaks of infections with salmonella spp. on two continents, in at least arizona and michigan in the usa and in finland.49 commercial movement of fruits and vegetables redistributes resistance factors along with the microbes. tracing the source after an infection has been diagnosed can be convoluted and often is not carried out unless disease is severe, lethal or epidemic or involves a highly visible person or population.travel and trade are key features in the epidemiology of the infection cyclospora, a cause of gastroenteritis. recognized for many years in multiple regions of the world, cases were often associated with living in or travel to areas where sanitary facilities were poor. in the summer of 1996, a large us outbreak occurred in persons who had not traveled. over a period of a few months, 1465 cases of cyclosporiasis were reported from 20 states. the outbreak was linked to eating raspberries imported from guatemala.50 during some seasons of the year up to 70% of selected fruits and vegetables sold in the usa come from developing countries.in the past, visceral leishmaniasis in brazil was primarily a rural disease. recently, however, several cities have reported large outbreaks of visceral leishmaniasis.51 reasons for the change in epidemiology include geoclimatic and economic factors (drought, lack of farm land, famine), leading to migration of large numbers of persons, who settle in periurban areas where they live in densely crowded shanties, lacking basic sanitation. the presence of domestic animals, such as dogs, chickens and horses, in and adjacent to human dwellings provides ample sources of blood meals for the sand fly, the vector of leishmaniasis. outbreaks have occurred in many cities in brazil, including teresina, são luis and natal. children and young people have been most affected. malnutrition can also contribute to the severity of the disease.disease–disease interactions can also alter the epidemiology of infections. visceral leishmaniasis has become an important infection in hiv-infected people in spain and other areas where the two infections coexist.52 the presence of hiv leads to increased risk of progression of infection; late appearance of disease can occur years to decades after exposure in an endemic region, leading to the appearance of cases of leishmaniasis in regions distant from endemic areas. a common consequence is missed or delayed diagnosis.movement today involves all forms of life and the movement of nonhuman species can affect infections in humans. importation of wild animals from ghana into the united states led to an outbreak of monkeypox, an infection previously known to exist in africa. humans became infected by handling prairie dogs (sold as pets) that had been housed with the imported wild animals from africa.53 aedes albopictus introduced into the usa via used tires shipped from asia54 has since become established in at least 21 contiguous states of the usa and in hawaii. aedes albopictus can transmit dengue and chikungunya viruses, as described above, and is a competent laboratory vector of la crosse, yellow fever and other viruses. it is also hardier than many other mosquito species and therefore may spread widely and be extremely difficult to eradicate. multiple strains of eastern equine encephalitis virus have been isolated from aedes albopictus in florida.an example from the past illustrates the potential consequences of the introduction of a mosquito vector into a new region. in march 1930, an entomologist in natal, brazil, came upon anopheles gambiae larvae in a small, wet, grassy field between a railway and a river.55 he was surprised, because the usual habitat for this mosquito was africa. investigation revealed that the probable route of entry into south america was via boats that made mail runs between dakar in senegal and natal in brazil, covering the 3300 km in less than 100 hours. in dakar the boats were anchored a distance from the shore within easy flight range of a. gambiae. in brazil, over the ensuing years, the mosquito spread along the coastal region and inland. natal, as an ocean port, terminus of two railway lines and the hub of truck, car and river transportation, was well suited for dissemination of a. gambiae into the region. although malaria already existed in the region, the local mosquitoes were not efficient vectors. anopheles gambiae, in contrast, lived in close proximity to humans, entered houses, sought human blood and was an efficient biter. in 1938 and 1939, devastating outbreaks of malaria killed more than 20 000 persons. in this instance, the simple introduction of a new vector into a region led to severe problems. fortunately, an intensive (and expensive) eradication campaign was effective.current transportation systems regularly carry all forms of life, including potential vectors, along with people and cargo. in an experiment carried out several years ago, mosquitoes, house flies and beetles in special cages were placed in wheel bays of 747 aircraft and carried on flights lasting up to 7 hours. temperatures were as low as –62°f (–52°c) outside and ranged from 46°f to 77°f (8–25°c) in the wheel bays. survival rates were greater than 99% for the beetles, 84% for the mosquitoes and 93% for the flies.56 occasional cases of so-called airport malaria – cases of malaria near airports in temperate regions – attest to the occasional transport and survival of a commuter mosquito long enough to take at least one blood meal in the new environment.in the usa, transportation of raccoons in the late 1970s from florida to the area between virginia and west virginia (in order to stock hunting clubs) unintentionally introduced a rabies virus variant into the animals of the region. from there, the rabies enzootic spread for hundreds of miles, reaching raccoons in suburban and densely populated regions of the north-east usa. spill-over of the rabies virus variant into cats, dogs and other animal populations and direct raccoon–human interactions have had extremely costly and unpleasant consequences.57 today highly pathogenic avian influenza a (h5n1) is a global concern.58 it is entrenched in poultry populations in asia and africa and has caused outbreaks in europe and the middle east. although the virus causes high mortality in infected humans, thus far h5n1 has not been able to establish sustained transmission from person to person. most humans appear to have been infected via close contact with poultry or their products. although the virus can be carried by migratory birds,59 most introductions appear to have been related to movement of poultry and poultry products. a model designed to map risk in south east asia found risk was associated with duck abundance, human population and rice cropping intensity.60 geographic exposures influence how one thinks about probable diagnoses in a given patient. in mexico, for example, more than 50% of patients with late-onset seizures have ct evidence of the parasitic infection, neurocysticercosis.61 in peru, 29% of persons born outside lima who had onset of seizures after 20 years of age had serologic evidence of cysticercosis.62 in northern thailand, melioidosis is a common cause of sepsis, accounting for 40% of all deaths from community-acquired sepsis.63 in considering the consequences of exposures in other geographic regions, relevant data in assessing the probability of various infections include the duration of visit, activities and living conditions during the stay and the time lapsed since the visit. among british travelers to west africa, the relative risk of malaria was 80.3 times higher for persons staying for 6–12 months than among those staying 1 week.64 in malawi, the risk of schistosome infection increased directly with duration of stay. seroprevalence was 11% for those present for 1 year or less, but this increased to 48% among those present for 4 years or longer.65 in a study of persons with cysticercosis, the average time between acquisition of infection and onset of symptoms was about 7 years.66 for malaria, it is necessary to know not only whether infection can be acquired in a specific location but also the specie of parasite present and the patterns of resistance to antimalarial agents. as chloroquine resistance has spread, maps now typically highlight the few remaining areas of chloroquine sensitivity. because the resistance to antimalarial agents is a dynamic process, with levels of resistance generally increasing over time (involving plasmodium vivax in some areas as well as p. falciparum), it is essential to base decisions about chemoprophylaxis and treatment on up-to-date information. figure 101.7 shows the distribution of malaria and resistance patterns globally as of 2005. recent analysis of data from a network that uses travelers as a sentinel population found marked differences in the spectrum of disease in relation to the place of exposure.20 expression of disease may vary depending on age of first exposure, immunologic status of the host, genetic factors and the number and timing of subsequent exposures. temporary residents of endemic regions have different patterns of response to a number of helminths from those of long-term residents. in cases of loiasis, temporary residents have immunologic hyperresponsiveness, high-grade eosinophilia and severe symptoms that are not seen in long-term residents of the same area.67 genetic factors can affect susceptibility to infection or expression of disease. some persons, for example, are genetically resistant to infection with parvovirus because they lack appropriate receptors on their erythrocytes.68 persons lacking duffy factor cannot be infected with the malarial parasite, p. vivax.knowledge about the geographic distribution of diseases is essential for informed evaluation and care of patients, who increasingly have had exposures in multiple geographic regions. recent travel and trade patterns have led to more frequent contact with populations (human and nonhuman species) from low latitude areas, regions with greater species richness.69 infectious diseases are dynamic and will continue to change in distribution. changes in virulence and shifts in resistance patterns will also require ongoing surveillance and communication to health-care providers. multiple factors favor even more rapid change, perhaps in unexpected ways, in the future: rapidity and volume of travel, increasing urbanization (especially in developing regions), the globalization of trade, multiple technologic changes that favor mass processing and broad dispersal, and the backdrop of ongoing microbial adaptation and change, which may be hastened by alterations in the physicochemical environment.as borders disappear, people and goods are increasingly free to move, creating new challenges to global health. these cannot be met by national governments alone but must be dealt with instead by international organizations and agreementse very year, the same ritual takes place at changing locations in the western world. while the heads of the eight leading industrialized nations meet at their annual g8 summit to discuss the global state of affairs, a wide variety of organizations and protesters meet in parallel to decry what they see as the negative effects of globalization. notwithstanding these protests, whether one sees globalization as a tool to overcome poverty, hunger and disease in the world or whether one feels threatened by its consequences, one thing is certain: globalization is here to stay. often narrowly defined as the increasing integration of the world's economies, globalization is in reality a powerful development that presents new challenges at the beginning of this millennium.one major problem is the increasing internationalization of health risks. however defined, this term has many dimensions, including economic, technological, political, social, scientific and cultural aspects. the links between globalization and health are complex and globalization is a multifaceted phenomenon that can affect health in myriad ways. its consequences can be either direct, at the level of whole populations, individuals and healthcare delivery systems, or indirect, through the economy and other factors, such as education, sanitation and water supply (woodward et al, 2001) . given the enormous complexity and breadth of the issues, our article cannot hope to cover the entire range of topics that link globalization to health. instead, we focus on those risks to health and health care that are related to central aspects of the globalization process, namely trade, travel and exchange of information.a major factor for the liberalization of international trade has been the multilateral trade negotiations during the past 50 years, which culminated in the establishment of the world trade organization (wto) (bettcher et al, 2000) . figure 1 illustrates the significant increases in world trade since 1980. although increasing trade is certainly good for economies, it also leads to a globalization of health risks. important examples of such risks include tobacco, alcohol, global epidemics of non-communicable diseases and trade in health services.the world health organization (who) estimates that the death toll from tobacco abuse alone will reach 10 million a year over the next two decades. up to 70% of these deaths, caused by lung cancer, cardiovascular diseases (cvds), lung diseases, diabetes and many other tobacco-related ailments, will occur in developing countries (murray & lopez, 1997) . these countries are at particular risk, as industrialized countries increasingly ban cigarette advertisements and tobacco companies intensively target people in poorer nations as potential customers. the high incidence of smoking among children and adolescents, and the disturbingly low age of initiation, raise additional concerns (global youth tobacco survey collaborative group, 2002) .alcohol consumption is another area in which the globalization of an industry has led to more health risks (jernigan, 1997 1,000,000years 0 1 9 8 0 1 9 8 2 1 9 8 4 1 9 8 6 1 9 8 8 1 9 9 0 1 9 9 2 1 9 9 4 1 9 9 6 1 9 9 8 2 0 0 0 2 0 0 2 substantially increases the risk of mortality from an impressive array of diseases (doll, 1998) , the impact of alcohol consumption on health is much more complex. there is a strong relationship between alcohol consumption and liver cirrhosis, some cancers, and most causes of injuries and violence, although minimal amounts of alcohol are sufficient to reduce the risk of cvd (beaglehole & yach, 2003) .the who has estimated that by the year 2020, non-communicable diseases, such as cancers, diabetes, obesity and cvd, will cause about two-thirds of the global disease burden, up from 40% at present. this rapid increase again illustrates the globalized risks for conditions that are mainly caused by diet, even in less developed countries that have coexistent under-nutrition. there were 151 million cases of diabetes worldwide in 2001, and this is estimated to increase by 46% to 221 million cases in 2010, with the steepest growth in the developing world (zimmet et al, 2001) . the same holds true for obesity (shell, 2001) . of course, not all of this is globalization's fault-these chronic or 'lifestyle' diseases are mainly caused by personal choice, that is, a sedentary lifestyle, the use of tobacco and a fat-and sugar-rich diet. nevertheless, a key factor has been the unprecedented increase in the global food trade, and its domination by large transnational companies that have developed global brand names and aggressive marketing strategies adapted to local situations (chopra et al, 2002) . the spread of universal brand names of popular beverages and fast foods has been especially rapid in the developing world during the past two or three decades and has contributed to the global epidemic of obesity by replacing traditional diets with fat-and calorie-rich foods. it is revealing that only a short period after their introduction on the chinese market, 65%, 42% and 40% of consumers in china recognized the brands coca cola, pepsi and nestlé, respectively (lang, 2001) .globalization of trade is also manifested in the implementation of the wto's agreement on trade related aspects of intellectual property rights (trips), which extends patent protection on new drugs for a minimum period of 20 years. as a result of high prices, trips threatens to limit and undermine access to new medicines, especially to poor populations living in the developing world (kamal & bailey, 2003) . in this sense, the implementation of trips can be seen as exacerbating health risks. trade and movement of infected cattle and poultry across national borders may also have contributed to recent outbreaks of mad cow disease in the northern hemisphere and avian influenza in asia.the globalization of trade is particularly relevant for health services that have become a commodity that can be traded in distinct ways. first, health services can be provided across borders. examples include a range of telemedicine tools, such as tele-diagnostics and tele-radiology as well as medical consultation through traditional and electronic channels. second, patients can travel abroad to receive health care or use certain facilities-the uk government recently allowed uk patients to seek treatment in the european economic area (lowson et al, 2002) . other countries, including developing ones such as cuba and india, openly advertise to attract foreign patients to their clinics and hospitals. third, health services themselves have become an industry that attracts foreign investments. several transnational companies from developed and developing countries have already created commercial health services through the purchase and establishment of hospitals (chanda, 2002) . fourth, the international movement of health personnel across borders has become a significant component of the trade in health services and has attracted considerable attention in the scientific and lay press. s imilar to trade, globalization has had large effects on international travel, with serious consequences for global health. the liberalization of the airline industry in many countries has made air travel affordable for more and more people around the world, which has led to a dramatic increase in the amount of global air travel. sutherst (2004) estimated that about one million people travel internationally every day and a similar number travel between developed and developing countries each week. another recent report (gossling, 2002) put the number of global tourist arrivals per year at 700 million. far-reaching air travel, aided by improvements in aircraft technology that allow longer non-stop flights, facilitates the spread of communicable diseases. it is entirely possible that a person in the early stages of an infectious disease could be halfway around the world in 12-15 hours and thus function as a vector for that disease, aiding its spread, perhaps into vulnerable, non-immune populations. the recent epidemic of severe acute respiratory syndrome (sars) is the best contemporary example of the rapid spread of a hitherto unknown and virulent viral pathogen through travel of infected humans (figs 2, 3 and 4) . sars was first recognized in february 2003 in vietnam where cases of atypical pneumonia with an unknown cause began to appear. by the first week of may 2003, 30 countries on six continents had reported a total of more than 7,000 probable cases with more than 500 deaths (who, 2003a) .another example is the global spread of antibiotic-resistant pneumococcus that was first identified in spain in the early 1980s and rapidly jumped to south africa and the usa before spreading to all other parts of the world (who, 2000) . each year, approximately two million children die in developing countries as a result of lower respiratory infections, mostly pneumonia. the exact origin of this pneumococcus strain is still unknown but is likely to come from the far east (mcgee et al, 2001) . p erhaps the most profound changes that have taken place during the past 10 years have come through the globalization of ideas and information, facilitated through the revolution in information technology. the internet, satellite television broadcasting and high-speed data links across the globe have dramatically increased access to all kinds of information, even in the most remote corners of the world. despite early concerns about a 'digital divide' that would further disadvantage the poor, these fears have been overestimated. the reality is that this divide is narrowing between rich and poor countries that have increasing access to cell phone communication and the internet (the economist, 2004) . the success of the food and tobacco industries' aggressive marketing strategies mentioned above have been closely linked to this information revolution.although better access to information is certainly a good thing, it has also created fears that freely available scientific information might be abused by terrorists (beck, 2003) . giving basically everyone who is interested access to the full sequences of human pathogen genomes, and the ongoing trend towards open access of published research (owens, 2003) and even ongoing research activities for new drugs (hubbard & love, 2003) , poses a serious dilemma with important implications for global health. should the full sequence of the anthrax bacillus or smallpox virus and other virulent pathogens be published if this data could be used to develop biological weapons? another example is the development of an improved virus to kill mice that has created fears that the enhanced virus could be used for bioterrorism (finkel, 2001) . al-qaeda and the japanese terrorist group aum shinrikyo might have planned to use published research data for nefarious purposes (petro & relman, 2003) .there is another inherent danger that comes with the vast flood of information now available through the internet, namely the reliability and accuracy of health information from various web sites (eysenbach et al, 2002) . many such sites contain wrong, misleading and even dangerous information (crocco et al, 2002) , and the lay public are often more confused than informed when they search for health advice. w ithout doubt, globalization poses risks to global health, but it also provides benefits. the extraordinary improvements in information technology have dramatically increased the speed and ease of data flow, thereby facilitating the sharing of information. medical discoveries made in one country can be made nearly instantaneously available to patients in other countries (wassenaar, 2003) . it has also sped up the pace of discovery by linking researchers across the globe to work on the same problem, such as the response to sars. global cooperation of scientists linked through the internet resulted in the impressively rapid identification of the sars virus and the development of a diagnostic test (gerberding, 2003) . similarly, the new england journal of medicine used the internet and electronic communication to review, revise and rapidly publish vital articles on the sars epidemic (drazen & campion, 2003) . and although many non-governmental organizations (ngos) decry the negative effects of increasing globalization, they have also clearly benefited from it to improve healthcare delivery and health policy in many developing countries. a recent key contribution of the global ngo movement lies with the adoption of the framework convention on tobacco control (fctc). ngos had an essential and vital role at the local, national and international levels in all development phases of the fctc (mackay, 2003) , and their contribution continues as they actively work with countries in the fctc ratification process.globalization has also brought about improvements in research methodology, and some argue that clinical research has become more sophisticated as a result (wassenaar, 2003) . other benefits of globalization include cross-border use of health services that benefit patients and provide much needed resources to national health systems (jain, 2003) and improved regulatory practices (wassenaar, 2003) . finally, one should not underestimate the power of knowledge as it empowers populations and individuals and, in turn, allows them to hold to account their political and professional leaders (ellis, 2003) . a s the major international agency dealing with global public health issues, the who-together with other international organizations-has an important role in mitigating the health risks posed by globalization. through the fctc, the who has tried to impose more stringent control on tobacco use in its member states. the policies recommend price and tax measures, protection from exposure to secondhand smoke, and regulation and disclosure of the contents of tobacco products. packaging and labelling, advertising, promotion and sponsorship are also regulated, as are tobacco dependence and cessation measures, illicit trade, sales to and by minors, and liability (hammond & assunta, 2003) . in may 2003, the final draft of the fctc was adopted by the 56th world health assembly. the treaty has been open for signature since june 2003 and will enter into force once it has been ratified by 40 parties. as of 1 july 2004, 167 countries and the european community have signed the fctc and 24 have ratified it, up from nine in march-impressive progress in just four months. the most recent public smoking bans in places such as new york city, ireland and norway are clearly further important steps towards protecting public health from the perils of tobacco smoke.another example of the who's key role in global public health are the international health regulations (ihr; who, 2004) . these were used during the sars epidemic to issue emergency travel advisories for several major cities in the world affected by the disease to discourage and restrict travel and thus contain the virus. these regulations were drafted to ensure maximum security the presentation of material on the maps contained herein does not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever on the part of the world health organization concerning the legal status of any country, territory, city or areas or of its authorities, or concerning the delimitation of its frontiers or boundaries. with regards to the epidemic of overnutrition as the main cause of many chronic, non-communicable diseases, some have suggested that the who should help to develop a coordinated global strategy on diet, physical activity and health (chopra et al, 2002) . such a strategy should include the use of policy, education and trade mechanisms to achieve its goal. to this end, the who advocates a healthier lifestyle-a recent joint who-fao (food and agriculture organization) report recommends that consumption of added sugars, beyond those naturally present, should be less than 10% of the daily caloric intake (who, 2003b) .various national and international groups have also been concerned with the quality and accuracy of health information found on the internet. the who is leading an initiative to establish a .health ('dot health') domain to enhance the credibility of information provided for public and personal health. the who proposed to restrict the use of .health to content providers who would voluntarily abide by established quality and/or ethical standards. however, in november 2000, the internet corporation for assigned names and numbers (icann) rejected the who's proposal because it was concerned by the vagueness of the who's standards for restricting registrars. objections were also raised, notably by a multinational pharmaceutical company, "as to the appropriateness of according a degree of authoritativeness over the implied accuracy of health-care-related information to a single quasi-governmental organization" (icann, 2000) .there have also been calls for a global oversight system to regulate and approve research on dangerous pathogens (steinbruner & harris, 2003) . participating governments would be required to establish review bodies that regulate relevant research in this area. such an approach must clearly involve the scientific community and must strike a balance between national security needs against the benefits of open scientific communication for future health improvement. a s pointed out above, globalization will not go away. it is therefore important to anticipate future challenges for global health and to consider how to react effectively. one major and increasing problem is the movement of health professionals from developing countries to highincome countries, which threatens the sustainability of health systems in the poor world. the director general of the who, lee jong-wook, clearly highlighted this potential threat while addressing the 53rd session of the who regional committee for africa: "health systems depend most of all on skilled and dedicated personnel, and here we face big challenges, particularly in this region which, on top of everything else, suffers heavy losses to the brain drain" (lee, 2003) . the extent of the problem has been highlighted previously (pang et al, 2002) and a recent survey from lithuania, where 61% of medical residents and 26% of physicians surveyed said they intended to leave for the eu or other countries, illustrates well the potential magnitude of health professional brain drain (stankunas et al, 2004) , not just for african countries.however, the migration of health personnel raises a complex ethical dilemma. on the one hand, it appears unethical for developed countries, which often depend on foreign-trained physicians to address shortages in rural areas, to attract health professionals from poorer countries. on the other hand, it hardly seems ethical to prevent skilled workers in search of a better life from accepting better opportunities, financial or professional (scott et al, 2004) . as borders disappear, there is an urgent need to develop strategies, at the national and international level, that will minimize the harm and maximize the benefits of the movement of health personnel. equally urgent is the need for more information about this problem. there are surprisingly little data on the magnitude of the movement of health professionals between poor and rich countries, and few studies have examined the impact of brain drain on national health systems.foreign direct investment in the health area, notably for the purchase and construction of medical facilities, also brings both opportunities and concerns. as mentioned previously, the presence of foreign commercial healthcare providers and transnational health services have the potential to benefit both patients and national coffers. however, one should not ignore the potential negative impact of privatized health care. a recent systematic review of private for-profit and private not-for-profit dialysis facilities in the usa found that haemodialysis care in notfor-profit centres was associated with a lower risk of mortality (devereaux et al, 2002) . more research to examine the potential impact of foreign commercial presence and cross-border use of health services on health is needed so that regulations can be designed to maximize their benefits and protect patients. a s mentioned previously, if patent protection leads to prohibitively priced drugs, it undermines access to new medicines among the most vulnerable populations. the effects of the trips agreement on pharmaceutical prices need to be documented, and the design and implementation of international agreements need to consider the potential effects on developing countries' health systems (woodward et al, 2001) . similarly, the essential drugs list, which guides the selection of drugs on the basis of public health relevance, efficacy, safety and cost, needs to remain an integral part of national drug policies (smith & tickell, 2003) .there is sufficient evidence that globalization has resulted in higher tobacco consumption, notably in poorer countries (who, 2001) and higher alcohol use, particularly among younger individuals (kuo et al, 2003) . it is therefore essential that governments retain the ability within international agreements to regulate so that they can …the development of an improved virus to kill mice… has created fears that the enhanced virus could be used for bioterrorism …freely available scientific information might be at risk of being abused by terrorists special issue s16 protect public health, especially the ability to restrict, and ban if necessary, advertising and lobbying activities. finally, the ongoing review of the ihr process must transform these regulations into an effective tool that will allow countries to strengthen global disease surveillance and to respond efficiently to international public health emergencies.the current models of international relations, mobility and movement of goods and people are responsible for the globalization of health risks. these developments clearly lead to an increase in health risks either directly or indirectly, particularly in the developing world where the benefits of globalization are often offset by its adverse effects. more insidiously, the threat of misuse of globalized information for bioterrorism purposes is becoming a serious concern for many governments. international organizations can have an important role in minimizing such risks through regulations, policy recommendations, advocacy and promoting dialogue among interested parties. in addition, to reap the benefits of globalization, we need novel approaches to international cooperation that place national self-interest in the context of global mutual interest and, in this way, promote international cooperation and goodwill (frenk & gomez-dantes, 2002) . the recent outbreak in severe acute respiratory syndrome - coronavirus-2 (sars-cov-2) has demonstrated the complete inability of nations across the world to cope with the pressures of a global pandemic, especially one in which the only current feasible treatments are those which deal with the symptoms alone and not the viral cause as the death toll rises, scientists begin to fall toward new avenues of research, with novelty showing itself to be an incredible and so far, underrated resource in this case, the use of biosurfactants in dealing with this pandemic justifies extensive study with their potential applications being in the prevention of viral spread;dealing with the symptoms that develop after the incubation period;directly targeting viral infected cells and preventing the spread of the virus throughout the host, all in addition to also acting as potential drug delivery systems and cleaning agents this extensive avenue of biosurfactants owes to the simplicity in their amphiphilic structure which permits them to interact directly with the lipid membrane of the coronavirus, in a way which wouldn't be of significant threat to the host although it could possibly interact and affect the virus, it could also affect human internal organs/cells by interacting with lipid membrane, if (biosurfactant is) ingested, and it still needs further studies in human models the structure of the coronavirus, in this case sars-cov-2, is detrimentally dependent on the integrity of its lipid membrane which encloses its vital proteins and rna biosurfactants possess the innate ability to threaten this membrane, a result of their own hydrophobic domains across their amphiphilic structure with biosurfactants additionally being both natural and sustainable, while also possessing a remarkably low cytotoxicity, it is of no doubt that they are going to be of increasing significance in dealing with the current pandemicbiosurfactants: a covid-19 perspectiveintroduction sars-cov-2 poses a serious and escalating threat to public health, after having triggered a pandemic that stems from its first recorded infection in wuhan, china during early december 2019 (hong et al., 2020) . in many cases, infection will induce flu-like symptoms in the host who will additionally become highly contagious, having an averaged r 0 of roughly 3.28, even throughout the initial incubation period which has been suggested to last up to 3-14 days (backer et al., 2020; liu et al., 2020) . complications in the immune response or infection occurring in those who already have underlying health conditions, may result in more serious symptoms such as pneumonia or acute respiratory distress syndrome (ards) which can often be fatal. this incidence of fatality paired with the ease of viral transfer which often occurs through droplet and aerosol transmission is what makes this particular strain of coronavirus so deadly (rothan and byrareddy, 2020) .there is current debate into the significance of the political action of many countries which could have prevented the spread from having such a global impact and whether more could have been done to better prepare healthcare services to deal with the virus. having been better equipped, hospitals may have likely been able to decrease the overall rates of death from the virus. regardless of where the responsibility for this pandemic lies, it is clear that we currently rely on international collaboration and extensive scientific prowess to deal with the issue and recover from it in a way which will best reduce the impact it can cause in the future.one such avenue of investigation is the use of biosurfactants which have proven themselves to be significant in a variety of processes, all of which being crucial in managing the pandemic by dealing with both the virus itself and the symptoms in which it can cause. the structure of the coronavirus, similarly to others of this type, consists of a lipid membrane which encloses its vital proteins and positive sense rna (vellingiri et al., 2020) . this is an incredibly simple structure but can cause tremendous harm when its membrane fuses with that of an animal cell, allowing its rna to be synthesized by the host. this will result in the replication of the virus with the use of the host's cellular mechanisms spreading to other cells in the body, causing exponential damage in the process. the lipid membrane, along with embedded spike proteins is crucial in the virus's ability to both maintain its integrity and also pass our cells' phospholipid bilayer which allows it to initiate its mechanism of infection (das, 2020) . the amphiphilic nature of biosurfactants allows them to interact with the hydrophobic domain of the viral membrane with a significant enough affinity to disrupt it, resulting in a breakdown of its structure and therefore disabling it.biosurfactants are currently used across a large range of industrial and medical processes and their innate versatility open up their use for a large variety of coronavirus related applications (randhawa and rahman, 2014) . in dealing with this pandemic, it is crucial that we target the virus at every stage of its transmission and incubation. the use of biosurfactants will therefore be considered in handwashes and cleaning agents to prevent the spread of the virus; targeting and relieving the symptoms after infection; acting as drug delivery systems and additionally their use in other important areas with a key example being the production reliable antiviral facemasks.biosurfactants are defined as being amphiphilic moieties which possess the ability to reduce surface tensions across the interface of typically polar substances such as oil and water, therefore exhibiting emulsification properties. biosurfactants stand out from synthetic surfactants mainly because of their biological and therefore renewable origins, being predominantly made by microbial species and some plants. compared to their synthetic counterparts biosurfactants have greater emulsification activities, work across a broader range of temperature conditions and most importantly, they have been proven to exhibit a significantly low degree of cytotoxicity (abdel-mawgoud et al., 2010) . the amphiphilic nature of biosurfactants means that their hydrophobic domain is able to interact with the lipid membrane of the virus, while simultaneously interacting with other hydrophilic substances such as water. this property is what allows them to disrupt the virus structure and therefore deactivate it (sandeep and rajasree, 2017) .biosurfactants additionally have an interesting trait in which they are able to form micellar structures around their critical micelle concentration (cmc), a value that differs greatly between the different biosurfactant types. this structure will be significant in directly targeting the virus, impacting its overall emulsification activity, while also being crucial in our application of biosurfactants in drug delivery. the micelles have the potential to work as liposomes which could directly deliver a drug to the site of infection while also protecting it from the harsh conditions in the body which would otherwise impact its function (nakanishi et al., 2009) .the versatility in the use of biosurfactants alongside their already large presence in both the pharmacological and food industries prove them to be a significant route in finding novel solutions to the covid-19 pandemic, therefore justifying their extensive research moving forward (campos et al., 2013; fracchia et al., 2018; nitschke and silva, 2018; ribeiro et al., 2020) .due to biosurfactant unique chemical structures, understanding the functional mechanisms of action as well as their toxicity to human body is crucial for their exploitation in medical field. nowadays, biosurfactant find applications as antimicrobial, antiadhesive, in immunomodulation and as antitumor. lipopeptides and glycolipids are the most effective as antimicrobial and represents an important source for the discovery of new antibiotics. biosurfactant have been shown in mammalian cells, to participate in several intercellular molecular recognition steps such as signal transduction, cell differentiation and cell immune response acting as antitumor agents by interfering with cancer progression processes (gudiña et al., 2013; fracchia et al., 2015; sajid et al., 2020) .the antimicrobial and anti-adhesive properties of biosurfactant relays on membrane damage/disruption, causing metabolite leakage by modification of membrane protein morphology; by affecting energy generation and metabolites transport as well as by altering the bacterial lipopolysaccharide system (lps), thus reducing cell adhesion and biofilm formation (van hamme et al., 2006; fracchia et al., 2015) . different lipopeptides have reached a commercial antibiotic status, like echinocandins, micafungin, anidulafungin, and daptomycin (fracchia et al., 2015) . moreover, some biosurfactant have shown immunomodulation activities (sajid et al., 2020) . as examples surfactin is an interesting molecule, believed to reduce the activity of macrophage by down regulating the expression of several cell surface molecule (i.e., cd54), thus being a potential candidate in the treatment of hypersensitivity related immune disorders (paine et al., 2002) . surfactin is also known to have anti-inflammatory activities because of its inhibitory properties on phospholipase a2, on the release of interleukin and nitric oxide (kim et al., 1998; byeon et al., 2008; backhaus et al., 2017) . in a similar way sophorolipid injection in animals showed inhibition of pro-inflammatory cytokine and nitric oxide in the treatment of sepsis (fu et al., 2008) . biosurfactant have been also proposed as new molecule for the treatment of autoimmune diseases as well as potent immuno-modulator and anticancer agent (sajid et al., 2020) .despite their versatility some biosurfactant are produced by opportunistic bacteria and it is essential to consider their in vivo toxicity and safety. scarcity of clinical data on the use and validation of such molecules in animal models and human volunteers pose a major challenge. nonetheless, some biosurfactants have proven their efficacy in different sectors, fulfilling drug regulatory bodies requirements as biocompatible and non-toxic molecules.although reasons behind microbial biosurfactant production are currently unresolved, a likely explanation has been proposed through evolutionary analyses. this view recognizes competitive advantages generated through biosurfactant production, aiding in areas such as resource acquisition and defense, therefore increasing survivability when compared to other organisms who may be disadvantaged as a result (cameotra et al., 2010; kiran et al., 2015) . biosurfactant production has often been found to occur where species have experienced depleted resources, as well as during times where they may benefit from their antimicrobial nature. previous studies have explored the defensive nature of surfactants by expanding the application of bioactive peptides to inactivate enveloped viruses. cyclosporin a (csa) is a biopeptide produced from the fungus tolypocladium inflatum, already known to inhibit the propagation of the influenza virus by interfering with the viral cycle (garoff et al., 1998; khan, 2017) . csa does not affect adsorption or rna replication but instead inhibits steps after protein synthesis, such as assembly or budding (garoff et al., 1998) . this is extremely important as budding enables viruses to exit host cells and attach to derived membranes enriched in viral proteins encouraging spread and infection (hamamoto et al., 2013) . by targeting later events of the virus life cycle the problem of resistance to available drugs will be overcome as well as limiting spread. lipopeptide used as adjuvant or linked to low mass antigenic molecules have also been used to stimulate the immune system to produce antibodies. synthetic lipopeptide vaccines have been shown to be able to induce virus specific cytotoxic t-lymphocytes against the influenza nucleoprotein epitope (deres et al., 1989) . similar results have been observed against foot-and-mouth disease in vivo b-and t hcell response to hiv-1 loleit et al., 1996) . this might have a very interesting application in novel vaccines discovery and production. sophorolipids (sl), a group of microbial glycolipids produced by yeasts have shown properties as immunomodulators, anti-inflammatory and improved sepsis survival in experimental animal models (borsanyiova et al., 2016) . by acetylation of the sophorose head groups, sl have been active against herpes virus and hiv virus. such modification is considered to improve hydrophilicity of sl thus promoting its antiviral and cytokine-stimulating property (shah et al., 2005; gross and shah, 2007) .these are potential issues that may arise with sars-cov-2. this necessitates for the screening of potential agents with novel modes of action to eliminate harmful life-threatening effects.timely antiviral administration is key throughout global pandemics and the prompt treatment of ill individuals is key to managing future cases. extreme measures such as closing public areas and social distancing may reduce the infection rate of a disease. however, only antiviral drugs or vaccines are effective in curing and preventing infection when directly exposed to sars-cov-2. when facing a new and previously uncategorized virus, vaccine production is likely to be a slow process-unless the viral strain closely resembles a previously identified virus in which we have pre-established treatments. therefore, during such unprecedented times, before a cure is available it is vital to encourage safe and efficient cleaning procedures that effectively eliminate dormant forms of the virus that may lay on surfaces in public areas, clothes or homes.anionic surfactant types are commonly used in cleaning products and detergents. when applied to a surface the fatty acid chains of the surfactant bind to the hydrophobic components of microbes, while the surfactants hydrophilic domain will simultaneously bind to water with a significant affinity, resulting in the solubilization of that microbe. this emulsification reaction therefore enables the surface to be cleaned whilst depositing an effective surfactant layer. once attached the anionic detergent particles electric charge removes harmful substances from the surface and solubilize them into smaller droplets which results in an emulsification of dirt and detergent. as the surfactant molecules are continuously attached to the dirt/harmful substance the process of repulsion continues effectively preventing the same particle from being reintroduced to the surface. a visual is shown in figure 1 .surfactants are the single most important ingredients in laundry and household cleaning products and typically account for 15-40% of total detergent composition (yangxin et al., 2008) . through increased research, various combinations of surfactant types as well as alterations to surfactant volume within existing and new products have proven surfactants to be effective over traditional products such as bleach. there is no doubt that bleach has proven itself to be an incredible antimicrobial agent with its active ingredient sodium hypochlorite being effective in destroying bacteria, fungi and viruses. however, bleach can irritate skin, airways and mucus membranes, which suggests prolonged exposure to be harmful. bleach also decomposes under heat and light and reacts easily with other chemicals decreasing its effectiveness. improper use of bleach such as deviations from recommended dilutions may also affect performance and its overall use is likely to carry with it its own environmental implications which increase in significance when we consider the large-scale washing of public areas to prevent viral spread. all the issues stated above highlight how using bleach alone for disinfection in public areas or areas of high risk such as hospitals/surgeries can involve injury to health-care workers and increase immunosuppression which may lead to increased susceptibility to sars-cov-2 especially in areas where exposure to the virus is more likely [world health organization (who), 2014]. therefore, using products that contain biosurfactants in conjunction with or as an alternative to heavily chemical cleaners may be more effective in efficient disinfection.biosurfactants have great advantages as eco-friendly and lesstoxic alternative to synthetic surfactant and to date, glycolipids (sophorolipids, rhamnolipids, and mannosylerythritol lipids) are the most commercialized in cleaning applications by different companies world-wide. companies like saraya, ecover, and henkel apply sl in their laundry, dishwashing and cleaning products whereas basf, evonik, teegene and unilever are commercializing rhamnolipids and lipopeptide biosurfactants based products (klosowska-chomiczewska et al., 2011; fracchia et al., 2014; randhawa and rahman, 2014; singh et al., 2019) .since the start of the pandemic in december 2019, demand for various products -especially gloves, soaps, disinfectants and hand sanitizers has increased dramatically. a huge emphasis has arisen on the necessity of cleanliness, specifically the efficient cleaning of hands after coming into contact with potentially contaminated surfaces both indoors and outdoors. due to this, governments globally have had to update and define technical and regulatory standards for such products to ensure safe practice and manufacture whilst dealing with the pandemic. information regarding proper hand washing techniques as well as products content has been published. specifically, the uk government has released technical specifications for the production of hand wash and associated legislation of personal protective equipment (ppe) as well as prerequisites before items are sold. stricter regulations ensure consistency and guaranteed effectiveness of hand washing products which are vital during times of a pandemic (cabinet office gov.uk, 2020)the effectiveness of hand sanitizers compared to washing hands with soap and water has been of constant debate as of recently. the c.d.c (center for disease control and prevention) has stated that using soap when washing hands is more effective than hand sanitizer or water alone [centers for disease control and prevention (cdc), 2019]. this is because surfactants present in soaps lift and remove microbes, harmful substances and dirt from skin. furthermore, the lather produced from soap as well as effective scrubbing work well to remove contaminants.the use of alcohol-based hand sanitizer that contain at least 60% alcohol is still recommended if washing hands with soap is not available. hand sanitizers do not get rid of all types of germs and may not be as effective where hands are excessively greasy or dirty [centers for disease control and prevention (cdc), 2019]. alcohol is extremely effective, but efficacy differs among different types. for example, ethyl alcohol (70%) is a powerful germicide and is considered generally superior to isopropyl alcohol. it is also important to consider the prolonged and repeated use of alcohol-based products such as a disinfectant which can cause discoloration and damage to the skin [world health organization (who), 2014]. whereas, teegene has reported about lipopeptide and rhamnolipid biosurfactant based cosmetics (randhawa and rahman, 2014; focus on surfactants, 2015) and evonik has reported their sophorolipid biosurfactant for skin conditioning, refatting and moisturizers properties to be used in shampoo, shower gel and household cleaners (focus on surfactants, 2016) and it also has a potential use in handwash applications.acute respiratory distress syndrome (ards) is a progressive medical syndrome, characterized by a build-up of fluid in the patient's alveoli which result in inefficient oxygen transfer across these alveolar membranes into the blood (matthay et al., 2019) . ards is often a consequence of an already serious medical concern, in this case covid-19, with the resulting lack of oxygen to organs contributing to the high fatality rates seen in those who begin to develop symptoms (ware and matthay, 2000) .one leading cause for this alveolar fluid build-up, in response to infection by sars-cov-2, is surfactant dysfunction which has negative consequences on the emulsification and thereby clearance of liquid from this particular region. current treatments for this rely on ventilators to supplement the body with the oxygen which otherwise would not be able to successfully transfer into the blood, relieving the immediate symptoms which would otherwise lead to issues such as hypoxia (luks et al., 2020) . socioeconomic factors have played a large role in the effectiveness of such a treatment, with providing enough ventilators and facilities for each patient affected proving to be difficult and, in some cases, impossible considering the cost, space and training required to use them.with this in mind, biosurfactants present themselves to be a promising area of study in identifying novel treatments for ards which could overcome the socioeconomic barriers that have so far limited the effectiveness of ventilators. it is for this reason that future study for their use as a direct treatment for ards, through solubilizing the alveolar substrate, is likely to generate positive results and is therefore crucial in combating covid-19 in the future.when considering possible treatment opportunities for the covid-19 pandemic, it is crucial to decide upon a mode of drug delivery which doesn't compromise the molecular nature of the product while also being able to deliver it successfully to the area of interest. with the sars-cov-2 predominantly impacting the respiratory system and upper gastrointestinal tract, a likely mode of delivery would be via aerosol or lozenge. the micellar nature of biosurfactants result in them being the ideal candidates for either system of drug delivery, allowing them to form a stable liposome which will encase the drug, protecting it from damage which may otherwise cause dysfunction (sosnowski and gradon, 2009 ). the physicochemical characteristics of biosurfactants allow them to maintain their integrity while used in an aerosol, this would be the likely mode of drug delivery considering the main area of virulence to be within the lungs.the solubility of biosurfactants will work to their advantage throughout this process as they will evidently increase the bioavailability of the drug, once it has been administered. this self-solubilising nature of biosurfactants therefore advances the drugs dose proportionality, resulting in more consistent impacts across patients (omkar et al., 2020) . the ability for biosurfactants to mediate drug delivery is apparent, however the benefits of their use in this way are 2-fold. in addition to providing safe passage for the drug to the target, the biosurfactants will also exhibit natural antiviral properties at the site of infection, in addition to also relieving surfactant dysfunction in the alveoli, another consequence of sars-cov-2 infection. in this way, they will be able to inhibit a number of viruses present around that given area while also directly relieving symptoms, a significant factor reducing its virulence and transmission between hosts. this characteristic has furthermore been expanded upon as researchers ponder the ability for biosurfactants to themselves behave as a treatment in this way. one such example includes the addition of clinically approved biosurfactants in gummies or lozenges, as they are consumed the biosurfactants will directly reach parts of the mouth and esophagus which may be impacted and therefore provide symptomatic relief (vellingiri et al., 2020) . in addition to this, the biosurfactant will likely form a vapor in the mouth which can be inhaled through the process of ingestion, allowing it to reach areas of the respiratory tract to potentially provide relief in that area as well.the covid-19 pandemic is one which has had a detrimental impact on public health, seriously hindering the normal functionality of our society and therefore resulting in massive hardship across both our economy and public well-being. it is for this reason that scientists have been at a bid to find novel ways in which this pandemic can be combatted, across all of its planes of influence throughout our society.biosurfactants have not only proven themselves to be the ideal candidates to behave as this novel solution but have done so in a way which targets many of the avenues that are crucial in resolving a pandemic of this scale. their potential in behaving as safe and effective cleaning solutions have been discussed and they have been recognized as being a valid alternative to current procedure. in addition to this, biosurfactants have been found to act as significant drug delivery systems, housing multiple benefits to their use, most importantly showing a great potential in being able to successfully deliver drugs, maintaining dose proportionality in the process. finally, the potential for biosurfactants to exhibit medicinal qualities in the treatment of sars-cov-2 infection, particularly in the relief of symptoms associated with ards, have shown exceptional promise. the lack of knowledge shrouding this phenomenon therefore justify extensive future research. a prominent barrier remains in the large production costs associated with biosurfactant bioprocessing, a significant factor which must not be overlooked and should remain a focal point for future study. reducing the cost of bioprocessing, alongside the continued research of biosurfactant applications in this area are key to success within this field.the incredible versatility found across the structure and functions of biosurfactants mean that their reach in effectiveness is by no means limited to the applications which have been so far highlighted. as research progresses in this area, the feasibility of both their use and their socioeconomic development increase. the results of this pandemic have been so far detrimental however, it is crucial that we push forward and adapt such ideas in finding the very solutions that we need to combat the consequences of this virus and pathogens in the future. in this way, biosurfactants bring promise to a scenario that is often shrouded in despair, with research and scientific prowess we will not only overcome the issues of this pandemic, but we will additionally better equip ourselves for the future.all datasets presented in this study are included in the article/ supplementary material.ms, sg, pc, and pr have equally contributed in the preparation of this manuscript.this study was funded by the expanding excellence in england (e3) scheme, research england, uk.with examples of contributions to the field such as alphonse laveran, ronald ross, and alan magill for malaria, 1,2 walter reed and william gorgas for yellow fever, 3 william leishman for leishmaniasis, 4 and léon lapeyssonnie 5 for the african meningitis belt, just to cite a few, military medicine has and continues to contribute to major scientific advances in the fields of infectious diseases and tropical medicine and, as a consequence, of travel medicine. as data regarding health problems in civilian travelers are globally comparable to those reported in deployed soldiers, this chapter will focus on the specifics of the deployed military population and its main incapacitating medical threats. the deployed military represent a special category of travelers characterized as a young, disciplined, trained, predominantly male population that is strictly selected, controlled, and regularly monitored, and that typically travels in a group accompanied by some level of medical care. medical readiness (basically equivalent to the civilian pretravel consultation) is an overriding concern of all commanders. it is a policy-driven force health protection approach based on physical, dental, and psychological examinations with mandatory lab and/or radiologic investigations according to the service personnel's country. it includes obligatory health education sessions regarding the specific deployment-related risks and up-to-date immunizations based on the country and service's health policies (table  36 .1 provides information for us personnel). any contraindication for vaccination results in ineligibility for deployment.deployments usually last from a few days to a year. rest and recuperation leave ("r & r") depends on the length of the mission and the institution's policy. in the majority of cases, military health care providers are deployed with the troops allowing for continuous medical support. however, due to lack of time or fear of the stigma of appearing weak, personnel often do not seek care unless presenting with incapacitating symptoms.since the beginning of armed conflicts, diseases and noncombatrelated injuries (ncri) have always caused much greater morbidity and mortality than battle injuries. as an example, the french conquest of madagascar in 1895 resulted in approximately 6000 malaria-related deaths for <30 killed in action. 6 a recent prospective study ( fig. 36.1 ) showed similar findings with ncri, gastrointestinal, dermatologic, and respiratory disorders representing the leading causes of health issues during deployment. the same authors reported a significant burden for infectious diseases (41% of all etiologies), with ubiquitous infections in the majority of cases. 7 as with civilian travelers, the use of alcohol and drugs has been associated with an increased incidence of accidents, emotional disorders, and sexually transmitted infections. [8] [9] [10] alcoholrelated regulations vary according to the country of origin and country of deployment, but the authors recommend restrictions against the use of alcohol on deployment to minimize these risks. continuing information and education, and prohibiting alcohol and drug use/abuse during rotations, should help to decrease the rates of ncri and other alcohol and/or drug-associated medical issues.noncombat-related injuries (including road traffic injuries) are a major cause of soldier attrition during international operations.although generally simple to treat during deployment (see fig. 36 .1). ncri have progressively supplanted combat-related injuries, respiratory disease, infectious disease, and gastrointestinal disorders as the leading cause of hospital admissions during deployment. 7, 11 french authors observed a significantly higher ncri rate in peacekeeping missions (lebanon, côte d'ivoire) versus kinetic (combat) operations (afghanistan). 7 among musculoskeletal disorders, french and us authors showed that low back pain and/or sciatica are a significant cause both for seeking care and for medical evacuation. 7 this is partly because of the heavy load carried by dismounted troopers (protection gear, weaponry and ammunition, food and water, specialized equipment) that can range between 50 and 100 kg per soldier.despite their relatively low prevalence, 7 combat-related injuries are the most feared result of military deployment and have a major psychological impact on troops, their families, and the media, and remain the number one priority of the military chain of command. lessons learned from recent conflicts have led to major breakthroughs in the field of trauma care. tactical combat casualty care, improved protection gear and armored vehicles, deployed forward surgical teams applying damage control surgery and resuscitation, advances in transfusion (fresh frozen plasma and platelets, lyophilized plasma, whole blood transfusion), and early medical evacuation have been associated with remarkably improved outcomes for the severely injured. [12] [13] [14] [15] however, the increased survival of patients sustaining severe pelvic, spinal, and extremity wounds with amputations has highlighted the essential role of rehabilitation medicine (improved prosthetics), psychiatrists, psychologists, and social workers in supporting the wounded and their families. 16 even though they represent a small portion of morbidity in deployed troops, psychiatric diseases are among the main causes of evacuation. 7 moreover, most posttraumatic stress disorders occur following deployment 7 and symptoms increase the longer the duration after return. 10 several factors may contribute to susceptibility to emotional or psychological disorders during deployment: education; prior stressors and childhood adversity; emotional isolation; concerns about family during deployment; working in a new, foreign, remote, and hostile environment with limited individual space; restricted and highly secured movements; different rest-activity cycle; being absent during births and funerals at home; exposure to combat stress; and witnessing unexpected atrocities, wounded, and killed comrades. 10 however, a recent prospective study found no association between deployment and suicide in current and former us military personnel. 17 preventing deployment-related psychiatric disorders relies on a thorough psychological and social assessment (as in us and french procedures, for example), during pre-enlistment medical screening, then prior to and following the tour, as well as the continuous social support of the families, and prohibition of alcohol and drug use/abuse during rotations.with the availability of protective countermeasures, morbidity and mortality from vectorborne disease have declined during recent military operations, but continue to pose significant operational threats to deployed forces. 18, 19 experience has shown that knowledge, attitudes, repellants. the us military currently supports vaccine research programs to develop vaccines against long-term threats such as dengue and emerging threats like zika. 31, 32 sexually transmitted infections (stis) have always been an important part of military history with non-negligible impact on the operating capacity of troops. for example, during the peninsular war of 1808-1814, half of all admissions in british troops were for gonorrhea and syphilis. 33 the pursuit of pleasure during war campaigns led to the establishment of military brothels that were shut down in the late 20th century but unfortunately replaced by local civilian bordellos. the military are an "at-risk" sexually active population as approximately one-third are in the under 25-year-old age category-the age range that experiences the highest rate of stis. 33 high incomes and purchasing power during deployments, feeling of invincibility, influence of pornography, sexual deprivation, cultural interactions, and group dynamics can generate a high prevalence of sti-associated behaviors like binge drinking and drug use, lack of condom use, and multiple sexual partnerships. 9 a recent us study, conducted in the navy, shifted the focus of sti acquisition among male shipboard sailors from sex workers to predominantly regular sexual partners within the local military community as the consequence of the growing number of female recruits. 34 other authors showed that family/personal life stress and psychological distress influenced the number of partnerships more strongly for women than for men. 9 another emerging issue of the growing number of women in the military is unwanted pregnancies during deployment. 35 preventing stis and unintended pregnancies requires information and education, access to condoms and contraceptives, and prohibiting alcohol and drug use/abuse during rotations.due to service personnel's living and working conditions such as crowding, close contact, diminished cleanliness, compromised skin integrity (friction blisters, cracks or tinea pedis in the feet, cuts and abrasions), military status is a recognized risk factor for streptococcal and staphylococcal skin and soft tissue infections (impetigo, erysipelas, cellulitis, cutaneous abscesses, panton-valentine leukocidin-positive staphylococcus aureus skin infection). 36 during deployments to tropical or subtropical destinations, these skin conditions tend to occur more frequently because of the increased heat and humidity, exacerbated by wearing heavy protective gear, and reduced washing and laundry facilities. in addition, they are harder to treat under such circumstances. 29 these environmental and lifestyle factors also facilitate superficial fungal infections that may develop in >50% of soldiers, presenting as tinea pedis, tinea cruris, tinea corporis, tinea axillae, tinea capitis, onychomycosis, and/or pityriasis versicolor. 29 due to the maceration in combat boots, feet not only pay a heavy price in terms of fungal and gram-positive cocci infections but also of other conditions such as pitted keratolysis (corynebacterium sp.) (fig. 36.2) . these lower limb lesions in turn increase the risk of erysipelas and cellulitis with the potential for significant negative impact on force availability. 36 additional skin disorders include other corynebacterial infections (erythrasma and trichomycosis) and heat rash (miliaria crystallina, miliaria rubra, miliaria pustulosa, and miliaria profunda). tropical climate-related bacterial and fungal infections can also be associated with delayed wound healing. 37 prevention of these infections is based on strict hygiene measures including washing/drying or changing clothes daily (or multiple times a day if needed), and if feasible, airing skin and feet out when possible. regular self-examination of the feet for early treatment of infections and practices on the part of both medical providers and those deployed can have a major impact on disease burden. 20, 21 militaries operationalize protective countermeasures through a layered approach that includes use of permethrin-impregnated uniforms and nets, and deet-containing repellents, vaccines, and chemoprophylaxis medications. from its earliest use among allied forces in the pacific campaign of world war ii, adherence to malaria chemoprophylaxis has been a challenge, leading to the dictum that ensuring adherence to chemoprophylaxis is a command responsibility and not just a medical responsibility. 6, 22, 23 one notable exception to this experience was the very high rate of reported adherence among us military forces deployed to liberia as part of the ebola response in operation united assistance in 2014-2015, with no cases occurring while deployed. 24 faced with high threat of infectious disease during the operation, the military health community provided robust, expert-level consultation on force health protection measures to all deploying forces and leveraged command support to consistently reinforce prevention policies and procedures. 25 force health protection policy (fhpp), set by theater commanders, establishes the countermeasures at the unit-level population, separate from individualized decision-making that may occur during an individual medical visit. specific medication recommendations for a deployed force balance intensity of transmission, drug resistance, impact of nonadherence on efficacy, and medication cost. for example, current us military policy establishes either atovaquone-proguanil or doxycycline as first line chemoprophylaxis regimens and restricts the use of mefloquine to those both intolerant of first line agents and properly screened for contraindications. 26 this entails the use, in us troops, of atovaquoneproguanil in high-threat settings, to include most of sub-saharan africa, and the use of doxycycline in lower threat regions such as southwest asia. another example would be the french health corps policy that uses doxycycline as the only first line chemoprophylactic drug to optimize adherence. 6 use of primaquine for presumptive antirelapse therapy (part) is typically recommended following deployments to risk areas for plasmodium vivax and p. ovale. fhpp is constrained by food and drug administration labeling to restrict the use of investigational products, which has historically been applied to dosing considerations of primaquine. hence the us military lagged civilian practice, using 15 mg of primaquine base daily versus the current recommendation of 30 mg of base daily. department of defense (dod) policies do in fact allow for a "standard of care" dosage to be recommended under fhpp. 27 force-wide testing of us recruits for g6pd deficiency is standard practice.leishmaniasis, specifically old world cutaneous leishmaniasis, has posed a consistent operational threat during recent us and uk military operations in southwest asia. recent experience has shown that forces have the greatest risk while theaters of operations are least mature, increasing the chance of sleeping on the ground, use of improvised shelters, and failure to utilize insecticide-treated nets with ultrafine mesh size. 28, 29 recent military experience with leishmaniasis has informed current management recommendations with an emphasis on topical, oral, or even wound care alone as management for old world cutaneous leishmaniasis. 30 this approach is especially important from the perspective of maintaining troops in the field and avoiding need for hospitalization or evacuation for parenteral therapy.regarding new world cutaneous leishmaniasis, in french guiana for example, leishmania (viannia) guyanensis and l. (v.) braziliensis are associated with concomitant or late mucosal leishmaniasis that can cause destructive lesions of the nasooropharyngeal/laryngeal mucosa. as a consequence systemic treatment (pentamidine isethionate or meglumine antimoniate) requiring close monitoring is recommended for infected french soldiers. 30 the prevention approach for arboviral diseases centers on the use of vaccines, when available, and proper wearing of the uniform and and high altitude and novel pathogens endemic to that region. 39 clinical presentations include the "common cold," the "flu" (influenza-like illness), bronchitis, and pneumonia. influenza virus is the classic respiratory scourge of the military, but other respiratory viruses such rhinoviruses, human coronaviruses, respiratory syncytial virus, parainfluenza virus, and adenoviruses are common causes of cold and flu symptoms. pneumonia is most often caused by streptococcus pneumoniae and influenza virus. pneumonia epidemics due to adenovirus type 14 (ad14) reemerged among us military recruits when a vaccine was not available. strategies to reduce the incidence and impact of respiratory infections include an emphasis on hygiene measures (hand-washing, reduced crowding, cohorting of ill, etc.), vaccination for common pathogens (influenza, ad14), antibiotic prophylaxis (penicillin in us training camps to reduce group a strep pharyngitis), and early diagnosis and directed treatment of infection.despite the tremendous improvement in hygiene, sanitation, infection control, vaccination, and chemoprophylaxis, infectious diseases remain a major problem for deployed armed forces in the 21st century as these preventive measures can become neglected over time or disrupted during the early or the most intense stages of military operations. dramatic improvements have been made in the last decade regarding combat casualty care not only for physical wounds but also for the invisible ones (i.e., the psychological injuries). routine screening following deployments by health care professionals is important to ensure better management of these mental disorders. and blisters, as well as immediate and careful wound management, is recommended.other diseases such as scabies (sarcoptes scabiei), chickenpox (varicella zoster virus), and measles (in case of misdiagnosis during childhood or omitted vaccination) are difficult to address in these deployment settings. cases should be rapidly diagnosed, isolated, and treated (when possible).gastrointestinal and respiratory infections are among the most common ailments suffered by deployed military and are frequently cited as detrimental to military function. 38, 39 in 2003-2004, a majority of us personnel reported having suffered from diarrhea (76.8% in iraq and 54.4% in afghanistan) and respiratory illness (69.1% overall). 11 additionally many reported decreased individual performance effectiveness because of the illness (diarrhea [46%], respiratory [14%]). 11 in 2008, 50% of a british paratrooper unit in afghanistan was unfit for duty due to diarrhea. 38 the incidence of diarrhea during deployment is about 5%-7% per 100 person-months. 38 it is associated with poor hygiene and contaminated food, which are encountered more frequently early in a deployment 38 where hand-washing facilities are lacking and soldiers can be tempted to try fresh local food instead of eating the canned and/or lyophilized nutriments included in their self-contained, individual field rations. enterotoxigenic escherichia coli (etec), campylobacter, and shigella have been identified as causing 38%-45% of diarrhea. 40 viral causes are less common but are frequent causes of outbreaks. 38 prevention is based on rapidly establishing and maintaining effective sanitation and provision of clean food and water. to reduce the operational impact of diarrhea and to avoid associated deployment complications of dehydration and heat injury, rapid, effective treatment with a single-dose antibiotic (azithromycin or a fluoroquinolone) and loperamide is typically recommended. 38, 41 the risk of respiratory infections is thought to be an increased because of crowded living conditions compounded by relative immune compromise brought on by physical and emotional stress. 39 this is exacerbated by exposure to dust and smoke, extremes of temperature, the coronavirus pandemic, also known as the covid-19 pandemic, is an ongoing pandemic of coronavirus disease 2019, caused by severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2) [1] . to date, more than 4.5 million cases have been confirmed, with more than 300,000 deaths globally. surfaces can become contaminated by hands, objects, settling of viruscontaining aerosols, or contaminated fluids [2, 3] . therefore, these surfaces may play an important role in the transmission of pathogens in society [4, 5] . manual disinfection of surfaces by wiping and spraying antibacterial fluids is an important part of the healthcare setting. the shortage of effective sanitizing liquids, however, became a global challenge quickly after the covid-19 outbreak in december 2019. ethanol and isopropanol are the major active ingredient (~70-80%) of most common sanitizers, but the high volatility of these alcohols makes them less effective when sprayed on surfaces. the alcohol retention time on the surface plays a key role in its viricidal efficiency. a common solution to overcome this challenge is to include less volatile material (such as aloe vera gel) in sanitizer formulation. however, while blended with gels, the final solution becomes thicker and more difficult to spray on surfaces.anionic surfactants that are used in the manufacturing of liquid soaps and detergents, are also known for their antibacterial efficiency because of their dual functionality. the hydrophobic side of these surfactants can dissolve the outer layer of viruses and bacteria, while the hydrophilic side dissolves in water [6, 7] . therefore, these agents act as an emulsifier to remove the contamination.after the covid-19 pandemic, world health organization (who) has recommended that individuals wash hands more frequently and at least for 20 seconds to ensure bacterial and virus removal from the skin [8, 9] . it has been shown that the lipid outer layer of sars-cov-2 disrupts after long enough contact time with anionic surfactants [10] .in this study, we explored the effect of anionic surfactants addition to sanitizing liquids with different recipes. the main objective of this study was to reduce the volatility of the sanitizers without negatively influencing their thickness (viscosity) while boosting their virucidal properties.two well known anionic surfactants, sodium dodecylbenzenesulfonate (sdbs) and sodium laureth sulfate (sls) that are commonly used in dish soaps and liquid soaps, respectively, were studied at 3% concentration. in addition, commercial dish soap and liquid hand soap were subjected to experimentation with the goal of providing a simple, yet effective solution for daily applications. all tested liquids were also studied for their sars-coc-2 viricidal efficiencies.the sars-cov-2 coronavirus was obtained from molecular epidemiology laboratory at shiraz university of medical science, iran. ethanol, isopropanol, glycerin, sdbs, and sls were obtained from millipore sigma (beijing, china). two commercial dish soap and hand soap were purchased from golrang (tehran, iran). water of standardized hardness (wsh) was used in control experiments and also as a diluting agent in the formulation of sanitizing fluids. twelve sanitizing fluids with different recipes, as shown in table 1 , were prepared to examine the effect of individual components and mixtures on evaporation rate and sars-cov-2 virucidal efficiency of the solutions.for evaporation tests, pvc material with polyurethane (pur) surface coating was sliced into 20×50 cm (2 mm thickness) pieces and placed on a flat bench, as shown in figure 1 . sanitizing fluids were sprayed three times (from a distance of ~30 cm from the surface) on the pvc object.fluid evaporation was recorded using a sony hxr-nx100 camera, and videos were processed using ulead videostudio software. a 60-watt amber light was installed 100 cm above the surface to shine light on the surface to record better resolution videos. the surrounding environment was isolated to eliminate possible air convection, and the room temperature was maintained at ~27 ºc.the exact amount of evaporation time was recorded for each sprayed liquid.the coronavirus suspension was prepared by infecting monolayers of a549 cell (human lung epithelial carcinoma cells) lines. the virus titers of these suspensions ranged from 10 5 to 10 10 tcid50/ml. to determine the virucidal efficiency of each liquid, the 4-field test was performed according to en 16615:2015 european standard with slight modification [11] . briefly, four squares as test fields were marked on the pvc with pur surface coating material figuring a row, 5 cm away from each other. the marked test field 1 on this flooring was inoculated with the sars-cov-2 virus suspension. 10 μl inoculum was pipetted on the first test field and distributed with a spatula. a granite block was rapidly moved from test field 1 to test field 4 and back within no longer than 5 seconds. after 10 min contact time and drying, the sanitizing fluid was sprayed on the contaminated surface three times and allowed for 1 min. the coronavirus was then recovered from all four fields with a nylon swab. swabs of each field were transferred to 5 ml minimum essential medium (mem), respectively, and tubes were vortexed for 120 s. virus titres were determined by endpoint dilution techniques according to the en 14476:2015 european standard and calculated using the method of kärber and spearman [12, 13] . the virus reduction factor (rf) on the test fields was then determined according to the method described in details by becker et al. [14] . all experiments were carried out in triplicates. s2  s3  s4  s5  s6  s7  s8 s9 s10 s11 s12 water-based sanitizing solutions normally consist of ~70% alcohol (ethanol and/or isopropanol)as an active ingredient, ~3% glycerin to reduce dehydration if applied to the skin, and a small amount of fragrance. wsh, tested as control liquid, showed 97 s evaporation time using the method described above. to study the evaporation of sanitizing fluids, individual and multiplecompound tests were performed. evaporation test results are presented in figure 2 . the evaporation time of 70% isopropanol solution (s2) was higher than that of ethanol solution (s1) that was ascribed to a higher molecular weight of isopropanol than ethanol. the effect of glycerin addition to a mixture of 35% ethanol and 35% isopropanol (s3 versus s4 solutions) also showed an increase in evaporation time by approximately 23% from 30 to 37 s. however, it is desired to maximize the liquid contact time with the surface to enhance the virucidal efficiency of the sanitizer. sdbs surfactant, which is one of the main components of most commercial dish soaps, significantly increased the evaporation time from 24 s (of ethanol solution s1) to 33 s (for solution s5) (~37% increase). in addition, the incorporation of 3% sls (a major constituent of liquid hand soaps) increased the evaporation time of isopropanol solution (s2) from 35 s to 41 s in solution s7(~17% increase). these positive results encouraged us to investigate commercial dish soap and liquid hand soaps. the volatility reduction in the case of these soaps were even more significant than those of sdbs and sls. notably, liquid hand soap (solution s8) increased the evaporation time of isopropanol solution by about 57% from 35 to 55s. furthermore, the addition of 3% dish soap to the ethanol solution (s1) increased the evaporation time by about 63% from 24 to 39 s (of fluid s9), as shown in figure 2 . solutions s11 and s12 were prepared to record the evaporation time in the absence of alcohols and glycerin. we observed that dish soap and hand soap increased the evaporation time by 9% and 15%, respectively when compared with the control experiment (wsh). since evaporation experiments showed promise, we performed virucidal efficiency experiments thereafter. the twelve liquids exhibited different virucidal efficacies against the chosen coronavirus ( figure   3 ). isopropanol showed a slightly higher (~7%) reduction factor than ethanol solution (s1 and s2 figure 3 ). however, the combination of the alcohols (s3) did not exhibit rf between s1 and s2. the virucidal efficiency of s3 was ~13% greater than the expected value (average of s1 and s2) that could be ascribed to a different virucidal activity in s3. the addition of 3% glycerin did not influence the rf significantly as can be seen from the rf value obtained for s3 (6. compared with solution s3. therefore, there could be another positive synergistic effect between the three agents (alcohol, soap, and glycerin) that creates a need for further investigation. we hypothesize that alcohols participate in the virucidal activity by dehydration mechanism, while anionic surfactants inactivate the virus via cell disruption mechanism. this hypothesis, with emphasis on the synergistic influence, will be studied as the next phase of the present investigation.solutions s11 and s12 were prepared to explore the virucidal properties of the commercial liquid soaps, regardless of alcohols. as expected, although these components slightly increased the rf value, the changes were negligible when compared with the control experiment (wsh background: the emergence of the novel virus, sars-cov-2, has posed unprecedented challenges to public health around the world. currently, strategies to deal with covid-19 are purely supportive and preventative, aimed at reducing transmission. an effective and simple method for reducing transmission of infections in the public or healthcare settings is hand hygiene. unfortunately, little is known regarding the efficacy of hand sanitizers against sars-cov-2. methods: in this review, an extensive literature search was performed to succinctly summarize the primary active ingredients and mechanisms of action of hand sanitizers, compare the effectiveness and compliance of gel and foam sanitizers, and predict whether alcohol and non-alcohol hand sanitizers would be effective against sars-cov-2. results: most alcohol based hand sanitizers are effective at inactivating enveloped viruses, including coronaviruses. with what is currently known in the literature, one may not confidently suggest one mode of hand sanitizing delivery over the other. when hand washing with soap and water is unavailable, a sufficient volume of sanitizer is necessary to ensure complete hand coverage, and compliance is critical for appropriate hand hygiene. conclusions: by extrapolating effectiveness of hand sanitizers on viruses of similar structure to sars-cov-2, this virus should be effectively inactivated with current hand hygiene products, though future research should attempt to determine this directly.hand sanitizers: a review of ingredients, mechanisms of action, modes of delivery, and efficacy against coronavirusesit is clear that covid-19 is a pandemic and global health crisis with the potential to kill millions of people, particularly the elderly and people with comorbidities such as hypertension, smoking and lung disease. at present we do not know if people with ms are at increased risk acquring sars-cov-2, covid-19 or developing severe covid-19. individuals with ms are not unique in their requirement to be treated with immunosuppressive therapies. we discussed the covid-19 epidemic with our renal transplant team who informed us that at present they are not taking any specific action about the levels of immunosuppression for their transplant patients during the epidemic. basic measures are recommended namely: to improve hand and home hygiene, to avoid highrisk travel and unnecessary contacts, to self-isolate if necessary and to reduce contact with the hospital and other medical institutions as much as possible, because they are more likely to be sources of covid-19. it is business as usual. nor are they necessarily halting their transplant programme. their argument is that transplanted kidneys and other transplanted organs are too precious not to protect them with relevant immunosuppressive drugs. why would we not have the same attitude about the brains and spinal cords of our patients with active multiple sclerosis?we could argue that solid-organ transplant patients are significantly more immunocompromised than pwms on disease modifying treatment (dmt). most transplant patients are on triple immunotherapy, compared to pwms who are on monotherapy and even then, the level of immunosuppression is generally low. hence, the mortality/morbidity risk to an individual on a dmt, infected with covid-19, may be actually quite moderate to low. another hypothesis being considered is that moderate immunosuppression may prevent severe complications associated with covid-19 infection. the severe pulmonary complications of covid-19 infection are consistent with ards (acute respiratory distress syndrome) caused by an over-exuberant immune response to the virus (ramanathan et al., 2020) . as a result, several exploratory trials are currently being undertaken in china and elsewhere using immunosuppressants to try and dampen the immune response to the virus. interestingly, fingolimod, a s1p modulator licensed for ms, is being tested as a treatment for covid-19 associated ards (continued on next page) g. giovannoni, et al. multiple sclerosis and related disorders 39 (2020) 102073 (clinicaltrials.gov identifier: nct04280588). interferon beta is also being trialled in covid-19 based on its antiviral properties (clinicaltrials.gov identifier: nct04276688). then there is the virology to take into account. sars-cov-2, the cause of covid-19, is a new human pathogen that is likely to have recently crossed species (andersen et al., 2020) . covid-19 will eventually become endemic and hence pose a seasonal risk to patients on immunosuppressive therapies. as it is a small rna virus with low fidelity it is likely to mutate rapidly making a one-off vaccine only a partial solution. vaccines take time to be developed, tested and introduced at a population level. delaying treatment, de-escalating therapy by switching to immunomodulatory dmts, such as interferonbeta, glatiramer acetate or teriflunomide, or interrupting dosing of dmts to wait for a vaccine will delay the adequate treatment of ms, especially as it may take 12-18 months to develop a vaccine. we, therefore, need a pragmatic response on management of the potential threat of covid-19 in individuals with ms. if patients have active ms they need to be treated based on the clinical evidence at hand and hence may need to be treated with higher efficacy dmts. this should be implemented in conjunction with appropriate behavioural modifications to reduce or ideally prevent exposure to the virus.it is essential to consider the potential risk of morbidity and possible mortality for each ms patient, who may be infected with sars-cov-2 and develops covid-19. the individual's risk profile is multifactorial; their dmt and consequent immune response is one of the factors. other aspects to consider, when assessing a respiratory viral infection include: smoking practices (increased cigarette smoking increases risk); ambulatory status (less mobility increases risk, especially if the patient is in a wheelchair); age (increasing age increases risk); weight (increasing weight impacts on ambulation and respiratory function); underlying respiratory illnesses, such as asthma or copd. also, the frequency of necessary attendance at a hospital or healthcare facility for laboratory or mri testing, but also for infusions may place the patient at a higher risk of exposure. in the context of these factors the health care professionals should weigh the potential risks of sars-cov-1 exposure and manage their dmt accordingly. visits for ms care should preferably be done by telemedicine or phone.the potential hazards posed by each dmt differ and, rather than imposing a blanket rule, decisions regarding treatment should be individualised (see table 1 ) and discussed with patients. for some patients having their ms treated and controlled may be more important than the potential danger of being exposed to and acquiring a more severe covid-19 infection. table 1 is our attempt to define the risks associated with the different classes of dmts in the event of a patient acquiring a covid-19 infection.assuming that antiviral responses are driven mainly by t-cells, in particular cd8+ cytotoxic t-lymphocytes, and natural-killer cells and less so, at least initially, by b-cells, allows one to construct a hierarchy of immunosuppression of dmts. the highest risk are the immune reconstitution therapies during the depletion phase of the treatment, i.e. haematopoietic stem cell transplantation (hsct), alemtuzumab (lemtrada), mitoxantrone (novantrone) and cladribine (mavenclad). after immune reconstitution, once the total lymphocyte counts have returned to normal or near normal the risk of severe viral infections are probably no higher than expected for the background population and would be associated with age and other comorbidities. please note, immune reconstitution takes months to years, so if the patient's last course of treatment was in the previous 6-12 months they may still be immunocompromised. a total lymphocyte count less 1.1 × 10 9 /l or 1100/ mm 3 is associated with an increased risk of infection and infection-related mortality (warny et al., 2018) . this risk increases progressively the lower the absolute lymphocyte counts; particularly when the lymphocyte count drops below 800/mm 3 (>50% risk) (warny et al., 2018) . as a rough guide, pwms with a lymphocyte count above 800/mm 3 (who grade 2) are able to deal with viral infections reasonably well provided they have no other comorbidities and are relatively young. ⁎ risk refers to acquiring an infection during the immunodepletion phase. post immune reconstitution the risk is low.g. giovannoni, et al. multiple sclerosis and related disorders 39 (2020) 102073 of the immune reconstitution therapies, cladribine (mavenclad) is classed as intermediate risk, because it is a relatively poor t-cell depleting agent (stuve et al., 2019) . t-cells are only depleted post-cladribine by an average of 50% with the cd4+ population being more sensitive than the cd8+ population. in the phase 3 clarity study, viral infections were uncommon post-cladribine and apart from herpes zoster, infections were no more frequent in cladribine-treated subjects compared to placebo (cook et al., 2011) . when viral infections occurred post-cladribine they tended to be mild or moderate in severity. similarly, anti-cd20 therapies such as ocrelizumab have a minor impact on t-cell counts and are not associated with severe viral infections (mayer et al., 2019) . in the phase 3 relapsing-remitting and primary progressive trials, infections were slightly more frequent on ocrelizumab compared to comparator arms (interferon-beta-1a or placebo) montalban et al., 2017) . most of these infections were mild and moderate with the severe infections being bacterial in nature (pneumonia, urinary tract infections and cellulitis). we therefore feel that both cladribine and anti-cd20 therapies are relatively safe to use during the covid-19 pandemic based on their profiles defined in phase 3 trials.the sphingosine-1-phosphate (s1p) modulators (fingolimod, siponimod, ozanimod, ponesimod) work by reducing the egress of lymphocytes from secondary lymphoid organs into the circulation (stepanovska and huwiler, 2019) . the actual degree of lymphopaenia is not associated with their efficacy nor the risk of infection (francis et al., 2014) . overall infectious complications are relatively low on s1p modulators, with opportunistic infections emerging over time (epstein et al., 2018; luna et al., 2019) . importantly, the vast majority of patients on s1p modulators do not have a problem dealing with community acquired viral infections. patients on fingolimod who are exposed to and acquire exotic viral infections such as dengue fever seem to deal with them without complications (fragoso et al., 2016a) . this is why patients on s1p modulators should be at relatively low risk of complications from covid-19 infection and why it may be safe to continue these treatments during the epidemic. fingolimod does however blunt vaccine responses (kappos et al., 2015) indicating that both the priming and effector arms of the immune system are affected, whether this will impact on covid-19 outcomes is at present unknown.although most neurologists consider natalizumab relatively safe there is a small increased risk of upper respiratory tract infections on this medication (kapoor et al., 2018; polman et al., 2006; rudick et al., 2006) and there are theoretical reasons why it may reduce trafficking of lymphocytes in the lung and mucosa (woodside and vanderslice, 2008) . it is clear that natalizumab blocks immune surveillance of the cns, hence a person on natalizumab who develops a covid-19 encephalitis could be in danger of major complications of this infection. the latter is analogous to pml, which is also a viral encephalitis, and similar to herpes-simplex and varicella -zoster encephalitis resulting from natalizumab exposure (fine et al., 2013) . coronaviruses are potentially neurotropic and there has been one online case report of a 56-year old chinese man developing covid-19 encephalitis. he developed a decreased level of consciousness with a normal ct scan of the brain. spinal fluid analysis revealed sars-cov-2. he subsequently made a recovery and was discharged (xinhua, 2020) . there is also clear evidence from the large chinese cohort that anosmia may be an early sign of covid-19 infection, suggesting involvement of the neuraxis.another human coronavirus hcov-oc43, which is generally associated with mild upper respiratory tract infections, has been shown to have neuroinvasive properties. studies in mice have shown that hcov-oc43 can infect neurons and cause encephalitis and cause persistent infections in human neural-cell lines (arbour et al., 1999) . there are case reports identifying hcov-oc43 rna in the cerebrospinal fluid or brain of children with acute disseminated encephalomyelitis (yeh et al., 2004) and acute encephalomyelitis (morfopoulou et al., 2016) . coronaviruses mutate very rapidly and hence may produce neurotropic strains quite quickly. the latter is a potential issue in the context of natalizumab, which creates an immune privileged site that may allow for the selection of these neurotropic mutants. another aspect that needs to be considered is what happens in the gut. sars-cov-2 infects the gastrointestinal tract, with about 3-4% of people with covid-19 developing diarrhoea (guan et al., 2020) . sars-cov-2 is shed in the stool (holshue et al., 2020) . natalizumab also reduces lymphocyte trafficking to the gut and is a licensed treatment for crohn's disease (ghosh et al., 2003) . will patients on natalizumab and other dmts have increased viral replication in the gut and shedding in the stool? will patients on natalizumab and other dmts infected with the virus become superspreaders? despite these questions the current science indicates that patients on natalizumab should be able to deal with a novel viral infection such as dengue (fragoso et al., 2016b) . reassuringly, five patients on natalizumab infected with dengue virus cleared the virus without complications similar to those on fingolimod (fragoso et al., 2016b) .clearly, any decision to start a dmt during the covid-19 pandemic will need to be taken carefully and will depend on the state of the covid-19 pandemic, not only in the particular country concerned, but in the specific area the patient lives and receives therapy. for example, aggressive public health steps to contain the spread of the virus locally may make it relatively safe for a patient to start an immunosuppressive therapy. our concern is that the covid-19 pandemic may trigger a large number of neurologists and patients to reconsider treatment strategy and choice of initial dmt and to opt for less effective immunomodulatory dmts. this change needs to be considered carefully. the covid-19 pandemic in all likelihood will be short lived and it would be unfair to patients treated during the epidemic to be disadvantaged in the long term regarding the management of their ms. neurologists have spent an extraordinary amount of time and effort to activate the ms community: to advance the principle that 'time is brain', to treat ms proactively to a target of no evident disease activity (neda) and more recently, to flip the pyramid and use higher efficacy treatments first line. these treatment principles are evidence-based and should not be thrown out in the context of a potential, but yet undefined, risk to our patients.recommendations on the management of italian ms patients during the covid-19 epidemics these are recommendations made by neurologists and infectious diseases specialists whilst we have no evidence-based data at present.given the lack of knowledge or data on the covid-19 disease course in ms patients receiving dmts, at present there is no recommendation to stop the different dmts and therefore expose ms patients to the risk of ms exacerbations. we, therefore, recommend continuing the current dmt specifically with: -first-line dmts (beta-interferons, glatiramer acetate, teriflunomide or dimethyl fumarate). these dmts can be prescribed as usual. -fingolimod -natalizumabfor 'lymphodepleting' dmts: any decisions about these dmts should be based on individual circumstances.-temporarily delay the start of lymphodepleting dmts such as ocrelizumab, alemtuzumab, rituximab or cladribine. -temporarily delay (between 6 and 12 months depending on the dmt) re-dosing of alemtuzumab, ocrelizumab and g. giovannoni, et al. multiple sclerosis and related disorders 39 (2020) 102073 cladribine. this decision should be made according to individual factors such as disease severity and activity. for anti-cd2o dmts it is recommended to delay the next dose even beyond 6 months if cd19+ and cd20+ lymphocyte counts are severely decreased at the time the next dose is due. -some special considerations: for patients who have already received the first dose of the first cycle, it is recommended to give the second dose (i.e. complete the first cycle) and 'extra precautions' should be taken.patients with confirmed covid-19 infection: withhold any first or second-line dmt until clinical resolution and/or approval to continue treatment by an infectious disease specialist. note: given the potential antiviral activity of beta-interferons, the decision to continue this treatment rests with the treating neurologist.symptoms of potential covid-19 infection: headache, anosmia, fever, dry cough and asthenia.instruct your patients not to attend accident and emergency services to avoid overcrowding and further spreading of the virus. instruct your patients to call the local emergency number, describe their symptoms and wait for instructions.evaluate the temporary withdrawal of current dmt based on the guidelines provided above.recommendations for ms patients and healthcare professionals at ms centres:-if possible, avoid crowded places such as cinemas, theatres, schools, etc. -in high risk areas, restrict access to ms centres to ms patients only. -for patients on immunosuppressive infusion therapies, the use of protective surgical-grade masks is recommended. -if travelling long distances or using public transport is absolutely necessary, it is recommended to use protective masks and hand sanitizing (particularly for patients on fingolimod, alemtuzumab, ocrelizumab, cladribine or rituximab). -if possible, work from home. -good personal hygiene is always important, specifically, it is recommended to wash your hands frequently, ideally in an alcohol-based gel (>60% alcohol).these recommendations are provided as a guideline only, please always refer to your local government advice. these recommendations are likely to change depending on the evolution of the epidemics.infection prevention and control is a series of practices, processes, and programs within healthcare to reduce the spread of infection among patients and staff. infection prevention and control (ipc) programs within hospitals and healthcare facilities typically consist of infection preventionists (ips) who are commonly nurses, epidemiologists, and microbiologists. the duties of the ip and ipc program includes a variety of responsibilities; disease surveillance, case investigation for hospitalassociated infections, education, training of staff, policy review, risk assessments for construction in patient care areas, emergency preparedness, reporting of communicable diseases to local health departments, reporting of healthcare-associated infections for reimbursement and federal requirements, etc. traditionally, the role of the infection prevention program is to focus on reducing healthcare-associated infections (hais) however, communicable diseases play a large role in their duties. properly training and educating staff on the correct use of personal protective equipment (ppe) and ensuring isolation precautions are correctly maintained is a daily responsibility for the ipc department. aside from ensuring staff compliance to ppe and isolation precautions, ipc works to educate and facilitate compliance among visitors, as they can be a source for disease spread within a healthcare facility. the role of the ipc program and infection preventionists is also as the connective tissue within healthcare facilities to ensure that infectious diseases have the proper response across the healthcare sector, which includes departments like environmental services, security, emergency medicine, facilities, administration, interventional radiology, sterile processing departments, etc. infection and control programs are the sentinels for underlying issues within the health of the community and healthcare facility.infection prevention and control departments are comprised of infection preventionists, who have a variety of backgrounds. traditionally the ip role has been primarily nurse-driven, but recent years have seen an influx of epidemiologists as the role increasingly involves hospital epidemiology, outbreak investigation, and public health response. the ip, even at the most novice level, must have a rudimentary understanding of microbiology, disease transmission, and public health interventions. ip competencies are built up according the association for professionals in infection prevention and epidemiology (apic) model, which is considered the gold standard. the apic competency model is based upon a text that includes topics that highlight the range of ip duties-occupational health, sterilization and disinfection, bioterrorism, emergency preparedness, outbreak response, infection prevention in a variety of settings (e.g., behavioral health, correctional facilities, dental services), aseptic technique, infection prevention for specialty care populations (e.g., burns, pediatrics, organ transplants), as well as the environmental components to infection prevention work (e.g., waste management, heating and ventilation, healthcare textiles). the duties and capabilities of the ip are required to be extensive and diverse. infection preventionists are expected to sit for the certification in infection control (cic) after 2 years. the cic is a complex certification which aims to ensure the ip is well-versed in the variety of issues that plague healthcare systems. since the 2002 severe acute respiratory syndrome (sars) coronavirus and 2013-2016 ebola virus disease outbreaks, infection preventionists' duties have increasingly involved high-consequence pathogens and emergency preparedness. overall, infection preventionists are responsible for all manner of infectious disease threats within a healthcare facility, regardless of origin.perhaps one of the most crucial responsibilities of the infection prevention and control program is to perform surveillance and report communicable diseases to local health departments. while ipc programs are frequently responsible for reporting hospital-associated infections within their facility, it is the responsibility for reporting communicable diseases that is relevant to defense against biological attacks. communicable disease reporting requirements (also known as infectious disease reporting) vary within each state and even county, but overall, there are state laws requiring medical providers to report notifiable disease to local public health departments [1] . while there is variation in the lists of notifiable diseases that states require healthcare providers to report, there is a general consistency of common and concerning microorganisms that includes all category a agents and a majority of those listed within the center for disease control and prevention's (cdc) bioterrorism agents page [2] [3] [4] [5] . within hospitals and healthcare facilities, it is generally the ipc program that is responsible for reporting communicable diseases to local public health authorities. while laboratory reporting can and does happen, it is mostly incomplete information and commonly limited to the positive laboratory result and the name of the patient. the legal responsibility of reporting the communicable diseases ultimately tends to fall upon the infection prevention and control program, which must not only report such diseases with complete patient and laboratory information, but also within the required time frame. state reporting laws dictate the list of notifiable diseases and their required reporting time frame. for example, in california, the california code of regulations requires a report for west nile virus infection be submitted by electronic transmission, telephone, or mail within one working day of identification, while a human or animal case of plague requires immediate reporting by phone [6] . these lists mirror that of the cdc's national notifiable diseases surveillance system (nndss). in essence, the reporting structure commonly begins with the ip performing surveillance based off laboratory reports and daily reports of admitting diagnoses for newly admitted patients. from this surveillance, reporting is performed to the local health department, which will then report to the state health department, which then reports it to the cdc. in short, national diseases surveillance and reporting frequently starts with hospital ipc programs. ipc programs have a critical role in communicable disease reporting, which aids in public health response. the strength of the infection prevention and control program will be seen in their ability to perform more specific surveillance and real-time disease reporting. poorly supported or minimally staffed ipc programs will likely rely solely on microbiology reports and might be delayed in their surveillance and reporting efforts. some diseases, like kawasaki syndrome, cannot be confirmed by laboratory tests, which can be challenging, but is overcome through daily chart review and a strong relationship with physicians and other clinical staff. moreover, once a case is identified as a communicable disease that must be reported, the skilled ip will not only report the required information (e.g., laboratory results, demographics, contact info) but also relevant medical record information for the condition, which will include a timeline of illness, travel history, physician notes, etc. such attention to detail facilitates a more rapid and efficient response from public health authorities. overall, the infection prevention and control program within healthcare facilities is frequently the primary source of communicable disease reporting, which is a vital part of public health response during biological events.ipc programs are a connective tissue within the healthcare setting, working across professions and job roles to ensure the response to infectious disease threats is appropriate. it is the responsibility of the ipc program to ensure that clinical staff follow infection control guidelines, but also ancillary staff, which includes but is not limited to environmental services, facilities, sterile processing and disinfection, laboratory, security, or food services. ipc coordinates with these departments to ensure the proper education and compliance is ongoing as interaction with patients is not solely limited to healthcare providers. aside from ensuring infection control practices are followed, the ipc program must also coordinate with different departments within the healthcare facility/system to ensure the proper expertise are being utilized. consider the role of construction or facilities maintenance. a relatively simple task, like installing cabling or renovating a new space can bring with it substantial patient safety concerns due to dust, mold, etc. ipc must consider the full spectrum of affected people and departments during biological incidents, for example; during a public health emergency or treatment of a patient in enhanced precautions, ipc must coordinate with environmental services to ensure proper waste disposal is being performed. in the event of a pediatric patient with ebola virus disease, ipc must ensure that child life services are able to provide recommendations and guidance in regards to the unique needs of pediatric patients. such unique situations require ipc response and coordination of expert opinions to ensure the most appropriate actions are taken. during an influx of patients with an infectious disease or in the wake of an attack, ipc will be an integral component to hospital response and coordination of efforts. in emergent situations, the hospital incident command system (hics) may be initiated, of which ipc plays a vital role in providing instructions and expert recommendations.isolation precautions are singularly one of the most critical components to preventing the spread of infectious diseases during patient care. the rapid isolation and adherence to personal protective equipment guidelines are imperative in daily patient care, but will become even more pertinent during infectious disease crises. adherence to standard precautions and hand hygiene is fundamental for all patient interactions. however, additional transmission-based precautions may be needed during the medical care of patients with infectious diseases. transmission-based precautions (isolation precautions) are often required in addition to standard precautions. full information on microorganism-specific isolation precautions and detailed ppe directions can be found within several cdc and world health organization (who) publications. ipc recommendations follow cdc guidelines for isolation precautions and corresponding ppe based upon the identified microorganism (e.g., bacterial, viral, fungal). the recommendations within this chapter serve as broad guidance for utilization and compliance. reference is made to the patient room, but isolation precautions should be applied to the area in which the patient is present (e.g., treatment room, post-procedural recovery bay).personal protective equipment (ppe) in the healthcare setting includes gloves, gowns, masks, shoe covers, and eye-protection. these items are the most common and frequently used ppe during patient care, but additional ppe may be recommended in emergent situations. ppe provides a mutual benefit to both patient and healthcare worker as it reduces the spread of diseases between the two parties. correct utilization of ppe decreases the microbial burden in the environment as well, preventing the spread of disease through cross-contamination. ppe is mutually beneficial within the care process, which should be taught in training to encourage compliance. donning and doffing ppe is a critical component to efficacy. improper use of ppe is common among healthcare workers, as the time to properly don can be taxing or because it is thought to be easier to continue wearing ppe if only leaving a patient's room momentarily (e.g., keeping a facemask on while running to the medication room). for ppe to be effective, it must be donned prior to entering the patient room and doffed prior to leaving or upon exiting (depending upon the layout of the care area) to avoid contamination of the hospital unit. ppe should always be changed between patients and should never leave the patient's room, regardless of how short a simple task may appear. if a patient is in isolation, anyone entering the room should don ppe, regardless of whether the planned task does not involve patient interaction or expected contact with the environment. once in the patient's room, one cannot predict what will be needed or if an emergency will occur, meaning that ppe should be worn at all times while caring for a patient in isolation.isolation precautions and the required ppe range from standard precautions to airborne isolation, all of which have different and distinct requirements. adherence to cdc isolation precaution guidelines and manufacturer recommendations for the ppe are imperative for the treatment of patients with infectious diseases. regardless of origin, vigilant adherence to proper isolation and ppe guidelines will aid in infection prevention and control efforts, which can halt an outbreak in its tracks. ppe can and should be worn by visitors of the patient however, this is limited to ppe that does not require fit-testing (i.e., respiratory protection for patients with airborne microorganisms, like n-95 masks, should not be worn by visitors or patients as they require special fit-testing to ensure proper sizing). during hospitalization, the room of an contagious patient should have the proper signage on the door indicating which transmission-based precautions are being used so that all staff or visitors entering may wear the necessary ppe.standard precautions (also referred to universal precautions) are basic precautions that should be utilized on all patients as a means of reducing the transmission risk of, for instance, bloodborne pathogens [37] . the most basic premise is to use hand hygiene and assess the risk of a potential exposure to blood or other potentially contaminated material (e.g., urine, feces, breast milk) and use the corresponding ppe. standard precautions encourage the healthcare worker to consider the tasks being performed and apply critical thinking to the risk of potential exposure and then select ppe based upon this assessment. for example, drawing blood typically only calls for gloves, but if the patient is thrashing or aggressive, the healthcare worker should consider eye protection. another component to standard precautions is respiratory hygiene and cough etiquette. this lesson was developed and became essential during the sars outbreak and has now become a staple within universal precautions. respiratory hygiene and cough etiquette highlights the importance of education for healthcare workers, patients, and visitors, to ensure they cover their mouth and nose when coughing or sneezing, perform hand hygiene following exposure to respiratory secretions, and practice spatial separation of febrile persons with respiratory symptoms. the goal of standard precautions is to ensure that, at the most basic level, healthcare workers are protected against blood and other potentially contaminated material through hand hygiene and risk-based ppe utilization. additional transmission-based precautions, such as contact isolation precautions, build upon standard precautions, meaning that standard precautions will always be used.the most basic and effective tool in the infection prevention arsenal is hand hygiene. competent hand hygiene practices can prevent the transmission of diseases, making it the foundation for infection prevention [32] . efforts to maintain compliance can be challenging as healthcare workers are expected to perform hand hygiene before and after patient interaction [30, 31] . the new who model for hand hygiene goes beyond the "before and after patient care" practice and emphasizes moments during the patient care process. the five moments of hand hygiene (frequently called "5 moments") model emphasizes a broader approach to hand hygiene that encompasses the intricacies of patient care. the who's 5 moments model is increasingly becoming the standard practice and includes five moments in which hand hygiene should be performed: before patient contact, before aseptic tasks, after body fluid exposure risk, after patient contact, and after contact with patient surroundings [7] . hand hygiene should also be performed after removing gloves. gloves can easily be seen as a cure-all protective barrier however, hand hygiene should be performed following their removal as leakage during care and cross-contamination during removal is possible [8] .hand hygiene is performed with either soap and water or alcohol-based hand sanitizer. according to the cdc, washing with soap and water for 15-20 seconds should be performed when hands are visibly soiled, after known exposures to clostridium difficile, after known or suspected exposures to patients with diarrhea during a norovirus outbreak, when exposure to bacillus anthracis is suspected or proven, before eating, and after using the restroom. if none of those situations are applicable, alcohol-based hand sanitizer is recommended and considered the most effective product. alcohol-based hand sanitizer (composed of 60-95% alcohol to maintain efficacy) is an easy and effective manner for hand hygiene that takes roughly 20 seconds to dry. depending upon the situation, alcohol-based hand sanitizer can easily provide staff with an effective and timely method for cleaning their hands, which significantly improves compliance.contact isolation precautions are used for microorganisms that are transmissible through touch or contact with the patient or a contaminated item (fomite). contact precautions include wearing a gown and gloves during interaction with the patient or their environment. the most common examples of infections in which contact isolation is used include diarrheal illnesses, methicillin-resistant staphylococcus aureus (mrsa), and draining abscesses. contact precautions should also be taken during the care for patients infected with known or suspected multi-drug resistant microorganisms, human parainfluenza virus (hpiv) infection in pediatric patients, poliovirus, vaccinia virus (adverse events following vaccination, like generalized vaccinia or conjunctivitis), etc. broadly speaking, contact precautions, should be used for patients with diarrhea or draining wounds, and should be considered for children who have respiratory illnesses. the necessary ppe for contact precautions, gown and gloves, should be donned appropriately before entering the room, and removed at the threshold, prior to exiting. depending on the make of the gown, it is important to follow manufacturers' recommendations for removal (like pulling away from the body to break any ties in the back.) and wear (i.e., wearing the gown over the shoulders, not hanging down around the elbows). contact precautions are an effective practice for protecting the healthcare worker against infectious diseases that are spread through touch and fomites.droplet isolation precautions are used to help stop the spread of microorganisms that are spread through tiny droplets that are disseminated through sneezing and coughing. the most common causes of droplet precautions are pneumonia, seasonal influenza, pertussis, and bacterial meningitis. droplet precautions can frequently be confused with airborne precautions, but these precautions focus on those microorganisms that are transmitted via droplets during close proximity interactions [9] . to protect against droplet-spread microorganisms, a surgical mask should be worn while in the patient's room. the mask should be put on prior to entering the room and removed upon exiting the room. while most ppe should not be worn outside of the room, a surgical mask should be discarded in the trash after leaving the room [10] . hand hygiene should be performed after the mask is removed upon exiting of the room. masks should always be disposed of after leaving the room and should not be re-used for multiple patients as the mask is considered contamination after being touched. in emergent conditions, there have been situations that call for re-using masks if supplies are limited however, these should be evaluated during the event and not a common practice. the association of perioperative registered nurses (aorn), food and drug administration (fda), who, and cdc all recommend disposal of fda-approved medical masks after single use and that healthcare workers should don a new mask for each contact with a new patient [11] . aorn highlights the hazards of reusing surgical masks by saving them or hanging them around the neck. droplet precautions are an effective infection control strategy for preventing the spread of infectious diseases that are spread via droplets and close contact.airborne isolation precautions are required during the care of patients who have or are suspected of having diseases like tuberculosis, measles, or chickenpox, which are caused by small organisms (<5 μm in diameter) that easily flow on air currents. patients infected with such pathogens are capable of transmitting disease through respiratory secretions that are aerosolized during coughing, sneezing, suctioning procedures, etc. airborne precautions are perhaps the most challenging as they require healthcare workers to wear appropriate respirators that have been fit-tested. adherence to airborne isolation requires healthcare workers to be fit-tested to ensure the national institute for occupational safety and health (niosh)-approved n-95 or higher level respirators maintain a proper seal around the face. these masks should be donned prior to entering the room, removed after exiting the room, and then disposed of.one of the most crucial aspects of airborne precautions is that the patient must be in an appropriate negative air pressure room. negative pressure rooms (also called airborne isolation rooms or aiir) are designated rooms with the proper engineering controls to ensure that aerosol particles containing microorganisms <5 μm in diameter are kept inside the room. it is vital to maintain negative air pressure, as it ensures that the air flow is from outside into the room, which prevents such microorganisms from being carried into the hallway and adjacent spaces (more information on negative air pressure rooms can be found in the section on environmental infection control). if a patient is suspected of having a disease that requires airborne isolation, it is critical to have them wear a surgical mask until a negative pressure room is available. one of the most common sources for exposures is delay in placing the patient into airborne isolation. healthcare workers should don n-95 respirators while in the patient's room and the patient should wear a regular surgical mask during transportation or in an area that is not negative pressure. the use of a surgical mask for patients acts as a protection for those in the rest of the healthcare space.airborne isolation is perhaps the most prudent during bioweapons-related or high-consequence biological events. patients with high-consequence pathogens, such as monkeypox, sars, smallpox, viral hemorrhagic fevers, mers, and influenza, require airborne isolation with some additional isolation precautions. airborne isolation is the most challenging aspect of dealing with such biological threats as it requires the unique environmental controls that can pose challenging during an influx of patients with infectious diseases or in resource poor areas. a recent who report highlighted the role of healthcare facilities and infection control failures in mers outbreaks, which underscores the consequences of ppe and infection control failures [12, 13] . it is a common practice in healthcare that a patient with a cough/fever has to wear a mask until infectious etiologies can be ruled out. by simply having a potentially sick patient wear a surgical mask during the triage process, healthcare workers and other patients can be protected, regardless whether the patient has an infectious disease that is spread by droplet or airborne mechanisms. although airborne isolation can be the most taxing in terms of ensuring properly fitted masks are used and negative pressure rooms are available, these are vital components to infection control for high-consequence and highly transmissible diseases.in many cases, combining isolation precautions is most beneficial. as medical care grow is in complexity and more people are involved in patient care, there is a higher risk for spreading microorganisms via aerosol-generating procedures or contaminated surfaces/objects. additional ppe, like boot/shoe covers, caps, etc., may be utilized in such isolation practices. however, proper ppe donning and doffing practices should always be followed [33] . some microorganisms, like human herpesvirus 3 (hhv-3, varicella-zoster virus), require a combination of airborne and contact isolation due to the nature of the illness they cause and transmission mechanisms. it is also common in pediatric care to combine contact and droplet isolation during the care of patients with respiratory viruses (e.g., human metapneumonvirus, respiratory syncytial virus, rhinovirus) as children frequently spread such microorganisms through touch. for example, according to cdc guidelines, respiratory infectious diseases (except for influenza, pertussis, etc.) only require standard precautions in adults. however, in infants and young children, standard plus contact isolation is encouraged, which emphasizes the need to assess the patient population when considering isolation precautions during care. combination precautions are especially beneficial if microorganisms are isolated from multiple sources, such as a patient with carbapenem-resistant enterobacteriaceae isolated from both a draining wound and an endotracheal secretion. typically, contact precautions are sufficient. however, if the microorganism is isolated in respiratory secretions, it is suggested that droplet precautions also be used.there is an increasing practice of combining and enhancing isolation precautions for severe, high-consequence, or novel infections as research is ongoing regarding their transmission mechanisms. enhanced isolation goes beyond just combining transmission based precautions, but adding additional measures and processes [33, 34] . ebola virus disease, sars, mers, and many other diseases require a combination of isolation precautions that include airborne and contact prevention measures, but also enhanced isolation practices that include additional ppe and precautions. novel or emerging infectious diseases may require an amalgamation of isolation precautions, especially in advanced medical settings. the 2013-2016 ebola virus disease outbreak highlighted the challenges of managing patients in american hospitals and required substantial revisions to existing ppe and isolation guidelines. at the most rudimentary level, isolation precautions should be designed around the transmission mechanisms of the infectious disease. sars and mers coronaviruses are primarily spread through respiratory droplets, which caused significant issues in the early stages of outbreaks due to delayed airborne isolation. on the other hand, ebola virus disease cases within the united states revealed gaps in isolation guidance and preparedness when responding to patients with emerging infectious diseases. although aerosol-generating procedures were a topic of concern for sars and mers, respiratory precautions were already considered for isolation precautions. the limited experience and knowledge among healthcare workers surrounding ebola virus disease also posed unique challenges for training on enhanced isolation precautions and ppe during the 2013-2016 outbreak. overall, enhancing isolation precautions is a helpful strategy for handling a novel or emerging infectious disease, especially if newer or more invasive medical procedures or pediatric patients are involved. one of the most common lessons infection preventionists highlight for clinical staff is that it is always better to quickly initiate isolation precautions and remove them later than find out hours or days into a patient's care that they were contagious. patients may voice frustration with being placed in isolation, but delay in isolating a patient who potentially has an infectious disease, runs the risk of furthering disease transmission.visitors play a significant role in the well-being of hospitalized patients however, they also can facilitate the transmission of infectious diseases. healthcare facilities will ultimately need to grapple with balancing patient satisfaction and the potential for visitors to act as amplifiers of disease, especially during outbreaks. adherence to isolation precautions and hand hygiene is vital among healthcare workers, but the role of visitors has also become a topic of concern. there is substantial evidence for the horizontal transmission of even multi-drug resistant microorganisms involving the hands and attire of healthcare workers. however, consideration must also be given regarding the role of visitors in infection prevention and control [14] . while there is no universal recommendation for handling visitor compliance to standard or more advanced precautions, it is encouraged that those visiting a contagious patient should use ppe for their own safety. the society for healthcare epidemiology of america (shea) has provided recommendations that highlight the challenges in enforcing visitor compliance, but also notes that it is crucial to consider the infectious microorganism when dealing with visitors who are unwilling to follow precautions. proper education and guidance on ppe donning and doffing should be given to visitors. however, hand hygiene is perhaps the most important and likely practice to be followed. shea notes that "hospital visitors may play a significant role in the ecology of healthcare-associated infections" but few visit more than one patient, which makes the transmission between visitors and multiple patients less likely [14] . there is a consistent challenge in enforcing compliance with visitors and little research that has focused solely on their compliance and role within healthcareassociated disease transmission. several things should be considered to address visitors of patients in isolation for an infection. if the visitor is a household contact and likely to already be exposed the concern then becomes if they are already infected and potentially contagious. if the visitor is a breast-feeding mother who is involved in the care of the patient, it is unlikely isolation precautions can be enforced. many hospitals within the u.s. also make it a practice to screen visitors during respiratory virus season to prevent symptomatic visitors from exposing patients or staff [35] . this practice should be considered for visitors of such patients, especially if they are house-hold or close contacts and may be a source for further transmission.patients with high-consequence diseases, like ebola virus disease or sars, may pose a unique challenge for healthcare workers in terms of visitors and isolation precautions and should addressed on a case by case basis. cdc recommendations for visitors of ebola virus disease patients include that healthcare workers should "avoid entry of visitors into the patient's room" and that visits should be scheduled and controlled [15] . visitors played a significant role in furthering the spread of sars and mers during outbreaks and consideration should be given to restricting the number of visitors during such events. a recent who report on mers found that of the cases between december 2016 and july 2017, 31% were associated with transmission in a healthcare facility, including healthcare workers, patients sharing rooms/wards with mers patients, and visitors [12, 13] . cdc guidance for infection control during treatment of patients with sars also encourages limiting visits to those who are necessary for the patient's emotional well being. ensuring public health during outbreaks inherently trumps visitation [16] . visitors should be educated and encouraged to wear the necessary ppe when visiting an isolated patient. at the bare minimum, it is prudent to educate and encourage visitors to practice hand hygiene upon entering and exiting the patient's room.airborne isolations pose a challenge for visitor compliance. since hospitals can not support fit-testing visitors for n-95 masks or other respirators, each situation should be evaluated on an individual basis. surgical masks can provide some protection but will not provide a true seal. it is a common practice for many healthcare institutions to allow house-hold contacts to visit a patient in airborne isolation without a mask (or wearing a surgical mask) since exposure has likely already occurred. in this situation, consideration should be given for exposure from that visitor to healthcare workers and others after they have left the negative pressure room. it may be prudent to have visitors in such situations wear a surgical mask upon exiting the patient's room and wear it until they exit the hospital.visitor adherence to isolation precautions is challenging for even the most common hospitalizations. staff compliance and vigilance can be a strong rolemodel and reminder for visitors, especially in regards to hand hygiene. in the event of a bioweapons-related attack or outbreak of a highly infectious disease (i.e., ebola virus disease), visitor protocols should be established. unique events and microorganisms can pose a challenge for isolation precaution compliance and recommendations may need to be modified for novel or specific situations (i.e., caring for a pediatric patient and maintaining parent/guardian visitor isolations). changes to ipc guidelines for such unique situations should be done in conjunction with cdc (and other expert) guidance and discussed in a multidisciplinary setting to ensure support is facility-wide. in these situations, allowance of visitors and ppe recommendations should be made on a case by case basis. visitors do play a significant role in infection prevention and control within the healthcare environment, which makes their adherence to standard precautions and isolation precautions important and challenging.transmission-based precautions should be maintained until the patient is no longer considered capable of transmitting the disease. the cdc's guidelines for isolation precautions is an excellent resource for duration of isolation. consideration should be given for immune status of the patient as immunocompromised patients may need to be isolated for longer periods of time due to lengthier microorganism shedding.patient placement is a vital component to infection control measures, especially during an influx of ill patients. isolation practices and cohorting (grouping like patients in a shared hospital room or designated unit) plays a significant role in reducing the microbial burden within the healthcare environment. patient cohorting is a common practice during outbreaks or limited availability of negative pressure rooms however, it is important to consider transmission-based precautions during the assignment of patient rooms and establishing cohorted units.isolating patients with the appropriate transmission-based precautions is often done during admission. however, if patients are transferred to the healthcare facility and there is already suspicion of an infectious disease, this may also determine where the patient is placed. there is a myriad of components that impact patient placement and such efforts should be performed with ipc in mind. although many healthcare facilities have private rooms, there is always the possibility that patients may have to share rooms. efforts should be made to place patients with infectious diseases that are transmitted via the contact, droplet, or airborne route, in private rooms. consideration for route of transmission should always be made during patient admission, which would determine both isolation status and patient placement. patients needing airborne isolation require rooms that maintain negative pressure, which are typically only a handful of rooms per care area. these patients should be place within private negative pressure rooms. there is an increasingly common practice of requiring private rooms for patients infected with highly resistant microorganisms, such as carbapenem-resistant enterobacteriaceae (cre) or multidrug-resistant tb (mdr-tb). patient placement should be determined with transmission-based precautions in mind and efforts should be made to ensure patients with highly contagious or high consequence pathogens (e.g., ebola virus, sars and mers coronaviruses) are in private isolation rooms per cdc guidelines.despite our best efforts, during peak respiratory virus season or an influx of patients, private room availability may be constrained. cohorting is a common practice during times in which room availability may be scarce. there are two kinds of cohorting; sharing of private rooms or grouping patients within a defined entire hospital unit. if private rooms are not available, patients infected or colonized with the same microorganism (e.g., influenza a virus, mrsa) can be cohorted together to share a room. during respiratory virus season, cohorting based off clinical symptoms is often utilized. while it was necessary to cohort ebola virus disease patients during the western african 2013-2016 ebola virus disease outbreak, cdc guidelines for u.s. hospitals is that patients should be placed in a private room. if there should be an influx of patients with a high consequence pathogen, consideration for cohorting within the same room should be made on a case-by-case basis with infection prevention and control coordinating with the appropriate public health authorities.during an outbreak or influx of patients in which hospital bed capacity is strained, cohorting can be utilized for an entire hospital unit or well-defined space. designated hospital units can be cohorted for infected patients. these units should either be dedicated to patients affected by an outbreak (and the same microorganism) or of all patients in isolation who are cohorted within their rooms based off the previously mentioned criteria. this is an effective practice for segregating the patients and their visitors from healthy/non-infected patients. cohorting is also an effective strategy for reducing the risk of cross-contamination by staff. the cdc notes that "cohorting healthcare personnel to care only for patients infected or colonized with a single target pathogen limits further transmission to uninfected patients but is difficult to achieve in the face of staff shortages in hospitals and residential healthcare sites. however, if continued transmission is occurring after implementing routine infection control measures and creating patient cohorts, cohorting of healthcare personnel may be beneficial." [17] . designated staff can be assigned to cohorted patients or units. it is highly encouraged that healthcare workers (especially nurses) caring for cohorted patients, should not also be assigned to patients who are immunocompromised. cohorting in single rooms or in well-defined units can be an effective mechanism for reducing the spread of infectious diseases during patient care.the ebola virus disease outbreak in 2013-2016 highlighted the role of healthcare worker transmission, not only between themselves, but also among patients. cdc guidelines encouraged healthcare facilities to minimize staff with direct patient care. it was encouraged that those staff caring for a person under investigation (pui) or infected with ebola virus, be dedicated to that patient as to minimize the potential for additional exposure. during the 2011 outbreak of carbapenem-resistant klebsiella pneumonia at the national institute of health's clinical center, ipc staff adopted a series of control measures that included cohorting, limiting activities of hospital staff exposed to infected patients, and hiring monitors to ensure healthcare providers were wearing appropriate ppe and using hand hygiene [18] . facilities should have policies developed and in place for those staff who may be exposed during their duties. incidents involving bioweapons, novel or emerging infectious diseases, or high consequence pathogens, will surely require unique guidelines that could test the capacity for hospitals. it behooves healthcare facilities and preparedness efforts to consider staffing and cohorting needs during such challenging situations.the flow of patients from triage to discharge also poses vulnerabilities for infectious disease transmission. the initial screening of patients can be an effective infection control measure for rapid isolation and ppe utilization. proper communication and triage questions can aid in the rapid identification of patients with increased risk for infectious diseases. hasty identification of a patient with a potential infection within their first moments within the healthcare facility can substantially decrease the risk for additional exposure. once admitted to a healthcare facility, patients are frequently transported for diagnostic tests and care. the transportation of a patient can also act as a facilitator for disease transmission if infection control practices are not maintained.the initial interaction a patient within a healthcare facility or urgent care unit is the first opportunity to identify risk for infection. the triage process determines the degree of urgency of the patient's condition, which then decides the order they are seen. during this process, there are many opportunities to not only identify patients with potentially contagions infections, but also rapidly isolate them to prevent further exposure to staff and other patients. it is encouraged for triage staff to provide patients presenting with a cough, (i.e., a potential respiratory infection) a mask to wear during their time in a waiting room. this simple act can be hugely preventative, whether the patient has influenza, mers, or tb. while the triage process primarily focuses on medical questions, this is also an opportunity for questions regarding international travel and fever. since the sars outbreak in 2002, it has become a relatively common practice to incorporate a question within the patient screening/triage process regarding international travel and fever. travel history is always an important component to the patient's medical history but we should not forget its significance during triage and patient screening. presence of fever is a standard part of the medical triage and intake during initial screening and if the patient is febrile, questions regarding travel history become that much more important. there are a mixture of recommendations regarding processes, but it is consistently thought that if a patient with an acute illness (e.g., fever within 2 weeks, diarrhea) has traveled outside the u.s. within the last 21 days, the patient should be isolated. isolation should be based upon the presenting signs and symptoms but providers should also consider the area of travel and if there are ongoing epidemiologically-significant outbreaks. during outbreaks, like those of sars and mers, screening and triage can include questions regarding not just travel, but also exposure or close contact with a sick person who recently traveled to those areas or was infected. the screening and triage process is especially beneficial for early detection and isolation of potentially infectious patients because it can easily be modified. screening questions can be added or removed based upon healthcare needs. while the standard questions remain the same, questions about specific travel or exposures can be added during times of public health crises. questions related to travel history should be maintained during all times though and it is encouraged that patients with an acute illness and international travel within 21 days, be placed in a private room until further evaluation by a healthcare provider. measles and tb are frequent suspected in patients with respiratory symptoms and a recent international travel history. however, the inclusion of travel history in medical triage and screening can also potentially capture cases of avian influenza, mers, viral hemorrhagic fever, etc.patients are frequently transported throughout the hospital during their care, which can make maintaining isolation precautions challenging. it is encouraged for patient transportation to be limited, but there are several recommendations to further reduce the spread of disease during patient movement. using appropriate barriers is crucial during the transportation of an infectious patient.patients in contact isolation are encouraged to change into a new hospital gown or attire and should be transported on a wheelchair or bed covered with a clean sheet (or other barrier). infectious skin lesions should be covered. the transporter should wear the appropriate ppe while assisting the patient into or out of the covered wheelchair or bed, which should then be removed upon exiting the room (gown and gloves are not required during the transport of patients in contact precautions). the cdc notes that "when transport or movement in any healthcare setting is necessary, ensure that infected or colonized areas of the patient's body are contained and covered." [17] . those patients in droplet or airborne isolation should wear a mask during the transportation process. it is important that notification of the patient's isolation status be done to the receiving department or healthcare personnel to facilitate the continuation of isolation precautions.despite best efforts, patients are not always isolated or transported appropriately. if a patient with an infectious disease has potentially exposed a considerable number of staff and other patients, infection prevention and control programs may be used to the contain further spread. all exposures are not equal, meaning that mrsa is a common microorganism within the community and an exposure response is often not warranted, whereas exposure to mycobacteria or a more severe illness may require follow-up. these responses should be determined by the ipc program, occupational health, and the medical directors associated with these programs in conjunction with hospital administration. post-exposure prophylaxis may be necessary for staff and patients, but medication distribution should be determined by the appropriate hospital experts. hospitals and ipc programs should have a functioning process for determining patients with exposure to specific staff or in other patients (i.e., those in the waiting lobby of an emergency department). commonly, exposure monitoring and notifications are used for patients, visitors, and staff exposed to measles, pertussis, etc., as post-exposure prophylaxis is recommended. ipc programs might monitor admitted patients who were exposed or potentially isolate them during the incubation period. exposures may also be the result of infectious healthcare staff, which may require patient notification. overall, these events should be addressed on an individual basis and adequate response measures should be applied to reduce the time between exposure and follow-up.although isolation and ppe utilization are a significant portion of preventing the spread of disease during hospitalization or medical treatment, the role of environmental transmission should not be forgotten. many diseases can be spread through fomites and poor consideration for the environmental aspects of infection control only fuel transmission. there is considerable literature on the recommendations and guidelines for environmental infection control, specifically by the cdc, osha, who, and apic. this section will provide a very high-level overview of these publications. the goal of this section is to raise awareness for environmental mechanisms of transmission and encourage consideration during the development of preparedness and response plans. healthcare environmental components, such as building design, waste management, disinfection and sterilization, and air monitoring, are critical to reducing the spread of microorganisms, but the ability to make changes may be hindered by high costs and other restraints.cleaning and disinfection of non-critical surfaces is a basic premise of infection control practices, especially standard precautions [17] . these practices become even more significant when caring for patients with infectious diseases. cleaning is the process of removing pathogens, whereas disinfecting kills germs on the surface, and sanitizing lowers the number of pathogens on an object to a safe level. rutala and weber provide an extensive outline of such methods for cleaning, which include:• sterilization: destroys all microorganisms, including bacterial spores • high-level disinfection: destroys all microorganisms except high numbers of bacterial spores • intermediate level disinfection: destroys vegetative bacterial, mycobacteria, most viruses, most fungi, but not bacterial spores • low-level disinfection: destroys vegetative bacteria, some fungi and viruses, but not mycobacteria or spores.such practices should be closely followed, especially in the event of novel or severe illnesses requiring enhanced precautions. disinfection recommendations may be revised based upon recommendations from osha and the cdc, as was seen during treatment of patients with ebola virus disease in u.s. hospitals. environmental contamination can be a significant mechanism for disease transmission during patient care and invasive procedures can increase this substantially. poorly disinfected or sterilized equipment has been the culprit of many healthcareassociated infections and outbreaks. high-touch surfaces or objects, like sinks and bedrails, require frequent cleaning and disinfection. frequency and intensity of cleaning and disinfection may also need to be increased depending up on the "degree of environmental contamination" [17] . environmental protection agency (epa)registered disinfectant should be used to combat the environmental contamination that occurs during patient care. it is important to note that certain pathogens may be resistant to routine disinfectants (e.g., rotaviruses, noroviruses, clostridium difficile, bacillus anthracis), meaning that healthcare workers should ensure the cleaning product they are using is effective against the specific microorganism. disinfection and sterilization of medical equipment should always follow manufacturer recommendations and be handled with care.there are frequently forgotten objects and surfaces that are common culprits for contamination and should be highlighted during routine cleaning. computer keyboards, stethoscopes, and clinical work stations are all areas that routinely have a high microbial burden and are frequently neglected during cleaning. there is extensive literature on practices for disinfection and sterilization, but at the most basic level, preparedness and response efforts should work to ensure routine cleaning and disinfection is done appropriately and correctly [36] . in emergency situations, a quick lesson is always to work "from clean to dirty" and consider all surfaces and objects. environmental contamination is a continued source for disease transmission in healthcare. these practices should be strengthened during routine care and also refined to meet special needs during public health emergencies and care of patients in enhanced precautions.hospital ventilation systems are a critical component to patient safety. these systems maintain negative pressure within airborne isolation rooms and positive pressure in operating/procedure rooms, as well as protective precaution rooms (for severely immunocompromised patients). negative pressure rooms will become a critical need in outbreaks of microorganisms that require airborne isolation. these rooms should have high-efficiency particulate air (hepa) and should also follow cdc guidelines for environmental infection control regarding air exchanges per hour (ach) (i.e. 12 ach for new construction as of 2001; 6 ach for construction before 2001) and be monitored in accordance with engineers' and manufacturers' recommendations [19] . the negative pressure rooms should maintain air pressure by being properly sealed and are encouraged to have self-sealing doors and ante-rooms. the heating, ventilation, air conditioning (hvac) systems should also have humidity monitors to ensure the moisture levels are adequate as to discourage microbial growth. the cdc has specific recommendations for air-handling systems in healthcare facilities, which are vital to patient safety and reduction of disease transmission. in the event of a biological attack or outbreak, ensuring that these systems are operational and can maintain proper negative pressure in designated rooms will be of the utmost importance. although negative pressure rooms are limited on each hospital unit, there is potential to convert entire units to negative pressure through adjustments to the ventilation system and sealing of the unit [20] .environmental cleaning, waste management, and handling of textiles are all components of environmental service work in healthcare. these duties are especially important upon discharge of the patient when a deep clean of the room is required (commonly called "terminal cleaning"). within a single day of admission, the composition of a hospital room's microbes begin to change and mirror that of the patient [21] . combatting the "bacterial communities" that develop within the healthcare environment is an ongoing struggle that emphasizes the important of adequate and consistent environment services. environmental services staff frequently manage these tasks and should be aware of the patient's isolation status so that staff utilizes proper ppe and ensures use of proper environmental protection agency (epa)-registered disinfectants (example: clostridium difficile requires the use of bleach products to kill spores). typically, hospitals have contracts with linen services and waste management companies (for both regular and medical waste). however, practices may change during the care of patients with high consequence pathogens that require enhanced isolation. cdc guidelines regarding medical waste, dishes and eating utensils and textiles all note that these objects have not been implicated in sars coronavirus transmission and that routine procedures should be utilized [22] . in the case of ebola virus, recommendations were significantly different. for example, despite ebola virus forming enveloped virions (which are susceptible to a wide range of hospital disinfectants), no epa-registered disinfectants had labels that specifically cited efficacy against the virus. consequently, cdc recommendations were changed to encourage use of epa-registered disinfectants that were effective against viruses that form non-enveloped virions, which are more resistant to hospital germicidal disinfectant cleaning products. cdc recommendations also included discarding of all textiles to avoid staff exposure during the laundering process [15] . many hospitals developed ebola virus preparedness plans that placed environmental service duties more on the clinical staff caring for a pui instead of potential exposing additional staff. environmental services practices should be closely followed during routine patient care but may require modification during the care of patients in enhanced precautions or during outbreaks.in the pursuit of more effective and efficient cleaning and disinfecting processes, newer technologies have been utilized, like that of ultraviolet disinfection technology and copper-infused linen. environmental monitoring to check room cleaning quality is also a frequently used measure to test true cleaning of the space. overall, environmental infection control by means of environmental services staff, textile care, and waste management are critical components to breaking the chain of infection. the efficacy of these duties and the adherence to transmission-based precautions when working throughout a healthcare facility is a monumental task and becomes even more critical during outbreaks.there is a considerable amount of literature and regulatory guidance on environmental infection control as it relates to water however, this section will focus on only a handful. firstly, facilities should consider the mechanisms for preventing the spread of waterborne microorganisms through proper hand hygiene, cleaning of sinks, avoidance of decorative fountains and fish tanks in patient-care areas, and maintaining proper temperatures for hot and cold water [19] . should water disruptions occur, corrective decontamination of the hot water system may be necessary, which can include flushing the water lines and outlets with chlorine and/or superheated water. hospitals should have contingency plans for water in the event that water disruptions are prolonged due to intrusions or contamination.construction, renovation, remediation, repair, and demolition within a healthcare environment can be sources for infection. all work must be reviewed by infection prevention and control to coordinate prevention methods that include containment barriers and post-construction cleaning. such efforts are necessary as demolition can lead to airborne infections associated with fungal spores in immunocompromised patients. moreover, if the proper planning is not done, engineering outages can impact negative pressure rooms, which decreases their efficacy. conversion of spaces to negative pressure wards or specialty isolation units should be planned and tested ahead of time to ensure proper ventilation is possible.in the day-to-day world of medical care, infection prevention and control practices, like hand hygiene, frequently have poor compliance [23] . while there are a multitude of issues that ipc programs face, perhaps the most damning one is internally. typically, ipc programs are seen as cost centers and not revenue generators, which frequently translates to lackluster support and prioritization [24] . medicine and healthcare are competitive markets, meaning that those programs seen from this light are likely to receive cuts. while there have been studies evaluating the cost of healthcare-associated infections in relation to that of an ipc program, there is a considerable gap within the research regarding ipc programs and response during outbreaks or cases of high-consequence pathogens. given that a single healthcareassociated infection (hai), like a surgical-site infection, can cost upwards of $50,000 and preventing just a handful of these infections can pay for the entire budget of an ipc program, it is not unreasonable to think that such cost-saving could be applied to biothreat response within hospitals [25] . the cases of ebola virus disease in dallas, texas, in 2014 exposed the lack of preparedness within u.s. hospitals, poor compliance with infection control, and the cost of treating such a severe illness with enhanced precautions. it was estimated that the cost of treating a hospitalized patient with ebola virus disease in the united states is $30,000 per day [26] . despite spending $60 billion on biodefense since 2001 to prepare for biothreats, a single imported case of ebola virus disease revealed deep breaks within u.s. preparedness efforts [27] . during the 2013-2016 ebola virus disease outbreak, it frequently fell on the ipc programs to coordinate hospital-wide preparedness and response efforts to ensure facilities were prepared to identify, isolate, and potentially treat a patient. while such events highlight the importance of ipc programs and the diversity of their responsibilities, for many in healthcare the looming threat of ebola has passed and so has the support. the focus for many ipc programs has gone back to preventing hais and ebola virus disease response plans have been neglected. a 2015 apic survey found that 92% of ipc program leaders believe they were more prepared than the previously year to receive a patient with a highly infectious disease [28] . while this is encouraging, would hospitals and ipc programs feel the same today, several years after the 2013-2016 ebola virus disease outbreak? there is a substantial need within healthcare to truly support ipc programs for not only day-to-day hai prevention, but also as a means of establishing an all-hazards approach. infection prevention and control, as shown within this chapter, involves collaboration with many internal and external partners to ensure patient safety. ipc programs are sentinels within hospitals, alerting internal and external partners of issues, so that they may form a collective response effort. it behooves bio-preparedness efforts to utilize ipc programs and consider ipc practices as a vital resource for disease control, medical countermeasures, and surveillance.while advances in medicine have given us the capabilities to increasingly counter disease, the invasiveness of certain medical procedures and treatments can pose substantial infection control risks. the treatment of thomas duncan, the first ebola virus-diagnosed patient in the united states, in a seemingly "regular" hospital without specialized training or facilities to handle a patient under enhanced precautions, points to this very dilemma. in the weeks following his hospitalization, there were conversations in hospital around the u.s. as to the safety and ethical considerations for more invasive and riskier medical interventions during the treatment of a patient with such an infectious disease. medical interventions like invasive surgery, dialysis, insertion of central lines, ventilation, extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ecmo), or even labor and delivery, all carry inherent risks for the staff performing them. the outbreaks of sars and mers coronaviruses, and ebola virus disease all challenged ppe and isolation recommendations, requiring changes to protect healthcare workers and visitors during treatment, especially those interventions that generate aerosols. these outbreaks have taught vital lessons regarding the life-saving capabilities of modern medicine and technology, but also reveal a lack of preparedness consideration for medical interventions in patients with such severe and uncommon diseases. future efforts should establish treatment and procedure plans with these diseases in mind, drawing on lessons learned and creating new protocols so that afflicted patients may receive the full range of medical care and healthcare workers can perform such work with minimal risk.perhaps one of the most challenging aspects of infection prevention during the ebola virus disease response in american hospitals was the continuous evolution of guidelines for isolation, ppe, disinfection, handling of medical waste, etc. the blue ribbon study panel on biodefense highlighted this very issue in its recommendations, pointing to the "need for a standardized process to develop and issue clinical infection control guidance for biological events." [29] . the recommendations from the cdc regarding isolation precautions, specifically the use of negative pressure rooms/airborne isolation and the necessary ppe, were an evolving process in the days following thomas duncan's hospitalization. as an infection preventionist, these days were taxing due to the constant scramble to not only train staff on the appropriate donning and doffing procedures, but even acquire the correct ppe. novel diseases like sars and mers also tax the public health and healthcare response systems in terms of providing adequate recommendations for isolation. while these fluctuations are understandable, in the event of a biological attack, fear and hysteria will likely play a larger role than in naturally occurring outbreaks, which makes the stability of ipc recommendations that much more important. healthcare workers must feel confident in not only their training, but also the efficacy of their ppe. it is crucial that future efforts include stronger processes to standardize infection control recommendations and guidelines during these critical times.biodefense and global health security efforts work to strengthen capacity to respond to infectious disease threats. these efforts are imperative to preventing, detecting, and responding to biological events, whether they are intentional, accidental, or natural. within these plans, there is often a considerable gap regarding the role of infection prevention and control and the programs within healthcare facilities. there have been several reports and recommendations in recent years to strengthen biodefense efforts. the health sector resilience checklist for high-consequence infectious diseases from the johns hopkins center for biosecurity points to the importance of infection control practices and their significance, but there is little overall mention of the programs within hospitals. this checklist focuses on the adherence to infection control practices, like that of the blue ribbon study panel on biodefense report, but tends to neglect the role of these programs. the same can be said of more recent pandemic influenza and hospital preparedness plans. unfortunately, there tends to be a gap in the literature regarding ipc within biodefense efforts and although most focus on larger components (disease surveillance, ppe, medical countermeasures), the utilization of ipc programs should not go ignored. hospitals already have this tool available and it behooves preparedness efforts to employ it. there is a continuous trend of pointing to infection prevention and control processes and neglecting the programs responsible for ensuring they are followed. the systemic gap in preparedness efforts citing infection prevention and control practices but failing to account for the program and role of infection preventionists reveals a fundamental lack of truly understanding the role of these programs and internal hospital operations. biodefense efforts inherently include infection control practices as they are the foundation for preventing the spread of disease, but this gap regarding the inclusion of ipc programs does them a disservice. hospitals already struggle with following ipc practices to reduce the spread of infection. biodefense efforts should strengthen the existing ipc infrastructure and ensure processes are effectively followed. if hospitals are already struggling with hand hygiene and ppe compliance, how will they manage bioterrorism acts or pandemics?the problem is twofold: current compliance to infection control processes is often substandard, and the ipc programs are frequently under-utilized and/or -prioritized. biodefense efforts should seek to increase infection prevention and control efforts and strengthen processes while building upon the existing ipc program infrastructure that can be an effective tool. infection prevention and control is a significant resource in the biodefense arsenal and should be seen as an independent component, like surveillance and medical countermeasures. these programs are already in place and while they focus on the day-to-day problems of hais, they can be utilized to better serve and strengthen the u.s. healthcare infrastructure and thus preparedness. strengthening ipc programs and processes benefits health security whether it is a local outbreak, an act of bioterrorism, or a pandemic.hospitals are the frontline for biological events and their capacity to adequately detect and respond to such threats can either halt or help the spread of disease. infection prevention and control practices are existing guidelines and recommendations that seek to combat disease transmission during medical care. ipc programs within hospitals work to ensure staff are educated on and compliant with such practices to protect patients, visitors, and healthcare workers. these programs are also an integral source for infectious disease surveillance and a connective tissue within hospitals, making them a significant contributor to public health surveillance. outbreaks of sars, mers, ebola virus disease, and multi-drug resistant microorganisms, have all revealed the importance of ipc and the devastating consequences of poor compliance. continued failure to prioritize ipc programs and practices, as well as the role they serve within outbreaks and growing biological threats, will only serve to weaken preparedness and response efforts. defense against biological threats requires strong infection control practices, programs, and the ability to adequately employ these efforts prior to and during public health emergencies. healthcare is a critical infrastructure, meaning that if hospitals are amplifiers for disease transmission and sources for negative patient outcomes, the impact can be devastating. infection prevention and control is an essential resource against all biological threats, regardless of their origin.the community setting and hygiene behavior play an important role in controlling influenza, whether seasonal or pandemic, and emerging infectious diseases provide a good chance for promoting universal preventive measures such as hand hygiene [1] . the world health organization (who) and other health organizations have stressed the need to highlight the importance of non-pharmaceutical interventions (npi) such as hand hygiene, social distancing and face mask as options to prevent influenza transmission in the community [2, 3] . nevertheless, because some npi measures are readily available and applicable for the general population they can be routinely instituted during influenza season regardless of pandemic threat evidence [4] [5] [6] [7] . household transmission of influenza can be reduced by the use of npi, but low acceptability of some npi such as facemasks make it more difficult to comply with some of these recommendations.hand hygiene is a key intervention for reducing transmission of acute respiratory infections (ari) and other infections such as diarrhea in community settings. hand hygiene has been specifically recommended for prevention of diseases with pandemic potential, such as severe acute respiratory syndrome and for pandemic influenza ah1n1pdm09. according to aiello et al. improvements in hand hygiene resulted in reductions in respiratory illness by 21 %, hand-hygiene education with use of non-antibacterial soap, being the most beneficial intervention [7] .yet studies examining hygiene practices during respiratory illness and interventions targeting aerosol transmission are needed [8] . it has been postulated that the effect of interventions may be higher in the pandemic scenario because of public anxiety giving way to higher rates of adherence, similar to what was observed during the sars epidemic [9] .during 2009 influenza pandemic there was some uncertainty as to which npi to recommend, especially whether facemasks should be endorsed [10] .the aim of the study was to investigate the effectiveness of non-pharmaceutical interventions in preventing cases of influenza in children in the community setting in 2009 pandemic and 2010-2011 post-pandemic/seasonal epidemic.a multicenter matched case-control study was performed in 7 regions of spain from july 2009 to may 2011, with controls matched for age, hospital and date of hospitalization. for each confirmed hospitalized case of pandemic influenza, 1 confirmed outpatient case and 3 controls (2 hospitalized and 1 outpatient) were selected. demographic variables, underlying medical conditions, use of antiviral agents, vaccines received and hygiene habits were collected for all cases and controls. the confirmed outpatient cases were obtained from the sentinel primary care influenza surveillance network; of these only confirmed pediatric cases and controls which had been previously selected to match hospitalized influenza confirmed cases recruited for the multicenter case control study were used in this study [11] . all participating centers were granted approval by their ethics committees to carry out the study, namely the following: for each of the 7 regions where this study was performed the setting of recruited cases was the primary care sentinel pediatricians from the influenza surveillance network [12] .only influenza ah1n1pmd09 virus was isolated in both influenza seasons studied. pandemic season was considered from july 2009 to august 2010 when who declared the end of pandemic period] and post-pandemic or seasonal from october 2010 to may 2011. outpatient children between 6-months and 17 years old with laboratory confirmed influenza and matched controls were recruited [12] .size of the sample was calculated for the main study and the number of pediatric outpatient cases selected as outpatient controls for a hospitalized case made up the subset sample for this study on community based pediatric influenza cases and controls. patients with influenza-like-illness (ili) in whom influenza a h1n1pdm09 virus infection was confirmed by real time-polymerase chain reaction (rt-pcr) were selected from the outpatient primary care influenza surveillance sentinel network as cases. an outpatient control was selected from patients attending those same primary healthcare centers (phc) consulting for other illness than ili or other acute respiratory tract infection (ari) considering ili symptoms as sudden onset of symptoms, fever and at least one of the following: malaise, headache, muscle pain; and at least one of the following: cough, sore throat, shortness of breath. outpatient cases and controls were matched according to age (±3 years), geographical area and consultation date allowing for a range of ±10 days.the following demographic variables and pre-existing medical conditions were collected for all study participants: age, sex, ethnicity, educational level and smoking habits of parents risk factors for acquiring influenza [history of pneumonia in the last two years, asthma, renal failure, diabetes, disabling neurological disease, neoplasia, transplantation, morbid obesity (bmi according to age) [13] , treatment with systemic or inhaled corticosteroids, and antibiotic treatment within 90 days prior to onset of symptoms of the case and influenza (pandemic and seasonal)], [13] . children were considered vaccinated with the seasonal influenza vaccine if they had received a dose of the vaccine at least 14 days before the onset of symptoms (cases] or the date of consultation for controls. for pandemic influenza vaccine children were considered vaccinated if they had received the pandemic influenza vaccine at least 7 days before the onset of symptoms (cases) or the date of consultation for controls. for the pneumococcal conjugate vaccines, a child was considered vaccinated if he had received the recommended doses according to age. cases were considered vaccinated if they had received the last dose (or only dose if this was the schedule corresponding to their age) ≥14 days before symptom onset. controls were considered vaccinated if they had received the last dose (or only dose if this was the schedule corresponding to their age) ≥14 days the date of consultation of the matched case. information on the vaccination status was obtained from primary healthcare centre registers or vaccination cards.a structured interview was used to determine whether study participants/parents had received information on preventing the transmission of pandemic influenza. participants (or their parents if they were under 12 years) were asked about the use of non-pharmaceutical interventions as yes/no variables (frequent hand washing: 1-4 times/day >5 times/day, use of alcohol-based hand sanitizers, hand washing at home after touching potentially contaminated surfaces on public transport or in shops) and , frequency of public transportation use, and the use of face masks) seven days before the onset of symptoms in cases and controls. frequency was asked for each variable and then broken down into two groups.there were no refusals to participate in the study.a bivariate comparison was made between cases and controls for demographic variables and pre-existing medical conditions using pearson's chi-square test for categorical variables and the student t test for continuous variables. the crude odds ratio (or) were estimated using the mcnemar test. a multivariate analysis was performed using conditional logistic regression to estimate adjusted or (aor), including age group (0-4 years and 5-17 years) and non-pharmaceutical interventions. both seasons with circulating a h1n1pmd09 virus were also analyzed separately for the same variables. the analysis was performed using spss version 18.all information collected was treated as confidential in strict observance of legislation on observational studies. the study was approved by the ethics committees of the participating hospitals. written informed consent was obtained from patients included before interviews were carried out.a total of 239 cases with confirmed influenza ah1n1pmd09 virus infection and 239 matched controls were included. cases had a mean age of 5.4 years (sd = ±4.5), 42.3 % were females, 88.9 % were caucasian, 74.3 % had secondary or higher education, 36.6 % had parents smokers and only 0.9 % had received any influenza vaccine while 35.9 % had received at least one dose of pneumococcal vaccine and 32.7 % were fully vaccinated according to their age. controls had similar characteristics with no significant differences (table 1) .cases presented a higher prevalence of underlying stratifying the 0-4 age group into 0-2 years and 3-4 years, no significant differences were observed in cases and controls with respect to the questions referring to having received information regarding influenza prevention, frequency of daily hand washing or use of alcoholbased hand sanitizers or hand washing after touching potentially contaminated surfaces.in the light of the possibility of other future influenza pandemics, examining public response to the a h1n1pmd09 influenza pandemic can provide information in terms of willingness to adopt preventive behaviors. in a polling study conducted by steel fisher et al. in five countries [14] , in all countries the most commonly adopted personal protective behavior was to wash hands or use hand sanitizer more often.this study highlights the effectiveness of hand washing in preventing infection due to influenza a h1n1pmd09 in the pediatric community setting. it has been proven by several authors that children at school age are a key factor in the spread of influenza epidemics [15] [16] [17] . this fact is underscored by several studies which have proven the effects of school closures on influenza outbreaks suggesting that school closure can reduce transmission of pandemic and seasonal influenza among schoolchildren, although the optimal school closure strategy is unclear [18] .yet, although a large proportion of students may have adequate knowledge on influenza, only some of them practice preventive measures [19] . in our study we found a negative association for influenza infection for both washing more than 5 times per day and hand washing after touching contaminated surfaces in the school age group [5-17 years] . this fact stresses the importance of health education in which parents and teachers play an important role. no protective effect was observed in the multivariate analysis for the use of alcohol-based hand sanitizers. the use of masks could not be assessed due to the low number of responders to this question in the pediatric outpatient setting. although there is limited data to support the use of face masks and/or respirators in healthcare and community settings, evidence suggests that given the potential loss of effectiveness with incorrect usage, general advice should be to only use masks/ respirators under very particular, specified circumstances, and in combination with other personal protective practices [20] . other studies in our setting have found an adherence rate of < 50 %, and suggested that facemasks are not useful in reducing seasonal influenza infections in the community due to their low acceptance, although they could be effective in those who wore them [11] . yet other authors find there is evidence to support the use of masks and/or respirators in healthcare or community settings [21] . mask use is best undertaken as part of a package of personal protection, especially including hand hygiene in both home and healthcare settings. however, examination of the literature has shown that most of the studies examined were too small to reliably detect what would be anticipated to be moderate effects [22] .frequency of public transportation use was included despite no recommendation was made by the spanish health authorities to avoid using public transportation during the pandemic, because it can be considered a mass gathering site and a source of infection transmission.in our study only 0.9 % of the children with underlying chronic medical conditions, who were eligible for vaccination, had received any influenza vaccine, a fact that was also observed by altmann et al. they showed that 93 % of these children, had not been vaccinated [23] . low vaccination coverage among children aged <5 years who are at greatest risk for influenza associated complications, and the low coverage among older children and adolescents suggest that continued implementation of existing strategies and the development of new strategies to improve seasonal vaccination coverage are needed [24] . the significant burden of influenza, on children should encourage upgrading vaccination coverage in these age groups and especially for those included in risk groups for whom yearly vaccination is recommended [25, 26] .as other authors have underscored, our data also showed that clinical and epidemiological characteristics of children infected with pandemic h1n1 2009 influenza a versus those infected with post-pandemic/seasonal influenza ah1n1pmd09 [27, 28] bear no significant differences. for both seasons, significant differences were shown for cases having presented with pneumonia in the previous two years, asthma, inhaled corticosteroid treatment and presenting with more than 1 co-morbidity.there are several limitations to the study which have to be considered, especially because of possible recall bias with respect to report of hand-washing behavior among cases and controls, although the questionnaires were completed within few days from consultation. there can also be a social desirability bias because of the fact that people might say they do wash their hands or use a hand sanitizer because that is what they are suppose to do. this may carry a certain misclassification of respondents which can not be accurately assessed.basic infection prevention interventions, including hand hygiene [using soap and water or alcohol-based hand sanitizers), have been shown to reduce the spread of respiratory viruses, particularly among young children [29] . stebbins et al. have shown that a respiratory hygiene intervention that included hand sanitizer use reduced school absences related to influenza a. although no significant effect of the intervention on the primary study outcome of all laboratory-confirmed influenza cases was found, there were statistically significant differences in protocol-specified ancillary outcomes. children in intervention schools had significantly fewer laboratory-confirmed influenza a infections than children in control schools [30] . allison et al. concluded that hand gel use is a feasible strategy in settings were frequent hand washing might not be possible, such as in elementary schools, and even though acceptance of facemask use was low, most teachers stated they would use masks in their classroom in a pandemic [31] . evidence from household, as well as institutions, demonstrate that personal hygiene continue to be a key prevention strategy against infection, thus it is necessary to stress the importance of keeping proper hygiene and cleaning practices to reduce the risk of spreading infection [32] .the success of an npi or a set of npis depends on both its efficacy and the feasibility of implementing it with relevant populations. if npis are to be used in community settings during a severe influenza season or pandemic, to increase acceptability on the part of the adults is of utmost importance. without such acceptance, it is highly unlikely that children and their supervising adults will participate [33] .this study emphasizes the importance of simple infection prevention measures, such as hand hygiene which have been proven effective to reduce the transmission of infection in schools and the spread to household contacts by papenburg j,et al. [34] . frequent hand washing should be recommended to prevent influenza infection in the family and community setting and in special in the school age group. coronaviruses, members of the family coronaviridae and subfamily coronavirinae, were initially considered epizoonotic in nature within avian and mammalian hosts (peeri et al., 2020; sahin et al., 2020) . the transition of coronaviruses to human hosts has resulted in acute respiratory diseases in humans. the severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus (sars-cov-1), middle east respiratory syndrome coronavirus (mers-cov) and the severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2; cause of coronavirus disease 2019 or covid-19) have been associated with extensive outbreaks in 2002 -2003 , clusters of disease from 2012 to 2020 (mers) and an ongoing 2019-2020 covid-19 pandemic (menachery et al., 2017; jiang et al., 2020; who, 2020; xu et al., 2020) . the infectivity doses for human disease by sars-cov-2 and other coronaviruses have yet to be defined (peeri et al., 2020; sahin et al., 2020) . a dose-response model developed for sars-cov-1 indicated that 50% of the exposed individuals would develop illness when exposed to 280 plaque forming units of the virus (watanabe et al., 2010) . given the gaps in our knowledge, the magnitude of the risk due to virally contaminated surfaces is uncertain and should be examined further.coronaviruses are positive-stranded rna viruses with an envelope containing glycoprotein spikes. the 26-32 kb genomes of coronaviruses are some of the largest among rna viruses. while the targets of antiviral drugs against the coronavirus that causes covid-19 could include its unique glycosylated spike and the m pro viral protease (jin et al., 2020) (figure 1) , curtailing the spread of the virus remains the first line of defense and a crucial step to reduce the spread of the disease. disinfectants and biocides effective against coronaviruses may work by inactivating the enveloped virus due to their affinity for the lipid-containing viral envelope, the capsid, and the genome (pratelli, 2007) . the use of antimicrobials for hand sanitation (hulkower et al., 2011) , fomite disinfection, and as nasal sprays and oral rinses (eggers et al., 2015b; graf et al., 2018) , may reduce human-to-human transmission of the virus. the ongoing covid-19 outbreak has resulted in shortages of commercial alcohol-based sanitizers, rubbing alcohol, and personal protective equipment (ppe); therefore, this review is intended to provide information regarding a range of alternative biocides effective in eliminating or reducing the presence of coronaviruses from fomites and other potential sources of cross contamination.food processing plants and retail facilities often contain a high density of workers working in close proximity. the rapid spread of the sars-cov-2 virus indicates that its transmission may be multifactorial (otter et al., 2016) (figures 2, 3) such as though aerosols, droplets and fomites. while many food processing facilities have hazard analysis critical control points (haccp) plans that involve cleaning, sanitation and hand washing programs, several facilities have reported increased spread of sars-cov-2 among workers, resulting in shut downs and possible food shortages (hart et al., 2020) .transmission of sars-cov-2 is different from that of foodborne bacterial pathogens and viruses, which are transmitted via the fecal-oral route. the transmission of sars-cov-2 can not be controlled only through hand washing and sanitizer use and requires interventions that prevent aerosol and droplet based transmission of the virus. a recent study of sars-cov-2 infected patients indicated that higher viral loads existed in the nose than the throat (zou et al., 2020) . nasal shedding of virus particles was similar to that the influenza virus (zou et al., 2020) , with both symptomatic and asymptomatic individuals having similar viral loads during the first 10 days of infection, after which individuals with severe illness have a 60 fold increase in viral load . control of respiratory transmission of sars-cov-2 through aerosols and droplets, as well as transmission by contact with contaminated fomites (figure 3 ) requires synergy between conventional and novel techniques, including oral and nasal rinses with approved antimicrobials, as well as hand washing, donning of face masks and social isolation (bali and chaudhry, 2020) .sars-cov-2, similar to sars-cov-1, can remain viable in aerosols for a duration of 3 h. recent studies on sars-cov-2 and previous studies on sars-cov-1 and mers-cov indicate that coronaviruses can survive on surfaces such as plastics and stainless steel for durations up to or exceeding 5 days (sizun et al., 2000; casanova et al., 2010; van doremalen et al., 2020) . shorter survival of sars-cov-2 was observed on printed and tissue papers, but the virus was recovered from the surfaces of surgical masks after 7 days (chin et al., 2020) . further recovery of sars-cov-2 from wood and fabric for up to 2 days indicates that commonly encountered surfaces can harbor sars-cov-2 (casanova et al., 2010; otter et al., 2016) . studies using the endemic human coronavirus strain (hcov) 229e indicate that the coronavirus may maintain infectivity for a week's duration on inert surfaces, while the transmissible gastroenteritis virus (tgev), another coronavirus, survived for a month at 4 • c. similarly, longer durations of virus recovery (14 days) were observed at 4 • c for sars-cov-2 (chin et al., 2020) . factors such as viral load and humidity also influence the survival of coronaviruses. while intervention efforts such as quarantining, distancing of individuals, hand washing, and the disinfection of fomites, including food contact surfaces (who, 2020) have been suggested, the potential for mitigation strategies to reduce sars-cov-2 viral load, shedding in patients and survival in the environment and on contact surfaces need to be addressed. the objective of this review is to describe antimicrobial agents with virucidal activity against coronaviruses that can be effectively used for sanitation and disinfection of surfaces individually, or in combination to provide effective hurdles to the spread of sars-cov-2. agents for the sanitation and disinfection of carriers, vehicles and fomites in food production, distribution, and retail settings (sizun et al., 2000; otter et al., 2016) are the primary focus. fomites likely place a role in viral transmission because they can be contaminated with virus-containing secretions, such as aerosols or droplets, expelled through coughing or talking (figure 2 ) (hulkower et al., 2011; menachery et al., 2017; kampf et al., 2020) . during the 2002-2003 sars-cov-1 outbreak, 31 cases in three separate clusters were linked to a single index patient at national taiwan university hospital. the third cluster included six healthcare workers with direct sars patient contact, and six additional infected healthcare workers who had no direct contact with the patient. contaminated fomites were a suspected route of transmission to the workers with no direct patient contact. out of 119 environmental samples collected throughout the hospital, nine were confirmed sars-cov-1 rna positive (chen et al., 2004) .several other surveys on coronaviruses such as sars-cov-1 and mers-cov have indicated that fomites, along with airborne routes, contribute to the spread of coronaviruses (otter et al., 2016; xiao et al., 2017) . surface swabs of two hospitals treating mers-cov patients indicated that 42 out of 68 surfaces were positive for the coronavirus using reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction (rt-pcr). the mers-cov was cultured from surfaces such as stethoscopes, doorknobs, bed guardrails, and elevators (kim s.-h. et al., 2016) . swabs of surfaces such as a refrigerator handle, table, and television remote control were positive for sars-cov-1 using rt-pcr in sars units during an outbreak in toronto (dowell et al., 2004) . several factors, including surface material, organic load, viral load, temperature, and environmental humidity may influence the survival of viral particles on surfaces (kim s.-h. et al., 2016; otter et al., 2016) .a comparative study of the sars-cov-1 and sars-cov-2 examined viral stability kinetics in aerosols and on surfaces and determined that decay rates for both viruses were similar on many, but not all surfaces (van doremalen et al., 2020) . airborne titer reductions for both aerosolized viruses were <1 log 10 tcid 50 /ml after 3 h. sars-cov-1 and sars-cov-2 were both detectable on plastic and stainless steel for up to 72 h; sars-cov-2 titers decreased from 10 3.7 to 10 0.6 tcid 50 /ml after 48 h on stainless steel and after 72 h on plastic. however, sars-cov-1 appears to have a significantly shorter half-life on cardboard, as the study found no detectable sars-cov-1 after 8 h, while viable sars-cov-2 was undetectable after 24 h (van doremalen et al., 2020) . this suggests that the causative agent of the current covid-19 pandemic might survive better on environmental surfaces than sars-cov-1; however, the authors did caution that considerable statistical dispersion occurred within studies examining cardboard (van doremalen et al., 2020) . coronaviruses (hcov-229e and feline infectious peritonitis virus or fipv) can remain infectious for long periods in water (>100 days in water at 4 • c and >10 days in water at 23 • c) and pasteurized settled sewage (2-4 days), suggesting contaminated water may be a potential vehicle for human exposure if aerosols are generated . at 25 • c, the time required for a 99% reduction in reagent-grade water was 22 days and 17 days for two sars surrogates, tgev and mhv, respectively. in settled sewage that was pasteurized to reduce competing microorganisms and then spiked with coronaviruses, times for a 99% reduction were 9 days for tgev and 7 days for mhv. at 4 • c, there was <1 log 10 infectivity decrease for both these surrogates after 4 weeks (casanova et al., 2009) . however, in wastewater, domestic sewage, and dechlorinated tap water, inoculated sars-cov-1 persisted for 14 days at 4 • c but only for 2 days at 20 • c.while several factors affect the survival and infectivity of sars-cov-2 such as the type of surface (stainless steel, plastics and cardboard), moisture level and contaminants (protein, saliva and fecal material), the risk of sars-cov-2 presence on food contact surfaces and packing materials remains high during a pandemic. infected individuals albeit asymptomatic could come in contact with food or packaging throughout the food supply chain; hence the use of mitigation strategies should also be considered from food production facility to consumer handling of the food product.though the current sars-cov-2 literature indicates that it is a respiratory virus and not a food safety concern, coronaviruses and other respiratory viruses have been known to survive on produce such as lettuce for several days (yépiz-gómez et al., 2013) . sars-cov-2 has been isolated from feces, indicating that shedding through the gastrointestinal system occurs (yeo et al., 2020) ; therefore, it is hypothesized that sars-cov-2 may also have an affinity for cells in the intestine and colon (gu et al., 2020) .workers in the food, retail, service, and health industries normally come in close contact with a large number of individuals during the work day. recent shut downs of meat processing facilities that have established sanitation programs due to spread of sars-cov-2 among workers indicates the importance for new control strategies to spread the transmission of the virus (hart et al., 2020) . hence efforts to minimize the risk of virus contamination of common contact surfaces and survival of the virus in droplets and aerosols in food manufacturing, production, and retail centers should be considered. these efforts include the use of antimicrobial agents such as sanitizers and disinfectants on hands and fomites (otter et al., 2016; eggers, 2019) . the improper selection and inadequate use of sanitizers and disinfectants plays a significant role in the cross transfer and spread of pathogens (hirose et al., 2019) resulting in additional public health concerns. sanitizer choice and coronavirus susceptibility to current cleaning and sanitation practices within facilities is an important consideration. for instance, coronaviruses such as the mouse hepatitis virus (mhv) and tgev are less susceptible to 1:100 hypochlorite than they are to 70% ethanol (hulkower et al., 2011) . over-dilution of sanitizers and insufficient product contact time are critical factors that should be taken into account when targeting the elimination of coronaviruses from fomites (boyce, 2016) .the presence of sars-cov-2 in human feces (xiao et al., 2020) highlights the importance of incorportating cleaning and disinfection regimens in toilets and restrooms as well as developing protocols to prevent aerosolization of virus particles during flushing. the use of quartenary ammonium (alkyl dimethyl benzyl ammonium chloride) and peracetic acid was effective in coliphage ms2 redution on surfaces after flushing (sassi et al., 2018) . the use of biocides effective against sars-cov-2 in toilet bowls apart from cleaning could be considered in light of the information presented in this review.virucidal activity can be determined by suspension tests as well as carrier tests that mimic surfaces and evaluate the performance of biocides in the presence of organic loads through the addition of serum. viral reduction is determined by infectivity assays where treated viruses are compared to untreated controls for the reduction in viral cytopathic effects (cpe) on tissue culture monolayers. surviving fractions determined through log 10 reductions are enumerated either by viral plaque assays, a most probable number (mpn) assay, or by determining the 50% titration endpoint for infectivity (known as tissue culture infectious dose 50% or tcid 50 assay). plaque forming units (pfu) are proportional to tcid 50 titer by a factor of 0.56 (wulff et al., 2012) . rt-pcr for the estimation of viral nucleic acid using threshold cycle (ct value) has also been used to determine viral load. reduction factors are calculated using the difference in the quotient of the infection titer before and after exposure to the antimicrobial agent (rabenau et al., 2005b) according to the environmental protection agency (epa), an acceptable disinfectant claim requires a 4 log 10 reduction in the human norovirus surrogate, feline calicivirus (fcv) (epa, 2017) . european countries recommend the use of other viral surrogates such as murine norovirus (mnv) or adenovirus type 5 (adv-5) for testing (rabenau et al., 2014) . criticisms for suspension tests include that they do not mimic "real world" conditions, which should be taken into consideration while determining virucide selection for disinfection of surfaces soiled with organic matter and other substances that could reduce efficacy. results regarding the virucidal activity of disinfectants using non-enveloped surrogates translate well to the more susceptible enveloped viruses, such as coronaviruses. several factors such as target strain, testing of biocide against virus in suspension vs. drying and use of protein supplementation play important roles in influencing viral particle stability and loss of infectivity during the determination of virucidal activity (rabenau et al., 2005a) .alcohol based sanitizers can be used on skin, for the disinfection of fomites and on certain food contact surfaces (table 1) . alcohol acts on viral envelopes to denature proteins and is not significantly impaired by organic matter contamination . ethyl alcohol (ethanol), isopropyl alcohol (isopropanol or rubbing alcohol), and 2,4 dichlorobenzyl alcohol are classes of alcohol that have been shown to possess antimicrobial properties, although their concentrations and ranges of activity differ (lambert, 2004) .hand sanitizers and rubs containing alcohol (75-85% v/v) effectively reduce the infectivity of coronaviruses in in vitro tests. against sars-cov-2, both the world health organization sanitizer formulation 1 [85% ethanol (v/v), 0.725% glycerol (v/v) and 0.125% hydrogen peroxide (v/v)] and formulation 2 [75% isopropanol (w/w), 0.725% glycerol (v/v) and 0.125% hydrogen peroxide (v/v)] resulted in complete inactivation from an initial viral titer of 8 log 10 (tcid 50 /ml). tests of both ethanol and isopropanol within the same study (along with 0.125% hydrogen peroxide) against sars-cov-2 were effective in inactivating the virus within 30 s, even when used at a concentration of 30% (kratzel et al., 2020) , products based on 80, 85, and 95% ethanol without dilution inactivated sars-cov-1 to below the limit of detection (rf ≥ 4) within 30 s of exposure (rabenau et al., 2005b) . high concentrations of ethanol (95% and 85%) based hand sanitizers have also been useful in reducing sars-cov-1 by 5.5 log 10 (tcid 50 /ml) within an exposure time of 30 s (rabenau et al., 2005b) .ethanol at a concentration of 70% resulted in a 3 log 10 reduction of coronaviruses (tgev and mhv) after an exposure duration of a minute. hand sanitizers with 62% ethanol resulted in a reduction factor of 4 log 10 of tgev and a 2.7 log 10 reduction of mhv (hulkower et al., 2011) . alcohol-based formulations containing 3.2% povidone-iodine and 78% alcohol reported 99.99% (4 log 10 reduction) inactivation of the modified vaccinia virus ankara (mva), a reference virus for virucidal hand disinfectants, under clean and dirty conditions after a 15 s contact time (eggers et al., 2015a) indicating that these sanitizers might also be effective against other enveloped viruses such as coronaviruses. when evaluated on inanimate surfaces like metal, glass, or plastic, 78-95% ethanol inactivated the coronaviruses sars-cov-1, mers-cov, and mhv to reduction factor ≥4 in 30 s (kampf et al., 2020) . the use of amyl metacresol (0.6 mg) and dichlorobenzyl alcohol (1.2 mg) at ph of 2.3 in throat lozenges resulted in negligible antiviral activity against human coronavirus oc43 (hcov oc43) (morokutti-kurz et al., 2017) in in vitro tests.povidone iodone (pvp-i) has been used for skin, nasal, and oral cavity disinfection ( table 1) . pvp-i is an iodophore with broad spectrum antimicrobial activity against bacteria, fungi, and viruses. pvp-i forms i 2 and hypoiodous acid (hoi), which oxidizes nucleic acids and membranes (lachapelle et al., 2013) . pvp-i is used for the disinfection of skin when formulated into scrubs or hand washes and for oral cavities through oral sprays and mouth rinses (nagatake et al., 2002; kariwa et al., 2004; durani and leaper, 2008) . nasal spray of pvp-i has been used for the post-operative control of staphylococcus aureus infections and could potentially be used to reduce nasal harborage and dispersal of sars-cov-2 (phillips et al., 2014) . the exposure of sars-cov-2 (7.8 of log 10 (tcid 50 /ml) to 7.5% of pvp-i resulted in the virus titer dropping below levels of detection after 5 min (chin et al., 2020) . the use of pvp-i at a concentration of 7.5% (surgical scrub), 4% (hand wash), and 1% + 8.3% alcohol (mouth rinse) against mers-cov resulted in a 99.99% reduction in virus populations after 15 s in both clean and soiled conditions (bovine serum albumin and erythrocytes). virucidal activity of pvp-i was observed against mers-cov even after a 1:10 dilution, though a higher duration of exposure (30 s) was required for the oral rinse that contained 1% pvp-i + 8.3% alcohol (eggers et al., 2015b) .antiviral activity of pvp-i containing products (0.23-1%) was observed against sars-cov-1. exposure of sars-cov-1 to pvp-i containing products reduced a viral load of 1.17 × 10 6 tcid 50 /ml to below levels of detection within a duration of 2 min (kariwa et al., 2004) . pvp-i was also effective when used against human rotavirus, a non-enveloped virus that causes diarrhea, on disk of stainless steel and plastics, indicating its effectiveness as a surface sanitizer . the efficacy of pvp-i against test bacterial pathogens (skin contaminant surrogates) did not decrease when tested on an inert surface (durani and leaper, 2008) , indicating that pvp-i could be used for hand washing and disinfection of skin, surfaces and the oral tract, and as a substitute or replacement for alcohol-based products (durani and leaper, 2008) . while pvp-i can stain surfaces, it is water soluble and stains can be washed away or removed with a damp cloth. pvp-i' virucidal efficacy against coronaviruses at concentrations as low as 0.23%, rapid efficacy at 15 s, and residual efficacy in combination with isopropyl alcohol or ethanol make it an excellent choice for disinfecting skin, oral cavities, and fomite surfaces (eggers et al., 2015b; kampf et al., 2020) . the combination of pvp-i with alcohol as a disinfectant could reduce the amount of alcohol required and could serve as a useful substitute or supplement to alcohol use.quaternary ammonium compounds (qacs) are popular sanitizers that can be used on certain food contact surfaces as well as fomites ( table 1) . qacs are cationic detergents with membrane active properties, and their antimicrobial activity is due in part to their ability to disrupt the lipid membrane of a microorganism (rabenau et al., 2005b; pratelli, 2007; kumar et al., 2017) . the effectiveness of qacs is very formulation specific and this affects the range of organisms to which they are effective and the time needed to be effective against a specific organism (gerba, 2015) the exposure of sars-cov-2 (7.8 of log 10 tcid 50 /ml) to 0.10% (100 ppm) of benazlkonium chloride resulted in viral titer reduction below levels of detection after 5 min (chin et al.) . an analysis of the efficacy of household disinfectants against murine hepatitis virus (mhv), a surrogate for sars-cov-1, indicated that a formulation of 0.10% (100 ppm) quarternary compound with 79% ethanol resulted in a 3 log 10 (tcid 50 /ml) reduction after a 30 s exposure time (dellanno et al., 2009 ). the use of 1% (1,000 ppm) benzalkoniumchloride (a qac) and 1% (1,000 ppm) chlorhexadine digluconate (a polybiguanide) against sars-cov resulted in a loss of culturability of the virus, though detection of viral rna through pcr occurred 30 min after exposure (ansaldi et al., 2004) . the formulations and test conditions used by kampf et al. (2020) indicated a low efficacy against mers-cov. the use of ethanol along with qacs usually has been associated with effective antimicrobial activity against coronaviruses (sattar, 2004) .hydrogen peroxide is commonly used to disinfect food contact surfaces, as a fumigant and as a sanitizer (table 1 ) (kumar et al., 2017) . studies have shown that hydrogen peroxide is effective against sars-cov and its surrogates. exposure of a coronavirus surrogate (tgev) dried on stainless steel to hydrogen peroxide vapor (20 µl) for 2-3 h resulted in approximately a 5 log 10 (tcid 50 /ml) reduction (goyal et al., 2014) . a limitation to this study was that the hydrogen peroxide vapor was examined on clean surfaces; therefore, further studies examining the impact of organic material and soil are necessary to determine its efficacy in a range of environments and situations. another study using a commercial product (accel tb) containing liquid hydrogen peroxide with surfactants was effective (>4 log 10 tcid 50 /ml reduction) at a concentration of 0.5% with an incubation time of 1 min against hcov-229e (omidbakhsh and sattar, 2006 ). however, limited information exists regarding the virucidal activity of hydrogen peroxide on other types of surfaces.sodium hypochlorite (naocl; chlorine bleach) has been used as disinfectant for the past century in water and on food contact surfaces (table 1 ; kumar et al., 2017) . hypochlorous acid (hocl) and the hypochlorite ion contribute the majority of the disinfectant activity associated with bleach-containing products, with the former compound contributing the most biocidal activity (kott et al., 1975; rutala and weber, 1997) . however, while chlorine-derived compounds do exhibit significant efficacy against coronaviruses on non-porous surfaces, organic matter and porous materials diminish virucidal activity because of the quenching of free chlorine (geller et al., 2012) . common practice in the food industry is to adjust alkaline chlorine formulations to ca. ph 7 using a food grade acid when it is used at higher concentrations to increase dissociation into the more potent antimicrobial compound hocl. however, ph adjustment is less common in healthcare and household environments and does not occur in literature examining the virucidal activity of bleach in these settings (kott et al., 1975) .the exposure of sars-cov-2 (7.8 of log 10 (tcid50/ml) to 1:49 (∼150 ppm) and 1:99 (∼75 ppm) household bleach resulted in the virus titer being reduced below levels of detection after 5 min (chin et al., 2020) . to elucidate the target of antiviral activity, bovine coronavirus was exposed to 100,000 ppm naocl (ph 11.5) for 1 min. real-time reverse transcriptase pcr (rrt-pcr) and western blot indicated that total rna and nucleoprotein degradation occurred in that time period. when the concentration was reduced to 10,000 ppm naocl, a 10 min treatment was required to achieve complete nucleoprotein degradation, although there was <1 log 10 reduction in total rna units observed (bieker, 2006) . hcov-229e challenged with 5,000 ppm naocl for 10 min on an inanimate surface underwent a ca. 3 log10 (tcid50/ml) reduction, which failed to meet epa standards for virucidal activity for a disinfectant claim (tyan et al., 2018) . however, when treatment levels were increased to 2,100 ppm naocl) on stainless steel coupons, a ≥4.5 log 10 tcid50/ml reduction was achieved after 30 s against the sars-cov-1 surrogate, mhv (dellanno et al., 2009) . much lower concentrations were required in seeded hospital wastewater; sars-cov-1 was inactivated by exposure to 10 ppm naocl (0.4 ppm free chlorine) after 10 min exposure, while inactivation occurred within 1 min in 20 ppm naocl (0.5 ppm free chlorine; kott et al., 1975; rutala and weber, 1997; kapil et al., 2004; wang et al., 2005; dellanno et al., 2009; geller et al., 2012; kumar et al., 2017; chin et al., 2020) .uses of peroxyacetic acid (paa) include the sanitation of food contact surfaces and for post-harvest produce washing. the antimicrobial action of paa involves the production of reactive oxygen species (ros) (vandekinderen et al., 2009) . ros oxidize sulfhydryl and disulfide bonds, which in bacteria leads to increased cell wall permeability, impacted enzymatic transport systems, and disrupted cell membranes (vandekinderen et al., 2009) . while paa has shown effectiveness on bacterial pathogens on food and food contact surfaces, it has varied impact on foodborne viruses, notably human norovirus (nov) and hepatitis a virus (hav), both non-enveloped viruses which tend to be more resistant to antimicrobials than enveloped viruses (watanabe et al., 1989; barker et al., 2001) . a paabased biocide (100 ppm paa) used to wash lettuce had no significant disinfection effect on viral titers of hav and murine norovirus (mnv) (fraisse et al., 2011) . higher concentrations of paa (>100 ppm) may be necessary to reduce nonenveloped viruses on surfaces, foods, and fomites, and research regarding the effectiveness of paa on coronaviruses is limited. a 0.035% (35 ppm) solution of paa inhibited sars-cov-1 replication in cell culture with <2 min of contact time (ansaldi et al., 2004) , while the same concentration did not affect the viral genome after 30 min of exposure (ansaldi et al., 2004) . another study suggested that sars-cov-1 can be inactivated with 500 to 1,000 ppm of paa (wang et al., 2005) . the epa has listed several paa-based sanitizers and disinfectants that can be used against sars-cov-2, in addition to other viruses (https://www.epa.gov/pesticide-registration/list-ndisinfectants-use-against-sars-cov-2; accessed march 24, 2020).wine vinegar (6% acetic acid) was effective in inactivating sars-cov-1 by a reduction factor of 3 log 10 within an exposure duration of 30s (rabenau et al., 2005a) providing both processers and consumers with an option for food contact surface disinfection.chlorine dioxide (clo 2 ) is a gas at room temperature and is easily dissolved in water, although concentrations in water diminish rapidly (gates et al., 2009) . it is an effective disinfectant in both gas and liquid states, making it a versatile biocidal agent (gates et al., 2009; morino et al., 2011) . a clo 2 solution at concentrations yielding 2.19 ppm free chlorine in wastewater has been reported to inactivate sars-cov-1 (wang et al., 2005; miura and shibata, 2010) , which makes it a less efficacious disinfectant against the virus than chlorine, which was effective at 0.5 ppm free chlorine. to achieve complete inactivation of the virus in wastewater, clo 2 at 20 ppm required a 5 min contact time. however, a 10 ppm solution only achieved a 55.3-68.4% inactivation of the virus (wang et al., 2005) .clo 2 is an active virucidal agent in its gaseous state. when placed in an environment with chlorine dioxide at concentrations of 0.05 ppm, influenza a virus (an enveloped virus) on wet glass slides was reduced from > 6 log 10 tcid 50 to below the limit of detection (<0.5 log 10 tcid 50 ) within 3 h, while the control (air) titers remained unchanged after 5 h exposure (morino et al., 2011) . complete inactivation of sars-cov surrogate mhv strain a59 after 12 h exposure to 0.16 ppmv/min clo 2 gas has been reported, with titers reduced 3.5 times after 6 h exposure . clo 2 can also be safely used in low concentrations around animals and people to control airborne viruses. mice housed in an environment with 0.032 ppm clo 2 were exposed to aerosolized influenza virus a and compared to mice housed in fresh air with no clo 2 . after 3 days, pulmonary titers in the control group were 6.7 tcid 50 , significantly higher than the 2.6 tcid 50 observed within the mice exposed to clo 2 (miura and shibata, 2010) . gaseous oxidizers should be used according the federal regulations and should be monitored to prevent inadvertent exposure to personnel (cdc, 1978) .ozone is a naturally occurring configuration of three oxygen atoms and has a half-life of about 1 h at room temperature; degradation results in spontaneous oxygen gas formation (kumar et al., 2017) . a powerful oxidant, ozone has unique biological properties and can be used as a gas at recommended levels with monitoring and can also be dispersed in water. viral susceptibility to ozone varies. enveloped viruses such as coronaviruses might be more sensitive than non-enveloped viruses due to the interaction of ozone with the lipid layer envelopes (kumar et al., 2016) . zhang et al. (2004) reported that a high concentration of 27.73 ppm ozone inactivated sars-cov-1 in 4 min. the medium (17.82 ppm) and low (4.86 ppm) concentrations could also inactivate sars-cov-1 with different speeds and efficacy (zhang et al., 2004) . in another study, maximum anti-viral efficacy of ozone required a short period of high humidity (>90% relative humidity) after the attainment of peak ozone gas concentration (20-25 ppm) (hudson et al., 2007) . mouse coronavirus (mcov) on different surfaces (glass, plastic, and stainless steel) and in the presence of biological fluids was inactivated by ozone by at least 3 log 10 in the laboratory and in simulated field trials (hudson et al., 2007 (hudson et al., , 2009 . ozone can be harmful to personnel when inhaled and should be used according to federal regulations (cdc, 2019) . precautions should be taken to monitor ozone levels in air to avoid inadvertent exposure to personnel (cdc, 2019).ultraviolet (uv) light has three classifications (uva, uvb, and uvc) based on wavelength and is known to cause pyrimidine dimers and breakage in nucleic acids (tseng and li, 2005) . this dimerization disrupts transcriptional and translational processes, affecting cellular function and can thus also interfere with viral replication. uv light treatment can be employed to target three transmission forms of viral particles: (1) in droplets, (2) aerosolized, and (3) on fomites; however, the inactivation of coronaviruses via uv light can be challenging as inactivation rates vary based on wavelength and the length of the rna transcript (stern and sefton, 1982) . generally, inactivation rates increase with the length of the rna transcript (stern and sefton, 1982) . also, uv target sizes for viral messenger rna (mrna) are typically directly related to that of the genomic-size rna (yokomori et al., 1992) .uvc light (254 nm) with an intensity of 4,016 µw/cm 2 inactivated sars-cov-1 in a liquid medium at a 3 cm distance for 15 min, while uva light had no effect on viability (darnell et al., 2004) . uv light, in combination with riboflavin, a b vitamin, reduced mers-cov titer below the limit of detection of 2.18 log 10 pfu/ml from an initial concentration of 7.5 log 10 pfu/ml (keil et al., 2016) . other studies have examined the effectiveness of uv light on aerosolized viral particles. sars-cov-1 in an aerosolized form treated with uv light illustrated a greater susceptibility (z-value ratio of air to liquid of 85.7) compared to that of the virus in liquid media (walker and ko, 2007) . while uv light (134 µw/cm 2 ) for a duration of 15 min was effective in significantly reducing the infectivity of sars-cov-1 from 7.57 to 2.25 log 10 tcid 50 /ml, the treatment did not completely eliminate the virus (kariwa et al., 2006) . uv light should be used according to federal regulations and during hours when operations have ceased to prevent inadvertent exposure to personnel (21 cfr 880.6600) (fda, 2019).very few studies have examined the effectiveness of metals against viruses. in a study by bright et al. (2009) , zeolite powders amended with silver and/or silver/copper ions resulted in reductions of 1.08 log 10 tcid 50 /ml (3.5% ag, 6.5% cu), 0.43 log 10 tcid 50 /ml (20% ag) and 0.50 log 10 tcid 50 /ml (0.6% ag, 14% zn, 80% zno) of hcov-229e after 1 h in a saline suspension (bright et al., 2009) . silver/copper zeolites were the most effective, with an observed 2.06 log 10 tcid 50 reduction after 4 h and a 5.13 log 10 tcid 50 reduction within 24 h. a 3.18 log 10 reduction was observed for fipv (feline coronavirus) after 4 h (bright et al., 2009) . the long duration required for inactivation of coronaviruses by metals such as silver and copper indicate that they might be ineffective in food production operations when used individually as rapid disinfection is required.silver has been shown to have antiviral activity against numerous viruses including the enveloped hiv, hsv-1, herpes vesicular stomatitis virus (hstv), and vaccinia virus, and the non-enveloped papovaviruses and adenovirus (adv) (silvestry-rodriguez et al., 2007) . the use of silver as a coating on food contact surfaces and processing equipment could be considered for further testing and validation as silver ions have also been demonstrated to inactivate the non-enveloped poliovirus (pv) and coliphages (yahya et al., 1992) and synergistic antiviral activity in the presence of oxidizing agents. similarly, silver has been shown to have synergistic antimicrobial activity against ms-2 bacteriophage when used in conjunction with uv light (butkus et al., 2004) .several plant-based compounds, though not biocides, could be effective in reducing the infectivity of sars-cov-2 by inhibiting or blocking viral attachment to host cells. phytocompounds, betulinic acid and savinin (wen et al., 2007) and essential oils from laurus nobilis (from berries), thuja orientalis (from fruit), and juniperus oxycedrus ssp. oxycedrus (from berries) (loizzo et al., 2008) have been shown to be effective against sars-cov-1.iota-carrageenan, a generally regarded as safe (gras) polymer derived from red seaweed (rhodophyceae) is a commonly used food thickener that has demonstrated inhibitory activity against coronaviruses and other respiratory viruses (graf et al., 2018) . iota-carrageenan forms a protective barrier on mucosa when used as a nasal spray, preventing the attachment of the virus to cell surface (grassauer et al., 2008) . against human coronavirus oc43 (hcov oc43), iota-carrageenan had an mic of 0.024 µg/ml (graf et al., 2018) . iota-carrageenan has demonstrated inhibitory activity against respiratory viruses such as influenza a h1n1 (wang et al., 2011) and reduced the viral load in nasal secretions of children displaying acute symptoms of common cold (fazekas et al., 2012) . common colds in humans can be caused by viruses such as human rhinovirus (hrv), human coronavirus (hcov), parainfluenza (piv), influenza (infa and infb), respiratory syncytial virus (rsv), adenovirus(adv), enterovirus (ev), and metapneumovirus (mpv) (koenighofer et al., 2014) . exploration of the use of iota-carrageenan (0.12%) nasal spray to prevent common colds caused by these viruses indicated that patients using iota-carrageenan nasal sprays had significantly reduced durations of symptoms, relapses, and viral titers with highest efficacy against hcov (koenighofer et al., 2014) . relapses among patients treated with iota-carrageenan nasal sprays were observed less frequently in groups infected with hrv and hcov (koenighofer et al., 2014) . the use of iotacarrageenan nasal sprays could be used as a method to prevent infection transmission among workers in food processing facilities. iota-carrageenan is gras certified (21 cfr 172.620) and is approved for use in foods, cosmetics and pharmaceuticals (hebar et al., 2015) .there are numerous groups of plant compounds/components that have been shown to have antimicrobial activity including saponins, thiosulfinates, glucosinolates, terpenoids, and polyphenols. many of these have been shown to have efficacy against various enveloped viruses such as herpes simplex viruses types 1 and 2 (hsv-1 and hsv-2), bovine herpesviruses (bhv), bovine viral diarrhea virus (bvdv), human immunodeficiency virus (hiv), dengue virus (denv), junin virus (junv), yellow fever virus (yfv), human respiratory syncytial virus (hrsv), influenza a virus (infv-a; h1n1, h3n2, h5n1, and h9n2 strains), newcastle disease virus (ndv), viral hemorrhagic septicemia virus (vhsv), human cytomegalovirus (hcmv), and measles virus (mev) indicating possible efficacy against coronaviruses (reviewed by goyal and cannon, 2006; bright and gilling, 2016) .the high infectivity of the covid-19 coronavirus, sars-cov-2, has caused rapid person to person transmission resulting in a pandemic that has posed multifarious challenges to the food industry. though not transmitted through food, infections caused by sars-cov-2 have resulted in the closing of food processing plants due to infections among essential workers. furthermore food contact surfaces and food packaging materials could serve as fomites for sars-cov-2, highlighting the importance of biocide use to mitigate the spread of the virus.currently used methods to reduce the transmission of the virus involve the use of masks, social distancing as well as the use of usepa approved disinfecting and sanitizing agents. these practices have not been fully successful in preventing transmission of sars-cov-2 in several food processing facilities. the information presented in this review indicates that sars-cov-2 can be transmitted through the air, feces, soiled surfaces and could occur on surfaces that are frequently touched. our review indicates that ethanol at high concentrations (>70%), povidone iodine, hypochlorite and qacs when combined with alcohol are efficacious against sars-cov-2 for surface disinfection. hydrogen peroxide vapor, chlorine dioxide, ozone and uv could be applied to reduce viral load present in aerosols with appropriate precautions to prevent exposure of personnel to these antimicrobials.while hand washing and the use of sanitizers is a commonly implemented practice in food production plants, the dispersal of the sars-cov-2 virus from often asymptomatic individuals carrying high viral loads in their nasal epithelium requires the exploration of new practices such as the use of nasal sprays to minimize person to person transmission of the virus. the review presents information on antimicrobials and plant-based compounds that could be explored to curtail transmission of sars-cov-2. plant derived iota carrageenan could prevent viral attachment to cells and reduce viral loads in the nasal epithelium. povidone iodine has also been used in nasal sprays and might serve as an additional preventative measure to control the person-person transmission of sars-cov-2.the use of a multiple hurdles to control the spread of pathogenic microorganisms is a common practice in the food industry and hence the implementation of several mitigation strategies can be adapted by the food industry. biocides effective against sars-cov-2 on moist/soiled surfaces, air and skin is a requirement of high priority for transmission control. food processing facilities should practice the judicious and optimal use of biocides to avert the development of antimicrobial resistance in non-target bacterial pathogens during the sars-cov-2 pandemic.the review provides the food industry with information about sanitizers and disinfectants with virucidal and inhibitory activity against sars-cov-2 or surrogates on food contact surfaces, liquids, aerosols and skin. the integration of the recommended disinfectants and infection-prevention approaches would prevent sars-cov-2 dissemination in food production, manufacturing and retail facilities and among personnel. the global impact is already profound and expected to intensify, particularly among the poorest nations. 3, 4 the main driver is overuse and misuse of antibiotics in medicine and agriculture including unregulated over-the-counter sales, while global spread of resistant bacteria or resistance genes is attributed to poor infection prevention and control in healthcare facilities, and sub-optimal hygiene and sanitation in communities, confounded by poor infrastructure and weak governance. 5 in the us, between 80-90% of the volume of human antibiotic use occurs in the outpatient setting, with nearly 50% considered to be inappropriate or unnecessary. 6 without prompt action, it is estimated that rates of amr to commonly-used antibiotics could exceed 40-60% in some countries by 2030, 7 and by 2050, around 10 million people could die each year as a result of resistance to antibiotics and other antimicrobial agents. 8 almost 9million of these will be in africa and asia. 8 in 2015, an alliance of the who, the food and agriculture organization of the united nations interventions." 9 the gap emphasizes the need for society-wide engagement, with a clear focus on "prevention first." 9 one of the five strategic objectives is a reduction in the incidence of infection through improved sanitation, hygiene, and infection prevention. 9 at least 120 countries have finalized national action plans, with the plans of more than 60 other countries under development. 10 what is striking is that the gap and national plans discuss infection prevention and control primarily in the context of healthcare facilities. (see https://www.who.int/antimicrobialresistance/national-action-plans/library/en/). by contrast, the latest 2019 uk national action plan, which sets out a 20-year vision 11 and a 5-year plan 12 for how the uk will contribute to controlling amr by 2040, offers guidelines on infection prevention in healthcare settings, but also highlights the role of the community, noting that, when it comes to infections in the community, the public have a huge part to play. 12 in recent years, demographic changes and changes in health service structure mean that the number of people living in the community needing special care, because they are at greater risk of infection, has significantly increased. the largest proportion of these are the elderly, who generally have reduced immunity to infection which is often exacerbated by other illnesses like diabetes and malignant illnesses. a decrease in immunity usually starts from 50 years old.other infection-susceptible groups include the very young, patients recently discharged from hospital, and family members with invasive devices such as catheters, as well as those whose immune competence is impaired as a result of chronic and degenerative illnesses (including hiv/aids) or because they are receiving immunosuppressant drugs or other therapies.immunosuppressed individuals are often also on other medications such as antibiotics, to help protect them from infection but can further increase susceptibility to infections such as clostridium difficile.home and everyday life settings provide multiple opportunities for spread of infection.everyday life settings include locations where normally there is no mandated hygiene policy as is typically found in clinical and educational settings; for example: work places, public transport, gyms, child day-care facilities, and shopping centers.poor hygiene is considered a major factor in the transmission of community-based infections, including gastrointestinal (gi) and respiratory tract (rt) infections such as colds and influenza, and skin infections caused by s. aureus. 14 for the elderly, communal living environments, combined with problems of fecal incontinence, create an environment in which enteric and foodborne pathogens are easily spread. as a result, the incidence of salmonellosis andcampylobacter diarrhea appears to be higher among the elderly in these situations.more vulnerable 'at risk' members of society are now being looked after outside hospital settings. for example, in germany, it is estimated that approximately three quarters of all people in need of care are currently being cared for at home. 15 in the community the immunocompromised are also at risk from opportunistic pathogens such as e. coli, klebsiella spp., and pseudomonas aeruginosa, which are considered as hospital related. 15 the key steps in preventing the spread of infection, known as breaking the chain of infection, are the same regardless of setting. in the home, pathogens may have been brought home from hospital settings or enter the home via colonized or infected people, pets/domestic animals, or through contaminated food and water. 15, 16 pathogens and other microbes are shed constantly from these sources, with rapid transmission around the home mainly via hands, hand and food contact surfaces, cleaning utensils and in the air ( figure 1 ). 15 respectively. for campylobacter, counts of >100 and >1000 were isolated from 5 and 1.7%respectively. this is a concern, since it is estimated that 80% of salmonella infections originate in the home, 32 and a uk study detected campylobacter spp. in 56% of chilled retail chickens, with 7% of samples containing >1000 colony forming units (cfu)/g of skin. 33 the infectious dose of campylobacter is estimated at <500 cfu. 34 chaidez et al. 35 demonstrated that the risk of salmonella transmission from cleaning cloths via hands to mouth was far higher than the guideline levels for acceptable risk.since most pathogenic organisms die relatively rapidly, particularly on dry surfaces, the greatest risk of human exposure presents immediately after shedding from an infected or contaminated source. however some species, including s. aureus, e. coli, and other organisms such as fungal species, rhinovirus, and norovirus can survive for long periods even on dry surfaces. 36 audit studies suggest that some gram-negative organisms can form permanent reservoirs or secondary sources of contamination, particularly where moisture is present such as in sinks and drains, kitchen cleaning cloths and sponges. 37 44 the dose also depends on host susceptibility and mode of entry, and may be lower for at-risk groups in the community such as children, the elderly, and people with compromised immunity. 44 although care of increasing numbers of patients in the community, including at home can help alleviate over-burdened health systems, it can be undermined by inadequate infection control in the home and urgent focus is now needed on infection transmission in homes and community settings in addition to healthcare settings.although multidrug-resistant (mdr) bacteria (i.e. bacteria that have acquired resistance to at least one agent in three or more antimicrobial classes) are typically hospital-acquired, 50 since 2000, we have seen the emergence of new "community acquired" strains of mrsa (ca-mrsa). while healthcare-associated strains are mainly a risk to vulnerable people, for ca-mrsa, any family member is at risk and it is more prevalent among children and young adults where they cause infections of cuts, wounds and abrasions. us experience suggests the risk is greatest among those engaging skin-to-skin contact activities and contact with contaminated objects such as towels, sheets and sports equipment. transmission is common in settings such as prisons, schools and sports teams. 42 a study assessing the transmission of ca-mrsa in a university in the us, found multidrug resistant usa300 responsible for diseases including necrotizing pneumonia, severe sepsis and necrotizing fasciitis, on common touch surfaces at the university, student homes and local community settings. this suggests transfer between different locations within the community. 61 enterobacterales are a common cause of community-associated infections, including urinary tract infections and bacteremia as well as gastrointestinal infections. 51 67 kitchen sponges not only act as reservoirs of microorganisms, but also as disseminators over domestic surfaces, which can lead to cross-contamination of hands and food, which is considered a main cause of foodborne disease outbreaks.carbapenem-resistant enterobacteriaceae (cre) are also on the rise globally, but, to date, most cre infections in the us and europe have been healthcare-associated. 68, 70 although data from asia is sparse, carbapenemases have been found in bacteria recovered from drinking water in india and in food-producing animals in china. 69, 71, 72 in european studies during the 1990s, vancomycin-resistant enterococci (vre) were detected in the stools of healthy volunteers. [73] [74] [75] [76] [77] however, rates of vre, carbapenem resistance in acinetobacter infections, and mdr p.aeruginosa are thought to be low in individuals living in the community. 51 overall, the evidence suggests that mdr strains of bacteria, like any other strains of bacteria, can enter the home or other settings via people who are infected or colonized or via contaminated food and can be spread to other members of the family via hands and contaminated surfaces.if implemented effectively, home and everyday life hygiene has the potential to reduce rates of infection and the need for antibiotic prescriptions, thereby reducing the selective pressure for the development and subsequent dissemination of resistance. 15 microbiological data 14, 15 suggest that the surfaces that are most often responsible for spread of harmful microbes, at key moments include the hands themselves, hand contact surfaces, food contact surfaces, and cleaning cloths and other cleaning items ( figure 2 ). these surfaces are referred to as critical surfaces or critical control points. clothing, household linen, toilets, sinks and bath surfaces may also contribute to establishing a chain of infection, however, the risks associated with these surfaces are typically lower as they rely on the hands and other "chain links" to disseminate infectious microbes to cause human exposure. an important aspect of targeted hygiene is hygienic cleaning -as opposed to visible cleaningto break the chain of infection. this is achieved using hygiene procedures (products plus process) to reduce pathogenic microorganisms on critical surfaces to a level where they are no longer harmful to health -thereby preventing ongoing spread. 15, 84 several methods exist to achieve such reduction in potential pathogens: mechanical/physical removal using dry wiping, soap or detergent-based cleaning together with adequate rinsing, inactivation or eradication using a disinfectant on hard surfaces or an alcohol-based sanitizer on the hands, or a physical process such as heating (to ≥60°c/140°f) or ultraviolet treatment. most frequently, a combination of these approaches is likely to be used. 15, 84 when developing hygiene procedures aimed at breaking the chain of infection, the goal should be to ensure that each procedure is appropriate to its intended use. in recent years, risk modelling has been developed in order to achieve this. 80 quantitative microbial risk assessment (qmra) was originally developed for ensuring water quality and is increasingly being used to develop infection prevention control strategies in other settings, including healthcare. 85, 86 qmra is a scientifically-validated approach that uses published data to model the chain of infection and estimate safe residual level of contamination at critical points in the chain. 84 , 87 this information is then used to estimate the log reduction required to reduce contamination to a safe level. based on these estimates, tests modelling use conditions can be used to develop effective hygiene procedures to achieve the required reduction. the approach is set out in more detail by bloomfield et al. 84 in the past, recommendations on selection of hygiene procedures for home and everyday life were based on the health status of family members, and it is still argued by some that disinfectants should only be used in situations where people are infected or at increased risk of infection. 87 although there is data to show that hygiene is important in preventing transmission of mrsa colonization and infection in the domestic environment, further investigation is required to demonstrate the full extent to which poor home hygiene may contribute to the burden of foodborne infection associated with antibiotic resistant strains.quantifying the impact of hygiene on the burden of infection in home and everyday life is challenging because of the large population sizes required to generate significant results, and difficulties in conducting studies involving multiple interventions. most data have been generated from single intervention studies -primarily hand hygiene -where meta-analyses show a positive impact on gi and rt infections. [91] [92] [93] children who attend day-care centers have significantly more infections than those who do not.the most common are rt and gi infections, and the risk of otitis media is almost twice that of children remaining at home. 94 studies in day-care centers and schools in which hand hygiene was combined with cleaning and/or disinfection of environmental surfaces indicate a positive impact on illness rates and reduction in the use of antibiotics. [94] [95] [96] [97] in an intervention study 96 reduction of antibiotic prescriptions for rt infections in a group who used hand sanitizers compared with a control group. 98 another 2018 intervention study 99 found that children were prescribed antibiotics for significantly fewer weeks in day care centers using specific disinfecting products and cleaning protocols than centers that continued to use their standard procedures and products (rr=0.68 [95% ci 0.54, 0.86]; p=0.001) -a relative risk reduction of almost onethird.to the best of our knowledge, only one study on the impact of targeted hygiene in the home has been conducted. 100 this study, conducted among low-income communities in cape town, south africa, evaluated the impact of hygiene education alone and education in combination with hand washing with soap at critical times, bathing at least three times a week, cleaning/disinfecting household surfaces at critical times, and proper waste disposal. 100 qmra is also now being used to estimate the impact of hygiene interventions on infection in community settings. 102 haas et al. 103 concern has been expressed as to whether expanding use of microbicidal products, in the home and everyday life may contribute to the rise in amr. 105 sub-lethal levels of microbicides can induce stress on bacterial cells, causing expression of mechanisms that reduce the biocide concentration at the bacterial target site further and allow the bacterial cell to repair. 106, 107 these include overexpression of an efflux system, membrane regulatory changes, and changes in membrane permeability and composition. 107 these same mechanisms can produce changes in the susceptibility profile to unrelated antimicrobials. 107 in other words, the use of microbicides may cross-select for antibiotic resistance and be associated with reduced antibiotic susceptibility to clinically significant levels (recently reviewed by maillard 107 ).factors inherent to the microbicide (i.e. concentration, formulation, mechanism of action), the microorganisms (i.e. type/strain, metabolism, resistance mechanisms), and product usage (e.g.concentration, exposure time), all impact on product efficacy. 107 decreases in efficacy, for example, following shorter contact time or product dilution, will lead to bacterial survivalantimicrobial damage caused by a sub-lethal concentration of a microbicide is likely to be repairable. 107 a number of expert reports commissioned in the last 10 years have highlighted laboratory studies linking microbicide use with reduced antibiotic susceptibility. however, these reports conclude that there is little evidence for this effect occurring in real-life clinical practice, and have called for further research into whether microbicide use influences antibiotic resistance in the community. 108-111 rutala et al. (2000) found that the frequency of occurrence of antibiotic resistance in environmental isolates from homes was much lower than for clinical isolates from a hospital intensive care unit and an outpatient setting where there was routine extensive use of antibiotics. 112 two studies were carried out to investigate whether antibiotic resistant strains were more likely to be found in homes where antibacterial products were used, compared with homes where they were not. 113, 114 samples were collected from houses in the usa and uk of 30 users and nonusers of antibacterials. susceptibility tests against antibiotics and antibacterial agents (triclosan, pine oil, bac and para-chloro-meta-xylenol) were carried out on the bacteria isolated. the authors concluded that there was no evidence that antibiotic resistant strains occurred more frequently in user homes compared with non-user homes. a 1-year study by aiello et al (2005) also showed that household use of antibacterial cleaning products was not a significant risk factor for occurrence of antibiotic resistant isolates from hands. 115 despite more than 20 years of research, there is still no conclusive resolution to the question of whether and to what extent; microbicides might contribute to amr in clinical practice. in light of laboratory data, which indicates that microbicide-induced amr is biologically plausible for some types of microbicides, it is concluded that use of microbicides needs to be prudent and appropriate and that the products containing them must be used at recommended concentrations and with the appropriate contact time.targeted hygiene works to ensure that use of disinfectants and hand sanitizers (i.e. microbicides used at the correct concentration and contact time) are confined to situations where there is identifiable risk of spread of harmful microorganisms, ensuring that they play an essential role in tackling amr. the need for antibiotic prescribing may in fact increase if disinfectants and hand sanitizers are not used as indicated, due to the increased risk of infection and survival of bacteria bearing amr determinants. these could potentially spread to other areas in the home and on into the community. it is important to note also that preventing viral infections as well as bacterial infections, such as those that cause respiratory and gi infections, can also have a role in reducing amr as this will eliminate the potential for mis-prescribing or misuse of antibiotics.in in 2015, an estimated 663 million people around the world were drinking from unimproved water sources, and 2.4 billion had no access to improved sanitation -the vast majority of these were in sub-saharan africa and south asia. 119 it is estimated that 2.3 billion people lack the use of sanitation facilities which are not shared with other households, 120 42 as with studies conducted in hics, the highest levels of contamination in lmics are typically found in moist locations such as kitchen sponges and dishcloths. [122] [123] [124] the key question, however, is whether, and to what extent, the incidence and levels of potentially harmful pathogens (and thus infection risks) are higher in homes without access to adequate water and sanitation.sinclair and gerba 124 monitored fecal coliforms, total coliforms, e. coli and heterotrophic plate count bacteria on household surfaces in 8 homes that had improved latrines (i.e. a pour-flush latrine) in a rural village of cambodia, and compared the results with similar data from homes in the us 38 and japan. 39 fecal coliform levels in cambodia were found to be highest in moist locations such as the plastic ladle used for sink water, the toilet seat surface, and the cutting board surface. 124 for e. coli, the mean log cfu per 4 cm 2 ranged from 0.5 to 4.0, with highest counts found on the top of the squat toilet, the wash basin, and the floor around the toilet.fecal coliform levels were 100-fold higher on these surfaces in cambodia than on equivalent surfaces in the us and japanese studies.in lmics, due to a lack of basic sanitation, good hand hygiene is of vital importance. 116 globally, it has been estimated that only 19% of the population washes its hands with soap after contact with excreta. 93 observations show that hand washing with soap is undertaken in an ad hoc manner, 116 with many households having no access to handwashing facilities. 125 unsurprisingly, studies in lmics have reported high levels of fecal indicator bacteria on the hands of household members, [126] [127] [128] with one study correlating presence of fecal contamination on the hands with the prevalence of gastrointestinal and respiratory symptoms within the household. 126 a cochrane review showed that improving hand washing practices probably reduces diarrhea episodes in child day-care centers in both high income countries and among communities living in low to middle income countries by as much as 30%. 92the evidence set out in this paper suggests that, if combined with measures ensuring clean water and adequate sanitation, targeted hygiene practices in home and everyday life settings could make a significant contribution to tackling amr through infection prevention and a consequential reduction in antibiotic prescribing. this is true in all areas of the world including low-income countries.additionally, the evidence suggests that hygiene promotion would contribute to preventing the transmission of resistant bacteria from the home and everyday life settings, into healthcare settings, and back into the community. further research is still needed to evaluate the extent to which this might occur, especially in communities in low income countries.to be effective, hygiene interventions need to consider all aspects that are likely to affect the outcome. this includes a reduction of antibiotics from the food chain and the environment, improved hygiene education and availability of appropriate products as well as the provision of clean water and improved sanitation.based on these findings, the authors of this paper issue a call to action to national and international health policy makers, health agencies, and healthcare professionals to give greater recognition to the importance of hygiene in the home and everyday life and development and promotion or more effective codes of practice for hygiene in the home and everyday life as part of national action plans to tackle amr. although the precise impact of hygiene on transmission of infection between community and healthcare settings needs further investigation, it is important to recognise, that reducing the need for antibiotic prescribing and the circulation of amr strains in healthcare settings cannot be achieved without also reducing circulation of infections and amr strains in the community. we cannot allow hygiene in home and everyday life settings to become the weak link in the chain.the development of this position paper was supported by an educational grant from reckittbenckiser who fund the activity of the global hygiene council. medical writing support was provided by the medical communications agency, spink, which runs the secretariat for the ghc. hand hygiene can reduce the spread of pathogenic microorganisms to patients and healthcare workers (who, 2009) . campus class suspension is a precautionary measure for covid-19, however, the suspension limits nursing educators' support for nursing students' knowledge of hand hygiene. virtual classroom education can be an alternative method for nursing educators to enhance continuous hand hygiene teaching. online teaching and learning can be held through the virtual classroom. this editorial may provide a feasible approach for nursing educators to enhance hand hygiene for clinical nursing students. a quasi-experimental study found that strengthening hand hygiene knowledge for nursing students can address the gap between hand hygiene theory and practice during clinical training (korthonen et al., 2018) . a blended learning (campus and online) approach (ng and yip, 2019) is modified to virtual classroom education. as nursing students have learned hand hygiene theory through campus learning, this modified approach extents online instruction and skips face-to-face instruction on campus. the modified approach is designed to help nursing educators conduct virtual classroom education in three steps: 1. plan appropriate tasks, 2. select essential resources and 3. perform effective delivery.having a collaborative planning prevents potential mismatches in expectations and priorities between nursing educators and nursing students. the planning team includes nursing educators and nursing students to design of content and activity plans for meeting the various needs of nursing students. when a nursing educator starts a virtual classroom program, a specific scope of teaching tasks will be suggested. for example, a task of hand hygiene: when, how and why. the planning team can review the following questions to evaluate teaching tasks: 1) what is the content (specific scope) of a hand hygiene task? 2) what is the learning mode (video or e-notes) for hand hygiene? 3) do all parties (educators and students) support the task of hand hygiene?these questions can reflect teaching content, learning modes and the task of educators and students in preparing the necessary hand hygiene resources.nursing educators need to upload teaching materials including reading materials, handouts and videos. there are many resources in the electronic platform such as world health organization (who, 2009 ). in addition, local health organizations also provide useful information, such as centre for health protection, hong kong. website of centre for health protection, hong kong (https://www.chp.gov.hk/en/ healthtopics/content/460/19728.html) displays hand hygiene videos, pamphlets, booklets and posters in various fields (for example, at home, schools, clinics and hospitals) to help healthcare workers promoting hand hygiene (for example, washing hands with soap and water, and rubbing hands with alcohol-based hand lotion). these essential resources can help nursing educators build electronic libraries by selecting relevant materials to match current hand hygiene courses for enriching previous campus teaching.in the step of selecting the necessary resources, nursing educators can reassess three reviewing questions in step 1. the first question can reflect what the specific scope of hand hygiene is, such as the different aspects between hand sanitization and washing hands with soap and water. the second question can help nursing educators choose a learning mode. for example, instructional videos can provide visual guidance to show when nursing students need to wash hands with soap and water instead of sanitizing hands with alcohol hand-rub. the third question is to determine possible arrangements in different situations, including the availability of equipment: water supply in ambulances. these questions can help decide the necessary resources by considering the content, mode and arrangements of the task.online platforms such as zoom (zoomnow.net) and blockboard (blackboard.com) provide online platforms on mobile phones, laptops and computers for online seminars, conferences and presentations. the online platform expands traditional classrooms into virtual classrooms through technology. nursing educators deliver online teaching for nursing students through online platforms, enabling nursing students to receive school announcements in a virtual classroom, discuss and display collaborative works synchronously. for example, a nursing educator can discuss the time needed to wash hands with soap. students can display their answers, and the educator can provide immediate feedback to students.if all students are self-disciplined, then virtual classroom education can improve student learning outcomes. considering self-discipline, ng and yip (2019) recommend that all participants should follow mutually agreed rules to respect nursing educators and students. as a result, nursing educators can provide nursing students with study guides, including the structure of virtual classrooms and how students expect to interact with the educators and other students. nursing students should follow study guides to participate in learning activities. nursing educators also regularly check nursing students' on-line participation. feedback on the progress of nursing students ensures that students make progress towards achieving individual or group learning goals. to assess learning outcomes of hand hygiene, korthonen et al. (2019) developed a multi-component hand hygiene intervention (mchhi). mchhi has 17 questions, such as 'hand disinfection is not needed before donning gloves' and 'hand should be disinfected after touching the patient's immediate surroundings' (ibid). nursing students can use mchhi to evaluate learning outcomes through self-assessment and peer assessment.this virtual classroom approach is a design for an online environment that provide real-time interaction between nursing educators and nursing students. nursing educators can plan, prepare and perform hand hygiene reinforcement during suspensions of on campus learning. whether novice and experienced nursing educators, this 3-step approach can be used to enhance the hand hygiene of clinical nursing students. hand hygiene is very important to health care professionals. this virtual classroom approach can be applied to nursing education and other health care education such as medical education, physiotherapy education and occupational therapy education. as the rapid growth of tandem transportation has reached an unprecedented level of global connectivity with the disaster regions. some preventive measures against covid-19 have be announced in the affected countries including campus course suspensions. applying this virtual classroom approach to countries where campus classes are suspended will be an alternative method to enhance hand hygiene.all the authors contributed to the planning, drafting and revision this editorial.this editorial did not receive any grant from funding agencies in the public, commercial and nonprofit sectors. in italy, where the covid-19 emergency developed immediately after china, the spread of the pandemic has highlighted some unsolved problems inherent to the prison system. this theme is already, unfortunately, of distressing topicality. among these, the complex balance between the security needs and the protection of the prisoner's right to health deserves particular attention. the detainees, in fact, constitute a group particularly vulnerable to the spread of an infectious disease, both because they have an average level of health lower than that of the general population, and because they live forced in cramped, overcrowded, poorly ventilated environments, in which it is not always possible to observe the general hygiene rules. for these reasons, during the ongoing pandemic emergency, it could be even more difficult to concretely protect the right to health of this portion of the population. in italy the spread of the covid-19 pandemic has highlighted the unsolved problems inherent to the prison system. since the abolition of death penalty, a sentence to prison is the harshest punishment imposed on criminals in italy. prison has substantially a threefold purpose. first, the separation from society and confinement of dangerous individuals for the safety of the public. second, by depriving someone of their liberty for a period of time, it is achieved a punishment for crime, that also act as a deterrent for the rest of the society. third, correction and rehabilitation to the community, with the possibility of preparing the prisoner for a lawabiding life. recent riots in italian prisons have made it clear that something in the delicate balance between confinement, punishment, and rehabilitation has failed. abovementioned riots -according to what the minister of justice reported in parliamentinvolved about 6000 prisoners (10% of the prison population) and led to the death 13 prisoners. furthermore, 40 prison officers got injured, in addition to the devastation of several institutions and the escape of dozens of prisoners, some of whom are still wanted. in front of these episodes, it could be difficult not to return an image of the prisoner as a dangerous person and, therefore, to be controlled and regulated. the great challenge of this moment is not to give in to a custodial involution of the prison and to keep in mind that the conditions of life in the detention institutions, particularly inadequate to face the ongoing pandemic emergency, can act as a stressful factor to aggravate the discomfort inherent in the loss of freedom. these riots were triggered both by the fear of contracting coronavirus in closed, overcrowded and precariously hygienic environments, and the limitations imposed on prisoners by italian law to prevent the spread of the virus. these measures provided that in-person visits were no longer allowed up to the end of the month and there was the possible suspension of premium permits and the semi-freedom regime. however, the riots of these days have reminded us the most serious problem of italian prison system, which is undoubtedly overcrowding. in italian prisons more than ten thousand detainees are held in excess of the regular capacity. in march 2019, out of 46,904 places available in the italian prison institutions, there were 60,512 prisoners, that is 13,608 more than the regular capacity, with an overcrowding of 129%. furthermore, there is a wide spectrum of health problems whose prevalence is greater among prisoners than in the general population. in italian prisons there is an overrepresentation of drug addicts. some of these fragile detainees, during the riots, died from drug overdose, after assaulting the infirmaries to steal methadone, a synthetic opioid used in the treatment of opioid addiction. overcrowding and overrepresentation of drug addicts are chronic issues of the italian prison system. the coronavirus pandemic only forced us for a moment to look at these unsolved problems, before returning to look at what society considers most notable. nevertheless, it will be difficult to forget the worrying fragility of the penitentiary system, which has appeared not able to guarantee conditions of security and public order neither inside the jail, nor outside, where escaped prisoners have not been captured yet. the public disorder we have witnessed can have profoundly destabilizing effects, by instilling fear in the population, who feel own safety already threated by the pandemic, and by jeopardizing efforts made to make prisons more human.it is precisely when it is more difficult to recognize aspects of humanity in the prisoners' behaviour that we must ask ourselves what we have done wrong as a society. if it is true, as dostoevsky said, that "the degree of civilization in a society can be judged by entering its prisons", the journey to be undertaken is still long and difficult. in these days, we have to face the challenging problem of how to protect the health of prisoners during a pandemic, preventing contagion in prison. in fact, compared with the general population, prisoners and detainees worldwide experience a higher burden of infectious diseases. the prevalence of hiv, hcv, hbv, and tuberculosis is higher in prison populations than in the general population, mainly because of the criminalisation of drug use and the detention of people who use drugs [1] . it is also known that there are some contextual factors within prisons which contribute to a higher risk of infectious disease transmission among prisoners. such factors include overcrowding, risk behaviour, delay or lack of diagnosis and treatment, limited access to clean water, inadequate sanitation, and lack of harm reduction measures [2] . in order to prevent coronavirus disease 2019 (covid-19) outbreaks in prison, who/europe has published interim guidance on how to deal with the coronavirus disease in these settings, entitled "preparedness, prevention and control of covid-19 in prisons and other places of detention" [3] . taking into account that "infection can be spread to people who are nearby (within 1 m) by breathing in droplets coughed out or exhaled by a person with the covid-19 virus, or people may become infected by touching contaminated surfaces or objects (fomites) and then touching their eyes, nose or mouth (e.g. a person may touch a doorknob or shake hands and then touch their own face)", this interim guidance recommend to take general precautions for infectious respiratory diseases, as observing physical distancing, washing hands with soap and water and drying them with single-use towels, utilizing alcohol hand sanitizer containing at least 60% alcohol, covering mouth and nose with disposable tissue when coughing or sneezing, and avoiding touching of eyes, nose or mouth if hands are not clean. it is clear that preventing the importation of the virus into prisons and other places of detention is essential to avoid or minimize the occurrence of infection and of serious outbreaks in these settings and beyond.there is a need for a continuous balance between the protection of the security of the prison administration, with the need to limit the use of external hospitalization to only the necessary cases, and the protection of the health of detainees. nevertheless, it must be kept in mind that even washing your hands can be difficult in prison, because there are lots of people using a small number of bathrooms and it is not always possible to access to soap when you wash your hands. the detainees are deeply aware of this, and this awareness mixed with fear has led them to the riots of these days. we cannot forget that prison health is public health by definition [4] . the intrinsic difficulties in balancing the deteinees' right to health and the protection of public security, which could be affected by the effects of both an excessively high number of releases, and the release of particular categories of subjects, are resonating in these days following the adoption, under age and health reasons, of house arrest for some members of organized crime. during this tragic period it's our duty as a society to protect disadvantaged people, and put in place concrete measures to ensure that prisoners, who already do not have full constitutional rights as the fundamental right to freedom, will not also deprived of the right to health.this research received no external funding.not applicable.not applicable.12.1 introduction (fig. 12.1 ) hardly a day passes without new headlines concerning infectious disease threats. the time is far from near to "close the book on infectious disease." not all infectious disease threats evolve into outbreaks or major incidents, and all threats concerning suspected infectious diseases do not turn out to have infectious causes.initially, the cause of major incidents often is not clearly identifi ed. this holds true especially for incidents in which symptoms of the affected persons are diffuse, the conditions are undiagnosed, or the hazardous materials involved are not clearly identifi ed. many incidents caused by material other than biological con-taminants are often initially classifi ed as suspected infectious incidents but, when the full picture becomes clear, they are found to have other causes for example, intoxication by chemical or radiological agents. one reason for this is that most societies have surveillance systems that most of the time direct their major interest toward the more common entity: infectious diseases.infectious diseases can constitute major incidents alone or as a part of or consequence of an incident having a non-infectious cause. the infections that follow as a part of or a direct consequence of a disaster may have several different causes, and they can differ depending on what type of primary incident they are secondary to. the primary incident can lead to disruption of the infrastructure in the affected society; which secondary can result in increasing biological incidents through, for example, increased crowding; collapse of water, deteriorating sanitation and hygienic conditions; drought or famine. secondary effects can even be seen within medical institutions for example as a consequnce of a lessened capacity to isolate infected individuals.because of some of these circumstances, infections can change in both clinical presentation as well as increase in virulence of the microorganism -the ability of the microorganism to cause disease. certain communicable diseases are more prone to cause outbreaks than others and can cause disasters independently.examples of infectious diseases causing disasters independently are pandemics caused by microorganisms, such as infl uenza or cholera. before the outbreak in 2003 of severe acute respiratory syndrome (sars), it was an unknown type of infection and is another example of infection constituting a major incident independently. sars also gives us a serious example of how emerging infections can be included in the term m. wahl e-mail: martin.wahl@vgregion.se biological major incidents . the term "emerging infections" sometimes covers both new and previously unknown contagions as well as reappearing older contagions or re-emerging infections.humanitarian emergencies caused by confl ict or natural disasters are frequently characterized by the displacement of large numbers of people. the populations affected are often resettled in temporary locations with high population densities, inadequate food and shelter, unsafe water, and poor sanitation. these conditions can increase the risk of transmission of communicable diseases and other conditions and lead to increased mortality, particularly from diseases prone to outbreak.to address this increased risk, specialized systems for disease surveillance and response are often set up in the affected areas during the acute phase of emergencies by national ministries, often with support from the world health organization (who) and other agencies. these early-warning disease surveillance and response systems are designed to detect and respond rapidly to outbreaks and disease clusters in populations affected by humanitarian emergencies.major incidents caused by a microorganism or its toxins also should be considered as possible bioterrorism incidents, and they are more often suspected as such than what they turn out to be in reality.several myths are circulating about natural disasters and their possible direct cause of outbreaks. one is that natural disasters themselves cause epidemics. outbreaks are, however, usually secondary to the displacement of people and disruption of infrastructures, as mentioned above. the appearance of infections after a disaster is therefore usually of the same type of infections that are present in the area before the incident but with a possible increase in numbers. a resent example of this is the situation in haiti after the extraordinarily devastating earthquake that occurred in january 2010.another common myth is that dead bodies spread epidemics. carcases smell and are generally unpleasant to see and to handle. they are, however, more of a sanitary problem but, in most circumstances, if handled properly they are not dangerous. it is only in large-scale cholera epidemics or outbreaks of viral hemorrhagic fever (vhf), such as the ebola virus, when bodies might be a direct threat to public health. those who have survived a natural disaster are usually more likely to spread diseases than are dead bodies.major incidents and disasters caused by a microorganism or its toxins can be classifi ed in the same way as major incidents of other causes, including the relevant classifi cation suggested in chap. 2 : incidents consequent to technical development • incidents intentionally caused by man • incidents subsequent to changes in climate and • naturemicrobiological incidents consequent to technical development can be caused by, for example, failing systems for the supply of water, sanitation, and ventilation. these incidents can happen in a community, a building, or a transport facility. many recent food-or waterborne outbreaks are consequences of mistreatment in the modern chains of distribution of food or water.crowding of people as well as animals constitute examples of technical development that can lead to infectious incidents, such as highly pathogenic avian infl uenza, which appears mainly in densely populated poultry farms. another example is the increased risk of epidemic meningitis that occurs when extreme crowding of people takes place, as it does during the pilgrimage to mecca, hajj.a well-known incident with spread of contagious spores over a large surface area happened in sverdlovsk, former sovietunion, in 1979. several cases of anthrax occurred among humans as well as livestock downwind from a microbiology plant ( fig. 12. 2 ). the cause was revealed several years after the incident as an accident after the misuse of fi lters, which led to the dissemination of anthrax spores into open air.incidents consisting mainly of primary physical trauma can have secondary results of infectious disease incidents, such as a sharp increase in the number of wound infections or a shortage of isolation facilities. hospital-acquired infectious diseases are another increasing form that is directly related to technical development in hospital settings and the development of medical techniques.microbiological incidents intentionally caused by man are often termed bioterrorism . they can be used intentionally during war as well as in other situations. an international agreement against the use of biological weapons was achieved under the united nations in 1975 at the biological and toxin weapons convention (btwc). the production and spread of biological agents requires both knowledge and resources to produce suffi cient amounts of the agent along with methods to weaponize the material. the latter problem is often underestimated and is why attempts of biological warfare often have failed. however, in spite of the 1975 btwc agreement, several attempts have been made to use biological weapons, e.g., during the iraq-iran war in the 1980s.an attempt to spread anthrax spores to the public in japan by the terror group aum shinrikyo in 1995 failed mainly because of the use of the wrong source of microbiological material. a nonpathogenic vaccinederived strain was used, causing no harm at all! the fi rst time a successful intentional spread of anthrax was confi rmed was in 2001 after the world trade center attack on september 11. the attack was followed by an intentional spread of anthrax through the mail system in the united states, with several fatalities caused by the most serious and well-weaponized form of anthrax.a man-made disaster that was presumably not caused directly or intentionally by man but could still rather easily have been foreseen or predicted as a direct consequence was the extensive outbreak of cholera in zimbabwe and adjacent countries in 2008-2009. in spite of intense efforts from the international society, the outbreak did not cease until approximately 100,000 people where affected; an unusually high case fatality rate clearly indicated a society under misadministration with failing infrastructure and a health system in ruins.at present, the largest threats to the infectious disease arena is probably microbiological incidents consequent to changes in climate and nature.infectious diseases re-emerge in areas where they previously have been eradicated or spread to new regions because of changes in climate. for example, climate change has the potential to increase substantially the presence of malaria in areas where it previously has been eradicated. the spread of dengue fever and the appearance of the viral infection chikungunya in southern europe are examples of incidents that most likely have one cause in ongoing climate change.climate change also can lead to increased drought and possibly famine, displacement of populations, shortage of water, fl oods, storms, and tsunamis, all of which can secondarily lead to and increase in infectious disease incidents.there is an obvious difference in potential microbiological hazards when, for example, a fl ood is caused by sea water or fresh water. the sharp increase in numbers of cases with severe leptospirosis in the philippines in 2009, after the heaviest rains and fresh-water fl oods in modern history, presented problems with different pathogens than what occurred after the salt-water fl oods in the southern united states in 2005 after hurricane katrina.the increasing problem with antimicrobial resistance is another change by nature that is considered to be one of the strongest disease threats at present. "the bugs are fi ghting back," and the situtation as it was before antibiotics were available seems to be returning quicker than anyone could expect.infectious disease incidents have certain characteristics that differentiate them from most other types of major incidents. the dissemination of or exposure to an infectious agent usually is not noticed until after some latency because the substance is not noted in any obvious way when the incident itself occurs -it is not seen or heard, has no smell, and is fi rst noticed only when the exposed persons develop symptoms. the number of affected can rise sharply, even logarithmically, if the agent involved is communicable with a high reproductive rate (the potential for the contagion to spread from person to person). the large number of people who possibly can be affected during a large-scale communicable disease incident is exemplifi ed with recent epidemics in table 12 .1 .there is almost always a delay between when the incident occurs until it is discovered or revealed as such, and may take even longer to be identifi ed as a specifi c infectious disease incident. the detection of infectious disease incidents relies mostly on different surveillance systems . different methods of surveillance constitute the basis for the detection of infectious disease incidents.an outbreak or an epidemic is by defi nition when more cases of a certain infection are noted or diagnosed than what is expected. terminology common for biological incidents are stated in table 12. 2 .an outbreak can be obvious or insidious depending on the symptoms present and how well surveillance is conducted. most countries have national surveillance systems for a number of different infectious diseases. the national authorities are linked and report to each other through different networks or organizations; e.g., globally through who, within the european union through the european centre for disease prevention and control, and through disease-specifi c networks such as enter-net (international surveillance network for enteric infections) and the european working group for legionella infections.international surveillance reporting and responding is coordinated through who and its member states. global roles have been implemented through who and its international health regulations (ihr) to enhance public health security at all levels: global, national, as well as regional. the ihr is an international legal instrument binding 194 countries, including all the member states of who. the aim of the ihr is to help the international community prevent and respond to acute public health risks that have the potential to cross borders and threaten people worldwide.in the globalized world, diseases can spread far and wide via international travel and trade. a health crisis in one country can impact livelihoods and economies in many parts of the world. such crises can result from emerging infections like sars or a new human pandemic infl uenza. the ihr can also apply to other public health emergencies such as chemical spills, leaks and dumping, or nuclear meltdowns. the ihr aim to limit interference with international traffi c and trade while ensuring public health through the prevention of the spread of disease.the ihr, which entered into action on june 15, 2007, requires countries to report certain disease outbreaks and public health events through focal points to who. building on the unique experience of who in global disease surveillance, alert, and response, the ihr defi ne the rights and obligations of countries to report public health events and establish a number of procedures that who must follow in its work to uphold global public health security.the ihr also require countries to strengthen their existing capacities for public health surveillance and response. who is working closely with countries and partners to provide technical guidance and support to mobilize the resources needed to implement the new rules. the overall aim is that timely and open reporting of public health events will make the world more secure in this aspect.who also coordinates a global network of experts -the global outbreak alert and response network (goarn) -that can step into action on request. goarn is a technical collaboration of existing institutions and networks that pool human and technical resources for the rapid identifi cation of, confi rmation of, and response to outbreaks of international importance.detection of an infectious disease incident depends largely on how sensitive and rapid a surveillance system is. parallel to traditional surveillance, systems are implemented to get early warnings for infectious disease incidents through, for example, syndromes, health-related information activities within the population, fi gures of absentees, or crude mortality data. all surveillance for emerging infections also needs to cover areas outside human medicine. zoonotic infections are infections that can spread from vertebrate animals to humans and vice versa. surveillance for zoonotic infections thus needs to cover both public and animal health communities to increase the surveillance for emerging diseases that have a potential for widespread and serious transmission. the fl u pandemic of h1n1 in 2009-2010 is one example of this, where the new viral strain actually had been circulating in pigs for almost a decade and probably jumped to humans only months before it was detected in mexico in the spring of 2009.the time period from dissemination of or exposure to an infectious agent and onset of the fi rst clinical symptoms varies depending on what type of microorganism is involved and the susceptibility of those exposed to the agent of concerned. the time period from exposure and infection to onset of symptoms is the incubation period . the incubation period usually varies within a certain time range and is dependent on several factors, such as infectious dose, mode of transmission, and susceptibility of the exposed.lack of susceptibility to a specifi c agent can have immunity as one explanation among many. immunity can be genetically determined (congenital) or acquired after exposure or immunization.several infectious diseases can be treated with antimicrobial agents either prophylactic i.e. before or curative i.e. after symptoms have occurred.the fi rst case diagnosed/detected with the infection in question is named the index case , whereas the fi rst case in an outbreak or an incident, i.e., the case that brought the contagion into a population or group of people, is the primary case .an infectious disease can spread among a group or a population at different speeds depending on factors such as mode of transmission, frequency and type of contact, grade of exposure, immunity among the population, and the potential for the contagion to spread from person to person, which is termed the reproductive or transmission rate .relevant characteristics of infectious disease incidents are summarized in table 12 .3 .an infectious microorganism can spread to and between humans via several different routes. it is important to know by which modes different contagions the individual that introduces the infection into a group or population secondary casethe individuals infected by the index case. secondary cases can generate further waves or generations of infection in the affected, exposed population reproductive ratethe average number of secondary infectious cases that are produced by a single index case in a completely susceptible population immunitywhen an individual, in the clinical context, does not develop a disease after exposure to the specifi c infection herd immunitythe level of immunity against an infection in a population that will prevent an outbreak of the infection prophylaxis efforts to prevent transmission or development of a disease before or after exposure to a causative agent attack ratethe proportion of a population that will become ill after being exposed to the specifi c causative agent case fatality ratethe proportion of all who became ill that will die of the infectious disease concerned, i.e., lethality are transmitted to be able to respond to a threat, incident, or outbreak in an appropriate way. the most relevant modes of transmission of infectious diseases are listed in table 12 .4 .knowledge about how to limit the spread of infections is as important as knowledge about transmission routes for different pathogens. because most pathogens and conditions are unknown in the individual contact situation, some basic rules are important to know and to practice from a general point of view. steps to be taken to achieve adequate personal protection depend on the outcome of the risk assessment conducted for each specifi c situation. the appearance of an infectious agent or disease at a certain place or at a certain time can be part of the natural occurrence of the microorganism concerned, but it also can be a consequence of environmental contamination, either accidental or intentional. each individual has physiological barriers such as skin and mucous membranes that function fairly well, at least as long as the barriers are intact. the barrier effect can be much improved and risks of exposure limited by introducing hygienic routines that are practiced at each level of contact between staff and potentially affected persons, i.e., every patient in a treatment or nursing situation. basic hygienic routines include disinfection of hands with alcohol-based items before and after each physical contact; the use of disposable gloves when in contact with secretions or for investigations; and the use of disposable aprons and eye and mouth protection when there is a risk of fl uid splash.point disinfection is added for environmental use, e.g., on surfaces once splash has occurred. figure 12 .3 shows medical staff equipped according to these principles.personal protective equipment (ppe) varies from situation to situation as a consequence of several factors, such as the contagiousness of the suspected pathogen, its routes of transmission, and the severity of the condition concerned. an increasing level of personal protection can be achieved through adding face masks or respiratory protective gear to the basic hygienic routines stated above and into the full ppe recommended for use when there is, for example, a suspicion of the presence of vhf pathogens, as illustrated in figs. 12.4 and 12.5 . the infectious agents causing vhf can serve well as a model situation when it comes to the use of ppe. the vhf agents can be transmitted by all known modes of transmission and the conditions hold a high fatality rate once transmission has occurred.decontamination is seldom used environmentally for biological agents, apart from in the medical setting for individual patients and for material and surfaces.the communicable disease most often subject to more extensive decontamination of the environment and contaminated individuals is anthrax . decontamination of the environment can be diffi cult, time consuming, extensive, and extremely costly because of the ability of the anthrax bacteria to form extremely viable spores. each decontamination plan has to be tailored to the unique situation concerned. for anthrax, this has been shown both historically and recently, in spite of the presence of modern techniques, equipment, and resources.in 1942, during the second world war, the small island of gruinard off the northwest scottish coast was the site of a biological warfare test performed by british military scientists (fig. 12.6 ). decontamination attempts on the island after the biological warfare testing were unsuccessful because of the durability of anthrax spores. as a result, gruinard island was quarantined for many years afterwards. visits to the island were strictly prohibited, except by personnel checking the level of contamination. in 1986, a decontamination effort was started using several hundred tons of formaldehyde solution diluted in seawater and sprayed all over the island together with removal of the worst contaminated topsoil around the dispersal site. a fl ock of sheep was then placed on the island and remained healthy. not until 1990, after 48 years of quarantine, the island was announced safe for habitation.the spread of anthrax by mail in the united states after the world trade center attack on september 11, 2001, killed fi ve people, closed down a senate offi ce building, nearly paralyzed the us postal system, and caused national and international panic. the environmental decontamination methods used on this occasion were chlorine gas and other decontaminants. the senate building could reopen 3 months after the contamination occurred.the investigation of this incident (the "amerithrax investigation") was conducted by the federal bureau of investigation (fbi) and lasted for 6 years. it was thereby the largest and most extensive inquest in the history of the fbi. the incident was fi nally assessed as an intentional criminal activity without connection to any political activities. however, complete resolution was never achieved because the main suspect committed suicide before the investigation could be fi nalized.personal protection is more than physiological and biological barriers. immunity needs to be considered as part of personal protection. immunity can be congenital or acquired. acquired immunity can follow natural exposure with or without obvious disease followed by recovery or can be induced through immunization.passive or, preferably, active immunization (vaccination) is possible for many infectious diseases. the duration of the protection achieved depends on the type of immunizing agent used and if the response is upheld naturally or if it is boosted through concomitant doses.the possibility of using immunization during an infectious disease outbreak, however, is often limited because of factors such as delay in identifi cation of the microorganism concerned, delay in the development of an immune response in the immunized individual, difficulties in defi ning a target population for directed immunization, and, in some instances, the cost of the vaccine as well as availability of the vaccine concerned.immunization is one active way of providing protection on an individual as well as on a population basis. the level of immunity in a defi ned population that prevents the occurrence of epidemics is known as herd immunity . the herd immunity varies with the transmission rate of the disease concerned. a high transmission rate takes a higher degree of herd immunity to prevent occurrence of an outbreak. for most communicable diseases, the herd immunity lies between 75% and 85%. in most circumstances, achievement of immunity through immunization has the drawback that it requires some time to develop. the length of time needed to develop immunity depends on what type of vaccine is used and the number of doses and dose-intervals needed to achieve full protection. the duration of immunity achieved through vaccination also varies correspondingly, depending on the type of vaccine and the number of doses given.personal protection can in certain instances also be achieved through prophylactic medication . such prophylaxis can be administered before or after exposure (preexposure and postexposure prophylaxis) and needs to vary in length depending on the organism concerned, its incubation period, and possible ongoing exposure. prophylactic medication with antimicrobials is seldom justifi ed. exceptions include exposure to anthrax material; when several cases of meningococcal disease have occurred in a closed population; malaria, and specifi c situations with hiv exposure.the fi nal measure to stop transmission of a contagion and its course once the disease has developed in an infected individual is treatment .biological weapons or agents are relatively easy to produce, but their use must include knowledge of methods of dispersion. even though an international agreement against the use of biological weapons was achieved by the un in 1975, several attempts have been made since then to use such weapons. the potential for the use of biological weapons is reduced through several factors, such as diffi culties in controlling the extent of the use, including contamination of affected areas and the possibility of negative effects on the user themselves.intentionally caused biological incidents can and have occurred both during warfare and as part of separate terrorist actions. the level of public health preparedness needed for possible bioterrorist incidents is not static but varies with several factors. the necessary preparedness depends on the continuous evaluation of threats and their changes over time.the suspicion of an intentionally caused incident is more common than the actual intentional use of biological agents. the level of suspicion depends on the evaluation of threats as well as how the threats are perceived.to face biological threats, public health preparedness must include plans that are adaptable to change in threats overtime as well as practical issues. practical issues that need to be included are to what extent protective equipment, vaccine, and antimicrobials are needed as well as their storage. to what extent materials need to be decentralized depends on type of threats and the assessment of such threats. facilities for isolation and the capacity to increase such facilities depending on possible scenarios also need to be included in such planning.the use of biological agents, and even just the threat of their use, has been shown to cause immense psychological effects. preparedness thus needs to include detailed strategies for how information is to be handled and disseminated and how to deal with the possible psychological effects of these threats.several organizations have produced lists of possible biological agents. the most critical agents for public health preparedness are those that are supposed to have the highest overall public impact; these are listed in table 12 .5 .caused incident?an intentionally caused incident can be suspected when either the number of cases or crude mortality show a rapid increase, the cases have an unusual presentation only in numbers or in clinical symptoms, or a different attack rate can be observed, i.e., indoors or at another distinct location. an unusual presentation of a known disease or contagion that show an unusual pattern of sensitivity and solitary cases of a condition with high potential for use as bioterror agent are other situations that should increase the suspicion of having an intentional cause. the importance of a broad surveillance system covering both known and unknown conditions is crucial to enable an early alert and the possibility of responding to what is unexpected but suspected.during the last four decades, the emergence of new diseases has given us approximately 40 new infectious diseases. such rapid development provides both good and strong reasons to keep and continuously develop an "open-minded" surveillance system for infectious diseases. the expression "expect the unexpected" applies more to infectious disease preparedness than any other area within disaster medicine.infectious diseases are unique in many ways when causing major incidents. microorganisms are part of our daily life, and they can cause severe disease as well as large outbreaks and epidemics. below are listed examples summarizing how infectious disease and microbiological threats are unique.the onset of an infectious disease incident is usu-• ally gradual but can rapidly increase and even reach logarithmic proportions. the base of the detection of infectious disease • incidents are well-developed and functioning surveillance and response systems. such systems also need to include mechanisms to detect emerging infections. there is often a delay between the incident itself • and its detection. once an incident is detected, most traces of it source are usually gone, and the base of its detection is mainly through indirect epidemiological evidence. there are several ways to protect target populations • and to stop an ongoing outbreak. the strongest medical threats at present are not bio-• terror activities; instead they are an increase in resistance to antimicrobials -infections are becoming more and more untreatable. a novel coronavirus (cov), the severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus -2 (sars-cov-2), results in the coronavirus disease 2019 . the world health organisation (who) declared the rapid spread of cases of covid-19 a pandemic on 11 th march, 2020. the global response to covid-19 has resulted in substantial changes to business and social practices around the world. with concerns existing around the pandemic, many reports relating to how best to limit the chance of infection have been shared via various news outlets and on social media, with significant amounts of misinformation and speculation being reported [1] . among these, recent rumours have circulated stating that contact lens wear is unsafe, that wearers of contact lenses are more at risk of developing covid-19, that certain contact lens materials are more "risky" than others and that contact lens wearers should immediately revert to spectacle wear to protect themselves. how true are these statements, and are they supported by evidence? importantly, are contact lens wearers increasing their risk of contracting covid-19 by wearing contact lenses? furthermore, what are the ramifications of a potential reduction in the availability of local ophthalmic care for contact lens wearers during this pandemic?before answering these questions, it first is important to review the known structural biology and pathophysiological mechanism of an infection caused by sars-cov-2. all covs contain ribonucleic acid (rna) as their genetic material, which is surrounded by a protein shell called a nucleocapsid. like other covs, sars-cov-2 is an enveloped virus, meaning its nucleocapsid is surrounded by a lipid bilayer. sars-cov-2 has three proteins which are anchored into and protrude from the envelope, including an envelope, membrane and spike proteins [2] . these proteins form the corona that can be seen by electron microscopy and gives the name to the covs. the spike proteins are glycoproteins that have high affinities for angiotensin converting enzyme 2 (ace2), a component of the renin-angiotensin system (ras) found in many human tissues [3] . this affinity is believed to allow entry of the virus into host cells, where the virus releases its rna into the host cell, leading to viral replication and further infection. patients taking ace inhibitors for hypertension may be at increased risk for adverse outcomes as taking this medication may increase ace2 in cardiac tissues [4] ; there may also be concerns about patients with chronic renal disease [5] . while many components of the ras are found in the eye and many of its tissues, there appears to be inconsistency in the literature regarding ace2, and more specifically, if it is present in the cornea, conjunctiva, or tears [6] [7] [8] [9] . this may relate to the infrequent findings to date of sars-cov-2 presence in covid-19 disease on the cornea, conjunctiva, or tear film of humans that is discussed later in this review. it is acknowledged that j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f covs can cause a variety of infections in animals, including conjunctivitis, anterior uveitis, retinitis, and optic neuritis, many of which are severe [10] .contact lenses represent a highly effective form of vision correction for an estimated 140 million people worldwide, with a very low incidence of either microbial keratitis or symptomatic inflammatory keratitis in strict daily wear of contact lenses [11, 12] . it is well established that contact lens wear, and particularly overnight contact lens wear, increases the risk of bacterial keratitis [12] [13] [14] [15] [16] . it is also well established that viral conjunctivitis is the overall most common type of conjunctivitis [17] . yet, the eye, ocular surface and tear film employ a variety of host-defense mechanisms such as physical barriers and immunological strategies that help reduce the chance of infection in the cornea and conjunctiva.a pubmed search on 24 th march 2020 found no evidence that contact lens wearers are more likely to contract covid-19 than spectacle wearers. the likely belief for this being a concern relates to the fact that sars-cov-2 has been isolated in tears, albeit to date, infrequently [18] and also that the virus is known to be transferred by hand contact, and thus could be transferred to contact lenses during their application and removal. in one report, positive tear and conjunctival secretions occurred in a single patient who developed conjunctivitis from a cohort of thirty patients with novel coronavirus pneumonia [18] . in another report, [19] 64 samples of the tear film from 17 patients with covid-19 showed no evidence of sars-cov-2 by viral culture or reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction (rt-pcr). further, the frequency of conjunctivitis in patients with covid-19 reported to date is low, at <3% [18, 20] , although it has been suggested that covs could possibly be transmitted by aerosol contact with the conjunctiva in patients with active disease [18, [20] [21] [22] [23] [24] . however, the question of whether covid-19 can occur through conjunctival exposure remains unknown [7] . recent papers concluded that "the eye is rarely involved by human cov infection, nor is it a preferred gateway of entry for human covs to infect the respiratory tract [25] ." and that "the results from this study suggests that the risk of sars-cov-2 transmission through tears is low [19] ." thus, to date, there are no findings that support concerns that healthy patients are more at risk of contracting covid-19 if they are contact lens wearers.it could be argued that covid-19 is so new that such data would not yet exist. however, the lack of evidence from previous outbreaks of coronavirus disease, including sars, suggests that the j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f risk of developing covid-19 from contact lens wear is low. it is informative to consider viral diseases that are transmitted by direct contact and which could be used as a surrogate for evaluating the risks of covid-19 in contact lens wearers. viruses that are associated with human infections have been found on ocular surface tissues or in the tear film. these include, but are not limited to, both dna and rna viruses such as adenovirus, other coronaviruses, herpes virus, human immunodeficiency virus, influenza virus, and zika virus [18, 22, [26] [27] [28] [29] . that said, these viruses are typically found at low levels and it is generally believed that they are not transmitted from the ocular surface (with the exception of adenoviral infections).one ocular viral infection to consider is epidemic keratoconjunctivitis (ekc), caused by the nonenveloped dna virus adenovirus. this disease is highly contagious, spreads rapidly through direct contact, accounts for 65-90% of viral conjunctivitis cases [30, 31] and has been implicated in actively transmitted disease in eyecare clinics and other common healthcare settings where there is close contact between healthcare providers and patients [32] [33] [34] [35] [36] [37] [38] . a review of the literature appears to show no increased risk for ekc in those wearing contact lenses versus non-lens wearers, with a reported frequency of 3-15% in contact lens wearers [32, 36] . indeed, it has been proposed that bandage silicone hydrogel contact lenses can be used to help treat adenoviral infection in patients [39] . there are conflicting data on herpes simplex keratitis (hsk, another dna virus, but one that is enveloped) and contact lens wear. one prospective cohort study and one retrospective case control study showed no association between contact lens wear and hsk occurrence or reoccurrence, whereas one retrospective study and a case report did suggest an association [40] [41] [42] [43] .another virus for which there has been concern as it relates to the ocular surface is the human immunodeficiency virus (hiv), which causes acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (aids), with an estimated prevalence of 1.1 million in the us [44] . hiv is an rna virus, but a different form of rna virus called a retrovirus, and has an envelope. hiv has been detected in most ocular tissues, including the cornea, conjunctiva and tear film of patients with aids [45] . it has also been recovered from the surface of a contact lens [46] . it is presently believed, however, that hiv has not been transmitted via ocular surface tissues or the tear film. the cdc specifically states, "hiv is not spread by saliva, tears, or sweat that is not mixed with the blood of an hiv-positive person." [47] research has also indicated that with appropriate rubbing of contact lenses, most contact lens care systems would likely prevent the chance of the lens transferring the virus to the eye and resulting in hiv [48] . however, because of the immunodeficiency and compromise, it is j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f recognized that aids is associated with opportunistic infections that can put an individual at risk for ocular infection [49] . hiv has been identified as a risk factor for hospitalization for corneal ulceration. while daily contact lens wear (not overnight wear) can be safe in a patient with aids, it is important that the eyecare practitioner play an active role in managing the patient and their ocular health as it relates to safe contact lens wear. a cd4+ count indicating immunocompetence may be key in guiding these decisions. on march 20, 2020, the cdc released information related to patients with aids and precautions as it relates to covid-19 [50] . of course, there are many differences in these viruses in terms of their structural biology, vectors and other factors. however, with limited current data comparing contact lens wearers versus non-lens wearers in patients with covid-19, this remains the best evidence available of disease spread via viral contaminants that are highly infectious and potentially spread by direct contact, and an exhaustive literature search would not support the apprehension that contact lens wear is a concern.coronaviruses are capable of producing a wide spectrum of ocular disease, including anterior segment diseases such as conjunctivitis and anterior uveitis, and posterior segment conditions like retinitis and optic neuritis [51] . current understanding about how sars-cov-2 spreads is based largely on what is known about other similar coronaviruses. currently, two types of sars-cov-2 have been detected (l and s) [52] . the l form is suspected to be the derived variant of the ancestral s type, which is suggested to be more aggressive and is significantly more prevalent in wuhan, china (where covid-19 was first reported) than other places, although its frequency of isolation has decreased since january 2020 [52] . the virus spreads primarily via person-toperson contact through respiratory droplets produced when an infected person coughs or sneezes [53, 54] . however, it also could be spread if people touch an object or surface with virus present from an infected person, and then touch mucosal surfaces such as their mouth, nose or eyes [54] [55] [56] . given that contact lens wearers must touch their eyes when applying and removing their contact lenses, it is understandable this has been raised as a potential concern for increasing their risk of exposure to the virus. the consistent, unambiguous advice to protect individuals from the virus is to employ frequent handwashing with soap and water. the lipid envelope of the virus can be emulsified by surfactants such as those found in simple soap, which kills the virus [54, 57] .best practice advice for contact lens wearers includes the same instructions that should be imparted under all situations, regardless of the covid-19 pandemic. when using contact lenses, careful and thorough hand washing with soap and water followed by hand drying with unused paper towels (generally known as 'kitchen roll' in the united kingdom) is paramount. for contact lens wearers, this should occur before every contact lens application and removal, and such j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f practice reduces the risks of infection and inflammatory responses and is highly effective [58] . it follows that as long as contact lens wearers are using correct hand hygiene techniques, they should be limiting any virus transmission to their ocular surface, and indeed, as already stated, there is currently no evidence that they are at any higher risk of developing covid-19 infection than non-wearers.a systematic review of the literature shows that there is no scientific evidence that wearing spectacles provides protection against sars-cov-2 or other viral transmissions, although this concept has been recently proposed in the media [59] [60] [61] . this belief around the safety of spectacles likely exists because of the guidance to use approved personal protective eyewear (medical masks, goggles or face shields) in certain settings involved in the care of infected patients [62] . however, these goggles and shields provide very different protection to that afforded by standard spectacles, a difference recognised by the u.s. centers for disease control and prevention (cdc), who state that "personal eyeglasses are not considered adequate eye protection [63] ."despite the cdc's clear delineation between standard spectacles and approved personal protective eyewear, it is understandable that a misplaced belief still exists for spectacles being preferable to contact lenses. there are a number of confounding factors, however, which do not support this theory. consider firstly, part-time wearers of spectacles who only use their spectacles for occasional distance use or for reading. their assumed 'protection' is intermittent, and additionally their increased frequency of putting on and removing their spectacles adds to the potential of touching their face each time, possibly in the absence of hand washing. another point to consider is that some viruses such as sars-cov-2 can remain on hard plastic surfaces (similar to those found in spectacle frames and lenses) for hours to days [64] [65] [66] [67] . upon touching their spectacles, any virus particles could potentially be transferred to the wearers' fingers and face and thus adequate hand hygiene practices should also extend to the regular handling of spectacle and sunglass frames to prevent transmission of viral particles to the fingers and subsequently to the face. spectacles should be regularly cleaned with soap and water and dried with paper towel to remove any adhered viral particles.the importance of hand hygiene j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o fhands are a common vector for the transmission of respiratory infection [68, 69] . an observational study of medical students examined the frequency with which they touched their face [70] . on average, each of the students touched their face 23 times per hour. of all face touches, 44% involved contact with a mucous membrane (eyes, nose or mouth) versus 56% that involved contact with non-mucosal areas (ears, cheeks, chin, forehead or ear). of the mucous membrane touches, 36% involved the mouth, 31% the nose, 27% the eyes, and 6% were a combination of these regions. given this very high number of face touches, hand washing becomes extremely important as a method to prevent transmission of any pathogenic organism from the fingers to the mucous membranes of the face. it is also important to remember that the generally younger demographic of contact lens wearers are often seen to practice more "risky" behaviors (such as the non-observance of social distancing seen recently during spring break in the us) [71] , which poses an inherent increased risk for sars-cov-2 infection. hence, it remains important to remind this age group of the role of hand hygiene in preventing both ocular and systemic infection, regardless of their mode of vision correction.in addition to commons soaps used in hand washing, the sars-cov-2 virus is very likely susceptible to the same alcohol-and bleach-based disinfectants that eye-care practitioners commonly use to disinfect ophthalmic instruments and office furniture. [66] to prevent sars-cov-2 transmission, the same disinfection practices already used to prevent office-based spread of other viral pathogens are recommended before and after every patient encounter. many of these steps have been summarised in a recent editorial [72] , which covers a number of important considerations for conducting safe clinical practice during the pandemic.the cdc and who recommend that people clean their hands often to reduce their risk of contracting the virus. specifically, they advise all people to: wash their hands often with soap and water for at least 20 seconds especially after they have been in a public place, or after blowing their nose, coughing, or sneezing. if soap and water are not readily available, they should use a hand sanitizer that contains at least 60% alcohol. they should cover all surfaces of their hands and rub them together until they feel dry. they should avoid touching their eyes, nose, and mouth with unwashed hands.the use of daily disposable contact lenses substantially reduces the risks of many inflammatory complications [73] . contact lens wearers should always either dispose of their daily disposable lenses each evening, or regularly disinfect their monthly or two-week lenses according to manufacturer and eye care professional instructions.a point to consider is whether there are differences in the risk of sars-cov-2 infection between the various contact lens materials available. suggestions have been made that siloxane-based materials (silicone hydrogels) are more likely to bind sars-cov-2 than hydrogels, [61] and that these contact lens materials are particularly "risky" to wear. a recent study showed that the aerosol and surface stability of both sars-cov-2 and its predecessor, sars-cov-1 (the viral strain associated with the prior sars epidemic of 2002 and 2003) was similar [74] . specifically, both viruses could be detected in aerosols for up to three hours, on cardboard for 24 hours, and on plastic and stainless steel for 2-3 days. to date, there have been no laboratory studies reported on the ability of coronaviruses to adhere to contact lenses, and none on the ability of disinfectants to kill coronaviruses adhered to contact lenses.there is no evidence of the presence of sars-cov-2 in the tears or conjunctival tissue of asymptomatic patients and even in those with confirmed disease, the presence of sars-cov-2 on the ocular surface is low [18] [19] [20] . thus, binding of sars-cov-2 to contact lenses from the ocular surface in asymptomatic wearers would be unlikely. it is advisable that patients with covid-19 should not wear contact lenses and if a patient were to develop covid-19 any contact lenses that were being worn at that time should be immediately disposed of as should any remaining disinfecting solutions and contact lens cases that the patient possess, the patient must revert to spectacle lens wear and when fully recovered should recommence wear with a new pair of lenses.the issues that influence bacterial, viral, fungal and amoebic binding to contact lens materials are highly complex and variable, with confounding data on the factors that impact microbial binding [75] [76] [77] [78] [79] [80] . to date, no studies have addressed this issue specifically for the virus that causes covid-19. a recent paper [66] has been cited as suggesting that silicone hydrogels are more likely to bind sars-cov-2 than hydrogels [61] . however, this paper did not examine contact lens materials. the inanimate surfaces described in the paper [66] which most closely resemble j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f contact lens materials were "plastic" and silicon rubber [64, 81, 82] . neither of these materials appropriately represents the complex bulk and surface chemistry of contemporary contact lens materials [83] [84] [85] and cannot be used to reflect the likely binding of any pathogenic organism to modern day contact lenses. soft lens material surfaces are far more hydrophilic than the plastic and silicon rubber surfaces examined in this manuscript and the binding of virus particles to substrates is complex, depending upon the charges and topographic characteristics of the virus and the characteristics of the surface in question [86] . the factors governing the binding of sars-cov-2 to inanimate surfaces are so far unknown, but for a variety of waterborne viruses the major driving factors were electrostatic interactions (charge driven), followed by hydrophobic interactions, with only minor impact from van der waals interactions [86] .other factors of note in the paper by kampf et al. are that the high concentration of inoculum used to examine the potential viral binding rates (10 3 -10 5 ) are likely very much higher than those encountered on the ocular surface in asymptomatic wearers, and potentially much higher than that encountered following contamination transferred via fingertip application or removal of contact lenses. the viability time quoted is that found at room temperature, but the time for which viruses remain viable at ocular surface temperatures is significantly lower [81, 82] and to date the time for which sars-cov-2 remains viable on hydrophilic substrates such as contact lens materials remains unknown. finally, these studies took place in a dry, static environment, which in no way reflect the moist condition of the ocular surface and did not take into consideration the impact of blinking on removal of potential viral contaminants from a lens surface. furthermore, no evidence exists that would support the contention that silicone hydrogel lenses are more likely to be contaminated with sars-cov-2 (or indeed any virus) than hydrogel lenses.to date, no evidence exists of the ability of currently marketed contact lens solutions to disinfect sars-cov-2, and evidence concerning the ability of contemporary care solutions to disinfect viruses remains equivocal [87, 88] and future work in this area is required. over 30 years ago it was recognized that contact lens care systems of that time, based on chemical and thermal disinfection approaches, were effective at inactivating both herpes simplex and human immunodeficiency virus (hiv) [89, 90] . another study showed that common commercial contact lens care systems were capable of "safely decontaminating" hiv-1 from contact lenses, particularly when a rub step was included [48] . a recent paper showed that benzalkonium chloride, a common ophthalmic preservative, could slow or halt adenovirus [91] . another paper reported that a rub-and-rinse technique was more effective at removing viruses from contact j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f lenses than one in which no rubbing occurred [88] . most modern lens care systems include a surfactant [92] , and given that sars-cov-2 has a lipid envelope, it is plausible that a rub-andrinse of the lens with such a care system may well be effective at killing the virus, but further work in this area is required to confirm this. finally, one study demonstrated that thorough cleansing of virus-infected contact imaging lenses (such as retinal and fundus lenses) with both bleach and water/detergent was possible [93] , although this is not suggested as a suitable option for contact lens disinfection.a potentially important finding from the review paper by kampf et al. [66] was their investigation of the inactivation of coronaviruses by various biocidal agents. these studies included examining the effect of disinfectants such as benzalkonium chloride, chlorhexidine digluconate, hydrogen peroxide and povidone iodine, which are (or have been) used in contact lens solutions.chlorhexidine digluconate was a relatively weak biocide when tested against mouse hepatitis virus or canine coronavirus, benzalkonium chloride had improved activity, 0.5% hydrogen peroxide (a concentration substantially less than that used in contact lens solutions) caused a >4 log10 reduction in human coronavirus within 1 minute, and povidone iodine at concentrations as low as 0.23% (much less than found in contact lens disinfection systems) caused >4log10 reduction in the coronaviruses that cause sars or mers (middle east respiratory syndrome) within 15 seconds.clearly, this is a fast moving situation, with information and advice being produced based on the best available evidence at the time each manuscript, news report and social media post is written.there are many areas where further study could extend current knowledge of the interaction of sars-cov-2 with both the ocular surface and contact lenses. already mentioned above, further study is required to investigate the interaction of sars-cov-2 with contact lens materials, and the ability of contact lens disinfecting systems to kill the virus. the tear film is another area of interest. the tear film has antiviral properties [94, 95] and it is plausible that the tear film could inactivate viruses that were to come in contact with the tears. for instance, the tear film contains the protein lactoferrin, which is thought to prohibit adenoviral entry into corneal epithelial cells [96] . however, this is unknown for sars-cov-2, but given the low frequency thus far of patients infected with covid-19 that demonstrate the virus in the tears [19] this is an area also worthy of study. what is missing at this time is the minimum infectious dose of sars-cov-2 that can cause covid-19 and such information would be valuable. this dose would likely differ depending upon j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f where that viral dose was delivered (for example, on the conjunctiva versus into the respiratory tract), or indeed whether there is true evidence to date that covid-19 could indeed occur through conjunctival transmission [7] .the evidence presented in this paper suggests the safety of contact lens wear has not altered due to the pandemic and that appropriate hygiene considerations for contact lens wear and care should be the same as that always recommended. however, with local access to eyecare being different at this time of social distancing, and potentially severely compromised during the height of the pandemic, what should eye care professionals bear in mind when discussing contact lens wear with their patients?a key consideration is for practitioners to be cognizant of local clinical care facilities during the course of the pandemic and to act to minimise the impact of contact lens-related adverse events on the wider healthcare system, which may be very stretched as staff are moved from providing ophthalmic care to other areas more directly related to covid-19 patients. the implications here will necessarily vary according to local and regional considerations. for example, as of march 24, 2020, routine eyecare has been suspended in many countries, with optometric practices moving to provide scaled-back provision, telephone-only consultations and/or emergency services. for example, in the united kingdom, practitioners should work to manage cases within an optometric framework rather than refer into the national health service where possible. this could include telephone contact with patients reporting contact lens problems and/or a video consultation using a suitable mobile phone app to enable rapid triage and management, reducing the need for burdening other clinical colleagues. some cases may be best managed by referral to optometric colleagues licensed to practice as independent prescribers (therapeutically qualified optometrists) and who can treat more significant contact lens adverse events. in other cases, local minor eye conditions services (mecs) may be an alterative care pathway. under this service patients are sent to local optometrists who have undergone accredited training in advanced optometric care that can triage whether referral to ophthalmology is required and, where possible and within their scope of practice, treat minor eye conditions. it is imperative that eyecare professionals avail themselves of the relevant options as early as possible in order to act quickly in the interests of both their patients and the wider healthcare system, and not begin to investigate the possibilities only after a contact lens wearer reports having some form of adverse event.in north america, australia and other regions/countries, therapeutically-endorsed optometrists are more likely to be the first port of call for contact lens patients with clinical adverse events, although again, most health authorities have required deferral of non-emergent, routine care.here also, appropriate pathways need to be considered and enacted where a reduced level of routine eyecare is available. in countries where contact lens fitters and practitioners are less likely to offer clinical care to patients with clinically significant adverse events, management pathways and advice should again be considered to minimise the impact on the wider healthcare system.it is particularly imperative during the ongoing pandemic that practitioners redouble their efforts to provide clinical advice to their patients to minimise contact lens complications, not least because many parts of the world are in forms of 'lockdown' and even leaving home to seek attention may not be straightforward. the simplest approach, as recommended by the american academy of ophthalmology, would be to cease contact lens wear and return to spectacles during this time [97] . however, given the personal motivation individuals may have for wearing contact lenses, or indeed those wearing lenses for a clinical reason (keratoconus for example), this suggestion is likely not practical for many contact lens wearers. in the uk, the general optical council have taken a pragmatic approach to contact lens wear and supply during the pandemic.releasing a joint statement with a number of other health care regulators, they recognise the highly challenging circumstances and the need to depart from established procedures [98] . they have offered guidance which enables practitioners to exercise their professional judgement on whether patients need to be seen, or whether, following remote consultation, that the best course of action is to continue to supply lenses, even in the case of an expired specification [98] . this action will act to ensure a continual supply of new lenses to wearers and significantly reduce any temptation from patients to use lenses beyond the recommended replacement interval.practitioners should also act to ensure patients receive a supply of their prescribed lens type and communicate this appropriately, to dissuade patients from sourcing alternative (non-prescribed) lens brands via online lens retailers.it is important to remember that by any absolute measure, contact lens wear is a safe form of vision correction for millions of people around the world. a review of 1,276 soft contact lens wearers records, across 4,120 visits, found eighty-two percent did not present with any complications during the observation period of more than two years [99] . the frequency of more significant complications such as corneal infiltrative events (cies) and microbial keratitis are well j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f understood. the annual incidence of symptomatic cies in daily reusable soft lens wear is around 3%, and nearly zero in daily disposable wear [100] . the incidence of symptomatic cies in extended wear is higher, with a 2-7x increased risk compared to daily wear [101] [102] [103] . annual incidence of microbial keratitis (mk) varies by modality, and is around 2 per 10,000 wearers with daily wear of soft lenses, [13, 15, 104] increasing to around 20 per 10,000 wearers in extended soft lens wear, irrespective of material type [13, 14, 105, 106] .however, a valid concern arises that any contact lens complication that warrants a visit to a healthcare facility at this time of limited resources is potentially an issue. to put these risks into context it is helpful to consider the incidence of contact lens issues in relation to accidental homebased injuries that also require medical care. in the u.s in 2012, a total of 19.4 million home injuries occurred that required medical attention, representing a rate of 24.17 per 100,000 of population [107] . a study across two years in belgium estimated the annual incidence of home incidents requiring management by general practitioners to be 2,194 per 100,000 people. [108] within the context of these figures, contact lens wear, with a rate for microbial keratitis of 0.2-2 per 100,000 (i.e. 2-20 per 10,000) wearers does not represent a significant additional burden on the healthcare system compared to the inherent dangers of living within the home, which based on their incidence as quoted above, would result in a far greater number of injuries that may require medical attention during the pandemic.how could the risks of contact lens wear be further minimised to reduce any potential burden on hospital visits at this time? the risk factors that result in cies and infectious keratitis are well understood. the relative risks of developing cies are summarised in the comprehensive review by steele and szczotka-flynn, [11] and include non-modifiable factors such as younger age (1.75-2.61x), higher prescription (≥5d) (1.21-1.6x) and history of a previous event (2.5-6.1x), along with modifiable risks such as overnight wear (2.5-7x), bacterial bioburden on the lens and lid margins (5-8x), and lens replacement schedule -reusable compared to daily disposable (12.5x). mk is associated with many similar factors, including overnight wear [13, 105, 106] , and for daily wear, poor lens and storage case hygiene, infrequent lens case replacement, exposure to water and smoking [109, 110] . risk factors for mk in daily disposable wearers are more frequent use, any overnight wear, less frequent handwashing, and smoking [111] . while it is not possible to change a non-modifiable risk factor such as the age of a patient, there are significant opportunities to address modifiable behaviours. given the reduced incidence of cies in wearers of daily disposable lenses [99, 100] , this form of lens wear seems ideal in a time of reduced clinical j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f provision. some patients hold supplies of both reusable and daily disposable contact lenses, with the latter normally used for sports or holidays. with appropriate practitioner discussion, a move to using daily disposable lenses could be recommended at the current time.ceasing planned or accidental overnight wear significantly lowers the risk of contact lens complications. some patients may principally use their lenses on an extended wear basis for occupational reasons and the same benefits may no longer be present if they are currently working from home. in such situations, reverting to a daily wear schedule could be meritedalthough only if the patient has an appropriate care regimen and is suitably compliant in its correct use. in the same way, patients who habitually alter from daily wear to extended wear over time (for work or other reasons) may be best advised to adopt a routine daily wear modality until normal clinical provision is available. such changes to contact lens wearing schedules should be undertaken only after consultation between the patient and their contact lens practitioner.scrupulous hand hygiene along with correct use of multipurpose solutions with rub and rinse cleaning of reusable lenses, daily case cleaning and regular replacement of the lens case are all positive changes about which eye care professionals should remind their patients at the current time. likewise, an important point is to counsel on the avoidance of contact with water to reduce the risk of microbial keratitis, especially acanthamoeba keratitis which has been increasing in recent years [112, 113] . finally, a patient who has access to both reusable and daily disposable contact lenses at home could be advised to switch to daily disposables, the modality with the lowest risk of complications in soft lens wear [73, 100] .adherence to compliant lens wear and care practices is an important aim for the profession all of the time, however, it can be argued during the current outbreak of sars-cov-2 this should be an area of heightened focus. the attention on thorough hand washing is welcome and an important start, but for eye care practitioners it is reasonable to use this time to go much further, revisiting patient education on safe wear and care practices with the aim of reducing the chance of developing contact lens-related complications requiring clinical care.in conclusion, to date no evidence suggests that contact lens wearers who are asymptomatic should cease contact lens wear due to an increased risk of developing covid-19, that wearing prescription spectacles provides protection against sars-cov-2 or that any one form of contact j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f lens material is more likely to enhance or reduce the risk of future covid-19 infection. however, information concerning this novel coronavirus is evolving at a rapid rate and eye care practitioners must remain attentive to new findings as they emerge.practitioners must remain vigilant about reminding contact lens wearers of the need to maintain good hand hygiene practices when handling lenses. a focus on fully compliant contact lens wear and especially on the modifiable risk factors associated with contact lens complications are especially important during the height of the pandemic, where access to primary and secondary optometric care may be substantially different to normal, and practitioners should act to minimise the burden on the wider healthcare system by considering their local clinical pathway options.patients must be reminded of the need to dispose of daily disposable lenses upon removal, the need for appropriate disinfection with reusable lenses, including the use of a rub-and-rinse step where indicated, and appropriate case cleaning and replacement. finally, consistent with guidance for other types of illness, particularly those of the respiratory tract [114] [115] [116] , no contact lens wearer with active covid-19 should remain wearing their contact lenses. this is the time to cease contact lens wear and revert to spectacles.j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o fa novel coronavirus (cov), the severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus -2 (sars-cov-2), results in the coronavirus disease 2019 . the world health organisation (who) declared the rapid spread of cases of covid-19 a pandemic on 11th march, 2020. the global response to covid-19 has resulted in substantial changes to business and social practices around the world. with concerns existing around the pandemic, many reports relating to how best to limit the chance of infection have been shared via various news outlets and on social media, with significant amounts of misinformation and speculation being reported [1] . among these, recent rumours have circulated stating that contact lens wear is unsafe, that wearers of contact lenses are more at risk of developing covid-19, that certain contact lens materials are more "risky" than others and that contact lens wearers should immediately revert to spectacle wear to protect themselves. how true are these statements, and are they supported by evidence? importantly, are contact lens wearers increasing their risk of contracting covid-19 by wearing contact lenses? furthermore, what are the ramifications of a potential reduction in the availability of local ophthalmic care for contact lens wearers during this pandemic?before answering these questions, it first is important to review the known structural biology and pathophysiological mechanism of an infection caused by sars-cov-2. all covs contain ribonucleic acid (rna) as their genetic material, which is surrounded by a protein shell called a nucleocapsid. like other covs, sars-cov-2 is an enveloped virus, meaning its nucleocapsid is surrounded by a lipid bilayer. sars-cov-2 has three proteins which are anchored into and protrude from the envelope, including an envelope, membrane and spike proteins [2] . these proteins form the corona that can be seen by electron microscopy and gives the name to the covs. the spike proteins are glycoproteins that have high affinities for angiotensin converting enzyme 2 (ace2), a component of the renin-angiotensin system (ras) found in many human tissues [3] . this affinity is believed to allow entry of the virus into host cells, where the virus releases its rna into the host cell, leading to viral replication and further infection. patients taking ace inhibitors for hypertension may be at increased risk for adverse outcomes as taking this medication may increase ace2 in cardiac tissues [4] ; there may also be concerns about patients with chronic renal disease [5] . while many components of the ras are found in the eye and many of its tissues, there appears to be inconsistency in the literature regarding ace2, and more specifically, if it is present in the cornea, conjunctiva, or tears [6] [7] [8] [9] . this may relate to the infrequent findings to date of sars-cov-2 presence in covid-19 disease on the cornea, conjunctiva, or tear film of humans that is discussed later in this review. it is acknowledged that covs can cause a variety of infections in animals, including conjunctivitis, anterior uveitis, retinitis, and optic neuritis, many of which are severe [10] .contact lenses represent a highly effective form of vision correction for an estimated 140 million people worldwide, with a very low incidence of either microbial keratitis or symptomatic inflammatory keratitis in strict daily wear of contact lenses [11, 12] . it is well established that contact lens wear, and particularly overnight contact lens wear, increases the risk of bacterial keratitis [12] [13] [14] [15] [16] . it is also well established that viral conjunctivitis is the overall most common type of conjunctivitis [17] . yet, the eye, ocular surface and tear film employ a variety of host-defense mechanisms such as physical barriers and immunological strategies that help reduce the chance of infection in the cornea and conjunctiva.a pubmed search on 24th march 2020 found no evidence that contact lens wearers are more likely to contract covid-19 than spectacle wearers. the likely belief for this being a concern relates to the fact that sars-cov-2 has been isolated in tears, albeit to date, infrequently [18] and also that the virus is known to be transferred by hand contact, and thus could be transferred to contact lenses during their application and removal. in one report, positive tear and conjunctival secretions occurred in a single patient who developed conjunctivitis from a cohort of thirty patients with novel coronavirus pneumonia [18] . in another report [19] , 64 samples of the tear film from 17 patients with covid-19 showed no evidence of sars-cov-2 by viral culture or reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction (rt-pcr). further, the frequency of conjunctivitis in patients with covid-19 reported to date is low, at < 3% [18, 20] , although it has been suggested that covs could possibly be transmitted by aerosol contact with the conjunctiva in patients with active disease [18, [20] [21] [22] [23] [24] . however, the question of whether covid-19 can occur through conjunctival exposure remains unknown [7] . recent papers concluded that "the eye is rarely involved by human cov infection, nor is it a preferred gateway of entry for human covs to infect the respiratory tract [25] ." and that "the results from this study suggests that the risk of sars-cov-2 transmission through tears is low [19] ." thus, to date, there are no findings that support concerns that healthy patients are more at risk of contracting covid-19 if they are contact lens wearers.it could be argued that covid-19 is so new that such data would not yet exist. however, the lack of evidence from previous outbreaks of coronavirus disease, including sars, suggests that the risk of developing covid-19 from contact lens wear is low. it is informative to consider viral diseases that are transmitted by direct contact and which could be used as a surrogate for evaluating the risks of covid-19 in contact lens wearers. viruses that are associated with human infections have been found on ocular surface tissues or in the tear film. these include, but are not limited to, both dna and rna viruses such as adenovirus, other coronaviruses, herpes virus, human immunodeficiency virus, influenza virus, and zika virus [18, 22, [26] [27] [28] [29] . that said, these viruses are typically found at low levels and it is generally believed that they are not transmitted from the ocular surface (with the exception of adenoviral infections).one ocular viral infection to consider is epidemic keratoconjunctivitis (ekc), caused by the non-enveloped dna virus adenovirus. this disease is highly contagious, spreads rapidly through direct contact, accounts for 65-90 % of viral conjunctivitis cases [30, 31] and has been implicated in actively transmitted disease in eyecare clinics and other common healthcare settings where there is close contact between healthcare providers and patients [32] [33] [34] [35] [36] [37] [38] . a review of the literature appears to show no increased risk for ekc in those wearing contact lenses versus non-lens wearers, with a reported frequency of 3-15 % in contact lens wearers [32, 36] . indeed, it has been proposed that bandage silicone hydrogel contact lenses can be used to help treat adenoviral infection in patients [39] . there are conflicting data on herpes simplex keratitis (hsk, another dna virus, but one that is enveloped) and contact lens wear. one prospective cohort study and one retrospective case control study showed no association between contact lens wear and hsk occurrence or reoccurrence, whereas one retrospective study and a case report did suggest an association [40] [41] [42] [43] .another virus for which there has been concern as it relates to the ocular surface is the human immunodeficiency virus (hiv), which causes acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (aids), with an estimated prevalence of 1.1 million in the us [44] . hiv is an rna virus, but a different form of rna virus called a retrovirus, and has an envelope. hiv has been detected in most ocular tissues, including the cornea, conjunctiva and tear film of patients with aids [45] . it has also been recovered from the surface of a contact lens [46] . it is presently believed, however, that hiv has not been transmitted via ocular surface tissues or the tear film. the cdc specifically states, "hiv is not spread by saliva, tears, or sweat that is not mixed with the blood of an hiv-positive person." [47] research has also indicated that with appropriate rubbing of contact lenses, most contact lens care systems would likely prevent the chance of the lens transferring the virus to the eye and resulting in hiv [48] . however, because of the immunodeficiency and compromise, it is recognized that aids is associated with opportunistic infections that can put an individual at risk for ocular infection [49] . hiv has been identified as a risk factor for hospitalization for corneal ulceration. while daily contact lens wear (not overnight wear) can be safe in a patient with aids, it is important that the eyecare practitioner play an active role in managing the patient and their ocular health as it relates to safe contact lens wear. a cd4+ count indicating immunocompetence may be key in guiding these decisions. on march 20, 2020, the cdc released information related to patients with aids and precautions as it relates to covid-19 [50] . of course, there are many differences in these viruses in terms of their structural biology, vectors and other factors. however, with limited current data comparing contact lens wearers versus non-lens wearers in patients with covid-19, this remains the best evidence available of disease spread via viral contaminants that are highly infectious and potentially spread by direct contact, and an exhaustive literature search would not support the apprehension that contact lens wear is a concern.coronaviruses are capable of producing a wide spectrum of ocular disease, including anterior segment diseases such as conjunctivitis and anterior uveitis, and posterior segment conditions like retinitis and optic neuritis [51] . current understanding about how sars-cov-2 spreads is based largely on what is known about other similar coronaviruses. currently, two types of sars-cov-2 have been detected (l and s) [52] . the l form is suspected to be the derived variant of the ancestral s type, which is suggested to be more aggressive and is significantly more prevalent in wuhan, china (where covid-19 was first reported) than other places, although its frequency of isolation has decreased since january 2020 [52] . the virus spreads primarily via person-to-person contact through respiratory droplets produced when an infected person coughs or sneezes [53, 54] . however, it also could be spread if people touch an object or surface with virus present from an infected person, and then touch mucosal surfaces such as their mouth, nose or eyes [54] [55] [56] . given that contact lens wearers must touch their eyes when applying and removing their contact lenses, it is understandable this has been raised as a potential concern for increasing their risk of exposure to the virus. the consistent, unambiguous advice to protect individuals from the virus is to employ frequent handwashing with soap and water. the lipid envelope of the virus can be emulsified by surfactants such as those found in simple soap, which kills the virus [54, 57] . best practice advice for contact lens wearers includes the same instructions that should be imparted under all situations, regardless of the covid-19 pandemic. when using contact lenses, careful and thorough hand washing with soap and water followed by hand drying with unused paper towels (generally known as 'kitchen roll' in the united kingdom) is paramount. for contact lens wearers, this should occur before every contact lens application and removal, and such practice reduces the risks of infection and inflammatory responses and is highly effective [58] . it follows that as long as contact lens wearers are using correct hand hygiene techniques, they should be limiting any virus transmission to their ocular surface, and indeed, as already stated, there is currently no evidence that they are at any higher risk of developing covid-19 infection than non-wearers.a systematic review of the literature shows that there is no scientific evidence that wearing spectacles provides protection against sars-cov-2 or other viral transmissions, although this concept has been recently proposed in the media [59] [60] [61] . this belief around the safety of spectacles likely exists because of the guidance to use approved personal protective eyewear (medical masks, goggles or face shields) in certain settings involved in the care of infected patients [62] . however, these goggles and shields provide very different protection to that afforded by standard spectacles, a difference recognised by the u.s. centers for disease control and prevention (cdc), who state that "personal eyeglasses are not considered adequate eye protection [63] ."despite the cdc's clear delineation between standard spectacles and approved personal protective eyewear, it is understandable that a misplaced belief still exists for spectacles being preferable to contact lenses. there are a number of confounding factors, however, which do not support this theory. consider firstly, part-time wearers of spectacles who only use their spectacles for occasional distance use or for reading. their assumed 'protection' is intermittent, and additionally their increased frequency of putting on and removing their spectacles adds to the potential of touching their face each time, possibly in the absence of hand washing. another point to consider is that some viruses such as sars-cov-2 can remain on hard plastic surfaces (similar to those found in spectacle frames and lenses) for hours to days [64] [65] [66] [67] . upon touching their spectacles, any virus particles could potentially be transferred to the wearers' fingers and face and thus adequate hand hygiene practices should also extend to the regular handling of spectacle and sunglass frames to prevent transmission of viral particles to the fingers and subsequently to the face. spectacles should be regularly cleaned with soap and water and dried with paper towel to remove any adhered viral particles.hands are a common vector for the transmission of respiratory infection [68, 69] . an observational study of medical students examined the frequency with which they touched their face [70] . on average, each of the students touched their face 23 times per hour. of all face touches, 44 % involved contact with a mucous membrane (eyes, nose or mouth) versus 56 % that involved contact with non-mucosal areas (ears, cheeks, chin, forehead or ear). of the mucous membrane touches, 36 % involved the mouth, 31 % the nose, 27 % the eyes, and 6 % were a combination of these regions. given this very high number of face touches, hand washing becomes extremely important as a method to prevent transmission of any pathogenic organism from the fingers to the mucous membranes of the face. it is also important to remember that the generally younger demographic of contact lens wearers are often seen to practice more "risky" behaviors (such as the non-observance of social distancing seen recently during spring break in the us) [71] , which poses an inherent increased risk for sars-cov-2 infection. hence, it remains important to remind this age group of the role of hand hygiene in preventing both ocular and systemic infection, regardless of their mode of vision correction.in addition to commons soaps used in hand washing, the sars-cov-2 virus is very likely susceptible to the same alcohol-and bleach-based disinfectants that eye-care practitioners commonly use to disinfect ophthalmic instruments and office furniture [66] . to prevent sars-cov-2 transmission, the same disinfection practices already used to prevent office-based spread of other viral pathogens are recommended before and after every patient encounter. many of these steps have been summarised in a recent editorial [72] , which covers a number of important considerations for conducting safe clinical practice during the pandemic.the cdc and who recommend that people clean their hands often to reduce their risk of contracting the virus. specifically, they advise all people to:• wash their hands often with soap and water for at least 20 s especially after they have been in a public place, or after blowing their nose, coughing, or sneezing.• if soap and water are not readily available, they should use a hand sanitizer that contains at least 60 % alcohol. they should cover all surfaces of their hands and rub them together until they feel dry.• they should avoid touching their eyes, nose, and mouth with unwashed hands.the use of daily disposable contact lenses substantially reduces the risks of many inflammatory complications [73] . contact lens wearers should always either dispose of their daily disposable lenses each evening, or regularly disinfect their monthly or two-week lenses according to manufacturer and eye care professional instructions.a point to consider is whether there are differences in the risk of sars-cov-2 infection between the various contact lens materials available. suggestions have been made that siloxane-based materials (silicone hydrogels) are more likely to bind sars-cov-2 than hydrogels, [61] and that these contact lens materials are particularly "risky" to wear. a recent study showed that the aerosol and surface stability of both sars-cov-2 and its predecessor, sars-cov-1 (the viral strain associated with the prior sars epidemic of 2002 and 2003) was similar [74] . specifically, both viruses could be detected in aerosols for up to three hours, on cardboard for 24 h, and on plastic and stainless steel for 2-3 days. to date, there have been no laboratory studies reported on the ability of coronaviruses to adhere to contact lenses, and none on the ability of disinfectants to kill coronaviruses adhered to contact lenses.there is no evidence of the presence of sars-cov-2 in the tears or conjunctival tissue of asymptomatic patients and even in those with confirmed disease, the presence of sars-cov-2 on the ocular surface is low [18] [19] [20] . thus, binding of sars-cov-2 to contact lenses from the ocular surface in asymptomatic wearers would be unlikely. it is advisable that patients with covid-19 should not wear contact lenses and if a patient were to develop covid-19 any contact lenses that were being worn at that time should be immediately disposed of as should any remaining disinfecting solutions and contact lens cases that the patient possess, the patient must revert to spectacle lens wear and when fully recovered should recommence wear with a new pair of lenses.the issues that influence bacterial, viral, fungal and amoebic binding to contact lens materials are highly complex and variable, with confounding data on the factors that impact microbial binding [75] [76] [77] [78] [79] [80] .to date, no studies have addressed this issue specifically for the virus that causes covid-19. a recent paper [66] has been cited as suggesting that silicone hydrogels are more likely to bind sars-cov-2 than hydrogels [61] . however, this paper did not examine contact lens materials. the inanimate surfaces described in the paper [66] which most closely resemble contact lens materials were "plastic" and silicon rubber [64, 81, 82] . neither of these materials appropriately represents the complex bulk and surface chemistry of contemporary contact lens materials [83] [84] [85] and cannot be used to reflect the likely binding of any pathogenic organism to modern day contact lenses. soft lens material surfaces are far more hydrophilic than the plastic and silicon rubber surfaces examined in this manuscript and the binding of virus particles to substrates is complex, depending upon the charges and topographic characteristics of the virus and the characteristics of the surface in question [86] . the factors governing the binding of sars-cov-2 to inanimate surfaces are so far unknown, but for a variety of waterborne viruses the major driving factors were electrostatic interactions (charge driven), followed by hydrophobic interactions, with only minor impact from van der waals interactions [86] .other factors of note in the paper by kampf et al. are that the high concentration of inoculum used to examine the potential viral binding rates (10 3 -10 5 ) are likely very much higher than those encountered on the ocular surface in asymptomatic wearers, and potentially much higher than that encountered following contamination transferred via fingertip application or removal of contact lenses. the viability time quoted is that found at room temperature, but the time for which viruses remain viable at ocular surface temperatures is significantly lower [81, 82] and to date the time for which sars-cov-2 remains viable on hydrophilic substrates such as contact lens materials remains unknown. finally, these studies took place in a dry, static environment, which in no way reflect the moist condition of the ocular surface and did not take into consideration the impact of blinking on removal of potential viral contaminants from a lens surface. furthermore, no evidence exists that would support the contention that silicone hydrogel lenses are more likely to be contaminated with sars-cov-2 (or indeed any virus) than hydrogel lenses.to date, no evidence exists of the ability of currently marketed contact lens solutions to disinfect sars-cov-2, and evidence concerning the ability of contemporary care solutions to disinfect viruses remains equivocal [87, 88] and future work in this area is required. over 30 years ago it was recognized that contact lens care systems of that time, based on chemical and thermal disinfection approaches, were effective at inactivating both herpes simplex and human immunodeficiency virus (hiv) [89, 90] . another study showed that common commercial contact lens care systems were capable of "safely decontaminating" hiv-1 from contact lenses, particularly when a rub step was included [48] . a recent paper showed that benzalkonium chloride, a common ophthalmic preservative, could slow or halt adenovirus [91] . another paper reported that a rub-and-rinse technique was more effective at removing viruses from contact lenses than one in which no rubbing occurred [88] . most modern lens care systems include a surfactant [92] , and given that sars-cov-2 has a lipid envelope, it is plausible that a rub-and-rinse of the lens with such a care system may well be effective at killing the virus, but further work in this area is required to confirm this. finally, one study demonstrated that thorough cleansing of virus-infected contact imaging lenses (such as retinal and fundus lenses) with both bleach and water/detergent was possible [93] , although this is not suggested as a suitable option for contact lens disinfection.a potentially important finding from the review paper by kampf et al. [66] was their investigation of the inactivation of coronaviruses by various biocidal agents. these studies included examining the effect of disinfectants such as benzalkonium chloride, chlorhexidine digluconate, hydrogen peroxide and povidone iodine, which are (or have been) used in contact lens solutions. chlorhexidine digluconate was a relatively weak biocide when tested against mouse hepatitis virus or canine coronavirus, benzalkonium chloride had improved activity, 0.5 % hydrogen peroxide (a concentration substantially less than that used in contact lens solutions) caused a > 4 log 10 reduction in human coronavirus within 1 min, and povidone iodine at concentrations as low as 0.23 % (much less than found in contact lens disinfection systems) caused > 4log 10 reduction in the coronaviruses that cause sars or mers (middle east respiratory syndrome) within 15 s.clearly, this is a fast moving situation, with information and advice being produced based on the best available evidence at the time each manuscript, news report and social media post is written. there are many areas where further study could extend current knowledge of the interaction of sars-cov-2 with both the ocular surface and contact lenses. already mentioned above, further study is required to investigate the interaction of sars-cov-2 with contact lens materials, and the ability of contact lens disinfecting systems to kill the virus. the tear film is another area of interest. the tear film has antiviral properties [94, 95] and it is plausible that the tear film could inactivate viruses that were to come in contact with the tears. for instance, the tear film contains the protein lactoferrin, which is thought to prohibit adenoviral entry into corneal epithelial cells [96] . however, this is unknown for sars-cov-2, but given the low frequency thus far of patients infected with covid-19 that demonstrate the virus in the tears [19] this is an area also worthy of study. what is missing at this time is the minimum infectious dose of sars-cov-2 that can cause covid-19 and such information would be valuable. this dose would likely differ depending upon where that viral dose was delivered (for example, on the conjunctiva versus into the respiratory tract), or indeed whether there is true evidence to date that covid-19 could indeed occur through conjunctival transmission [7] .the evidence presented in this paper suggests the safety of contact lens wear has not altered due to the pandemic and that appropriate hygiene considerations for contact lens wear and care should be the same as that always recommended. however, with local access to eyecare being different at this time of social distancing, and potentially severely compromised during the height of the pandemic, what should eye care professionals bear in mind when discussing contact lens wear with their patients?a key consideration is for practitioners to be cognizant of local clinical care facilities during the course of the pandemic and to act to minimise the impact of contact lens-related adverse events on the wider healthcare system, which may be very stretched as staff are moved from providing ophthalmic care to other areas more directly related to covid-19 patients. the implications here will necessarily vary according to local and regional considerations. for example, as of march 24, 2020, routine eyecare has been suspended in many countries, with optometric practices moving to provide scaled-back provision, telephone-only consultations and/or emergency services. for example, in the united kingdom, practitioners should work to manage cases within an optometric framework rather than refer into the national health service where possible. this could include telephone contact with patients reporting contact lens problems and/or a video consultation using a suitable mobile phone app to enable rapid triage and management, reducing the need for burdening other clinical colleagues. some cases may be best managed by referral to optometric colleagues licensed to practice as independent prescribers (therapeutically qualified optometrists) and who can treat more significant contact lens adverse events. in other cases, local minor eye conditions services (mecs) may be an alterative care pathway. under this service patients are sent to local optometrists who have undergone accredited training in advanced optometric care that can triage whether referral to ophthalmology is required and, where possible and within their scope of practice, treat minor eye conditions. it is imperative that eyecare professionals avail themselves of the relevant options as early as possible in order to act quickly in the interests of both their patients and the wider healthcare system, and not begin to investigate the possibilities only after a contact lens wearer reports having some form of adverse event.in north america, australia and other regions/countries, therapeutically-endorsed optometrists are more likely to be the first port of call for contact lens patients with clinical adverse events, although again, most health authorities have required deferral of non-emergent, routine care. here also, appropriate pathways need to be considered and enacted where a reduced level of routine eyecare is available. in countries where contact lens fitters and practitioners are less likely to offer clinical care to patients with clinically significant adverse events, management pathways and advice should again be considered to minimise the impact on the wider healthcare system.it is particularly imperative during the ongoing pandemic that practitioners redouble their efforts to provide clinical advice to their patients to minimise contact lens complications, not least because many parts of the world are in forms of 'lockdown' and even leaving home to seek attention may not be straightforward. the simplest approach, as recommended by the american academy of ophthalmology, would be to cease contact lens wear and return to spectacles during this time [97] . however, given the personal motivation individuals may have for wearing contact lenses, or indeed those wearing lenses for a clinical reason (keratoconus for example), this suggestion is likely not practical for many contact lens wearers. in the uk, the general optical council have taken a pragmatic approach to contact lens wear and supply during the pandemic. releasing a joint statement with a number of other health care regulators, they recognise the highly challenging circumstances and the need to depart from established procedures [98] . they have offered guidance which enables practitioners to exercise their professional judgement on whether patients need to be seen, or whether, following remote consultation, that the best course of action is to continue to supply lenses, even in the case of an expired specification [98] . this action will act to ensure a continual supply of new lenses to wearers and significantly reduce any temptation from patients to use lenses beyond the recommended replacement interval. practitioners should also act to ensure patients receive a supply of their prescribed lens type and communicate this appropriately, to dissuade patients from sourcing alternative (non-prescribed) lens brands via online lens retailers.it is important to remember that by any absolute measure, contact lens wear is a safe form of vision correction for millions of people around the world. a review of 1276 soft contact lens wearers records, across 4120 visits, found eighty-two percent did not present with any complications during the observation period of more than two years [99] . the frequency of more significant complications such as corneal infiltrative events (cies) and microbial keratitis are well understood. the annual incidence of symptomatic cies in daily reusable soft lens wear is around 3%, and nearly zero in daily disposable wear [100] . the incidence of symptomatic cies in extended wear is higher, with a 2−7x increased risk compared to daily wear [101] [102] [103] . annual incidence of microbial keratitis (mk) varies by modality, and is around 2 per 10,000 wearers with daily wear of soft lenses, [13, 15, 104] increasing to around 20 per 10,000 wearers in extended soft lens wear, irrespective of material type [13, 14, 105, 106] .however, a valid concern arises that any contact lens complication that warrants a visit to a healthcare facility at this time of limited resources is potentially an issue. to put these risks into context it is helpful to consider the incidence of contact lens issues in relation to accidental home-based injuries that also require medical care. in the u.s in 2012, a total of 19.4 million home injuries occurred that required medical attention, representing a rate of 24.17 per 100,000 of population [107] . a study across two years in belgium estimated the annual incidence of home incidents requiring management by general practitioners to be 2194 per 100,000 people [108] . within the context of these figures, contact lens wear, with a rate for microbial keratitis of 0.2-2 per 100,000 (i.e. 2-20 per 10,000) wearers does not represent a significant additional burden on the healthcare system compared to the inherent dangers of living within the home, which based on their incidence as quoted above, would result in a far greater number of injuries that may require medical attention during the pandemic.how could the risks of contact lens wear be further minimised to reduce any potential burden on hospital visits at this time? the risk factors that result in cies and infectious keratitis are well understood. the relative risks of developing cies are summarised in the comprehensive review by steele and szczotka-flynn, [11] and include nonmodifiable factors such as younger age (1.75-2.61x), higher prescription (≥5d) (1.21−1.6x) and history of a previous event (2.5-6.1x), along with modifiable risks such as overnight wear (2.5−7x), bacterial bioburden on the lens and lid margins (5−8x), and lens replacement schedule -reusable compared to daily disposable (12.5x). mk is associated with many similar factors, including overnight wear [13, 105, 106] , and for daily wear, poor lens and storage case hygiene, infrequent lens case replacement, exposure to water and smoking [109, 110] . risk factors for mk in daily disposable wearers are more frequent use, any overnight wear, less frequent handwashing, and smoking [111] . while it is not possible to change a non-modifiable risk factor such as the age of a patient, there are significant opportunities to address modifiable behaviours. given the reduced incidence of cies in wearers of daily disposable lenses [99, 100] , this form of lens wear seems ideal in a time of reduced clinical provision. some patients hold supplies of both reusable and daily disposable contact lenses, with the latter normally used for sports or holidays. with appropriate practitioner discussion, a move to using daily disposable lenses could be recommended at the current time.ceasing planned or accidental overnight wear significantly lowers the risk of contact lens complications. some patients may principally use their lenses on an extended wear basis for occupational reasons and the same benefits may no longer be present if they are currently working from home. in such situations, reverting to a daily wear schedule could be meritedalthough only if the patient has an appropriate care regimen and is suitably compliant in its correct use. in the same way, patients who habitually alter from daily wear to extended wear over time (for work or other reasons) may be best advised to adopt a routine daily wear modality until normal clinical provision is available. such changes to contact lens wearing schedules should be undertaken only after consultation between the patient and their contact lens practitioner.scrupulous hand hygiene along with correct use of multipurpose solutions with rub and rinse cleaning of reusable lenses, daily case cleaning and regular replacement of the lens case are all positive changes about which eye care professionals should remind their patients at the current time. likewise, an important point is to counsel on the avoidance of contact with water to reduce the risk of microbial keratitis, especially acanthamoeba keratitis which has been increasing in recent years [112, 113] . finally, a patient who has access to both reusable and daily disposable contact lenses at home could be advised to switch to daily disposables, the modality with the lowest risk of complications in soft lens wear [73, 100] .adherence to compliant lens wear and care practices is an important aim for the profession all of the time, however, it can be argued during the current outbreak of sars-cov-2 this should be an area of heightened focus. the attention on thorough hand washing is welcome and an important start, but for eye care practitioners it is reasonable to use this time to go much further, revisiting patient education on safe wear and care practices with the aim of reducing the chance of developing contact lens-related complications requiring clinical care.in conclusion, to date no evidence suggests that contact lens wearers who are asymptomatic should cease contact lens wear due to an increased risk of developing covid-19, that wearing prescription spectacles provides protection against sars-cov-2 or that any one form of contact lens material is more likely to enhance or reduce the risk of future covid-19 infection. however, information concerning this novel coronavirus is evolving at a rapid rate and eye care practitioners must remain attentive to new findings as they emerge.practitioners must remain vigilant about reminding contact lens wearers of the need to maintain good hand hygiene practices when handling lenses. a focus on fully compliant contact lens wear and especially on the modifiable risk factors associated with contact lens complications are especially important during the height of the pandemic, where access to primary and secondary optometric care may be substantially different to normal, and practitioners should act to minimise the burden on the wider healthcare system by considering their local clinical pathway options. patients must be reminded of the need to dispose of daily disposable lenses upon removal, the need for appropriate disinfection with reusable lenses, including the use of a rub-andrinse step where indicated, and appropriate case cleaning and replacement. finally, consistent with guidance for other types of illness, particularly those of the respiratory tract [114] [115] [116] , no contact lens wearer with active covid-19 should remain wearing their contact lenses. this is the time to cease contact lens wear and revert to spectacles.lyndon jones and karen walsh are employees of the centre for ocular research & education (core) at the university of waterloo. over the past 3 years core has received research support or lectureship honoraria from the following companies: alcon, allergan, coopervision, gl chemtec, imed pharma, johnson & johnson vision care, lubris, menicon, nature's way, novartis, ote, ps therapy, safilens, santen, shire, sightglass and visioneering.covid-19 was first recognized in december 2019 and within months evolved into a global 141 pandemic declared by the world health organization (who) in march 2020. to avert its rapid 142 spread, country-specific restrictions have been introduced spanning strict social/physical 143 distancing measures, stay-at-home orders and even lockdowns, workplace closings and 144 furloughs/layoffs, postponing of elective procedures in medical centers to preserve medical 145 resources, suspending many in-person medical consultation and clinic visits, or substituting 146 these face to face consultations with remote interventions, e.g. telecommunications. measures 147 to limit person-to-person contact affected institutions and researchers applying non-invasive 148 brain stimulation (nibs) operations. with the suddenness of covid-19 emergence, operations 149 at clinics and research centers administering nibs were disrupted to varied degrees -from 150 suspension of all activities, to limiting new enrollment or abbreviation protocols, to incremental 151 accommodations -depending on regional restrictions and the nature of underling protocols (e.g. 152in-person treatment vs remote treatment). the means of maintaining (and even expanding) 153 access to nibs during the covid-19 pandemic are strategically evolving. considering that 154 nibs is a unique non-pharmacological tool, forms of which have been successfully established 155 for treatment of a wide range of neurological and psychiatric disorders [1] [2] [3] [4] [5] [6] [7] , often on 156 moderately or even severely impaired patients unresponsive to conventional therapies [8, 9] during the covid-19-related stay-at-home mandate, critical consideration must be given to re-354 integration strategies and approaches for restarting studies and trials. the timing and details of 355 re-integration procedures will vary significantly across institutions, as did study stoppage and 356 stay-at-home procedures. nonetheless, brain stimulation teams can begin planning for potential 357 iterations of re-integration procedures. at present, commonly discussed strategies across 358 institutions include a tiered return to institutions for study teams, potential split shifts for study 359 team members to cover study activities, ppe for all participants and study staff, covid-19 360 infection or antibody testing procedures, body temperature assessment of all staff and 361 participants, redesign of lab procedures/space to minimize person-to-person contact, new 362 facility and equipment sanitization procedures, among others (see also below, section 6). while 363 institutional procedures will vary, advanced planning for how these procedures will impact study 364 continuation is important. in addition, study teams will be faced with a backlog of participants 365 that either missed planned follow-up visits or have upcoming follow-up visits, as well as a need 366 to replace participants whose intervention schedules were interrupted by stay-at-home 367 mandates. study teams will likely be strained to perform all needed activities for study 368 continuation upon return. advanced planning for prioritization of study activities will be important 369 for efficient transition back to in-person activity. we are also faced with the uncertain possibility of one or more recurrent waves of covid-19 373 and similar epidemic/pandemic outbreaks in the coming months and years. thus, careful consideration of protective equipment to protect research participants and staff members, to 375 disinfect tools and labs, and long-term planning for implementation of remote assessment 376 and/or intervention procedures may prove critical for long-term continuation of studies should 377 this become a reality. further still, once rapid covid-19 testing and antibody assays are proven 378 to be reliable and widely available, we will have tools that may allow us to alter how we respond 379 to future waves of covid-19. if procedures for maximizing the safety of in-person study 380 activities (modification of space for face to face visits, restructuring of waiting areas to separate 381 participants/patients, stringent ppe procedures, etc.) can be implemented immediately following 382 the current outbreak, these methods paired with new covid-19 testing procedures may 383 redefine how we respond to future covid-19 pandemic events. for example, most tms clinics 384 around the world were shut down for depression treatment following the initial covid-19 385 outbreak, preventing access to care needed by patients. if careful in our current and future 386 response, different approaches for safely continuing such activities may be possible. we can 387 consider developing institution specific standard operating procedures for the labs and 388 orientation of all staff members to deal with future outbreaks. as such, we provide a summary of 389 important considerations for response to covid-19 as well as a checklist for adapting research 390 and treatment practices to covid-19 in table 3 . 391insert table 3 about here  393   394 here we provide a list of recommendations for adapting research and treatment practices to 397 covid-19 pandemic. 398 399 1) conduct a systematic updated risk-benefit analysis of each protocol to decide for 400 each effort if it should continue and inform remaining steps; this may include 401 contingency plans to changes in a given circumstance (e.g. if x happens the trial will 402 need to wind down under these conditions), engaging all stakeholders in discussion 403 (e.g. staff, program office, dsmb, etc.), and statistical consultation with respect to the 404 power to make conclusions regarding protocol changes (e.g. change in dose, trials 405 terminated prematurely) and associated changes in outcome reporting (e.g. feasibility 406 instead of efficacy). 407 no way encouraging a decrease in the standards required for publication. rather, an increase in 511 understanding around the circumstances in which that work is done is called for. 512 513 firstly, it is vital to recognize the additional anxiety the current situation will place on early 514career researchers and phd students. for students with only months of funding left with which 515 to complete their degrees, this is a very stressful time, as it is for those more senior researchers 516 with grant deadlines. it is to be hoped that this paper will provide helpful suggestions and 517 contribute to the discussion for ways to ease the difficulties faced at this time, however, the 518 inevitable anxieties associated with the current situation are real and should be explicitly 519 acknowledged. we must work to address these and to support our colleagues through this 520 difficult time. 521 522 research groups around the world will be physically separate, indeed often spread across time 523 zones if students choose to spend this unprecedented period at home. this will inevitably lead 524 to psychological stress, something that has already been seen in china [13] . maintaining group 525 cohesion is vital and implementing explicit support structures is necessary, particularly for those 526isolating on their own with families elsewhere [14] . while online tools cannot replace face-to-527 face interactions, they are vital substitutes in current times. the vast majority of labs will have 528 moved work meetings online already, but in addition to these it is important to recognize that for 529 many work is also a social experience and now more than ever, an essential source of support. 530scheduled coffee breaks, games nights, film nights, cocktail hours (with alcoholic or non-531 alcoholic drink of choice) and many other social events are all being implemented successfully 532 across the world to create at least some of the social interactions so important to both our 533 mental wellbeing and our lab cohesion. explicitly matching group members in a buddy-scheme, 534where each lab member has a partner that they have to contact even briefly each day, is a way 535 of providing a light touch method to flag potential mental health issues early. while we cannot 536 prevent the inevitable increased rates of mental health problems in our community, making sure 537 that we explicitly discuss the difficulties we all face in this pandemic, and the inevitable mental 538 health repercussions, will hopefully allow those facing particular problems to speak out and 539 receive the support they need [15] . 540 541 it is necessary to act now to ensure that the current pandemic does not have long-lasting 542 negative consequences on the field. nibs has historically had a lack of female representation 543[16], something that leaders in the field have made a concerted effort to address in recent years [17] with increasing success. however, the current crisis is likely to exacerbate the gap between 545 women and men, and between carers and non-carers, in terms of available time and 546 opportunities. the burden of care and responsibilities have fallen unequally in this crisis -for 547 some this is a virtually unheard of period of quiet in which they have the time to produce as 548 much, if not more, work than normal. however, for the field as a whole it is vital to recognize that 549 for others this is a time where demands and anxieties have increased, and available time has 550 shrunk considerably. the "room of one's own in which to write" [18] is for some a daily reality 551 and for others merely a distant dream. the real effects of this inequality across academia is 552 already being spoken about anecdotally by editors, who report decreases in the number of 553 submissions from women [19] and, possibly, increases in the number of submissions from men. 554how those trends continue will need to be carefully monitored. 555while it is extremely difficult to judge what effect other responsibilities may have on our 557 colleague's productivity, it is timely to recognize that although individual circumstances vary 558 substantially on average women still carry the majority of the burden of both caring 559 responsibilities and household tasks even when both partners work [20] -something that can at 560 the moment only exacerbate gender imbalances in the field. it must therefore, be the 561 responsibility of all of us, particularly those in more senior positions, to acknowledge this and to 562 challenge the potential prejudices of others and ourselves when making career-determining 563 decisions, not just at the moment but in the months and years to come. suggestions have 564 already been made as to ways to tackle this, including explicitly treating this period as carers 565 leave in future applications [21] . 566 567 in the shorter term, the social/physical distancing measures in place around the world are not 568 only limiting what we can do in terms of science, but limiting the opportunities for all of us, 569 particularly the early career researchers, to network and to meet potential advisors for the next 570 stage of their careers. initiatives such as on-line conferences are likely going to be the 571 mechanism for sharing our science for at least the next few months and provide an essential 572 opportunity for our ecrs to discuss their work. however, what is difficult to reproduce on-line is 573 the informal chat over coffee with others in the field, which can often provide the start to a 574 conversation that ends with a postdoctoral position or support for tenure-track applications. 575overcoming these restrictions will be difficult: by definition it is challenging to formally engineer 577 informal discussions. we all have a responsibility to recognize this, and to be responsive to 578 unsolicited emails from researchers elsewhere. this is also a time to embrace the ability to 579 invite speakers from around the world to give informal talks at lab meetings and small 580 gatherings without the costs involved in travel. not only does this broaden our horizons at a time 581when it is all too easy to reduce our interactions, it also has secondary benefits. small lab talks 582 provide excellent opportunity to interact with external researchers in a small group. inviting 583 senior researchers to speak can provide a route into discussions for ecrs, inviting ecrs to 584 speak provides valuable experience for them. 585in practical terms, many universities have relaxed the timescales required for phd students, 587 something that we must support and petition for. many grant bodies around the world have 588 already announced blanket extensions to current funding -as a field it is our responsibility to 589 make these allowances as equitable as possible. a number of routes through the current crisis 590 have been suggested in the rest of this article which will allow us to continue our research with 591 disruption kept to a minimum. however, in the inevitable rush back to the lab, for the long-term 592 sake of the field we must not forget to bring everyone with us. 593 594as with all covid-19 safety procedures, regional and institutional guidances, applied judiciously 596 to specific protocols considering changing conditions, will determine which procedures should 597 be implemented and which can be abbreviated. our recommendations below explain a range of 598 existing procedures in the context of nibs application and should not be considered necessary 599 or sufficient for every situation. 600 601a critical factor in controlling and reducing the spread of sars-cov-2 and the associated 603 covid-19 has been so-called social/physical distancing, which means preventing physical 604 contact especially of persons who otherwise would not have social contact. what is essential to 605 understand here is that the terminology "social/physical distancing" may be somewhat 606misleading, as what matters in essence is the physical distancing. the latter in turn has mainly 607 been recommended because one dominant way by which sars-cov-2 is transmitted is by 608 airborne droplet infection. more specifically, aerosols emanating from the upper respiratory 609 pathway housing the virus in high concentrations are thought to passively "travel" through the air 610 and remain airborne for some time. while the exact travel distance and the amount of time that 611 infectious materials maintain in the air are currently a matter of debate, most recommendations suggest keeping (at least) 2 m (6 ft) distance to any other person and assuming that any 613 unknown person could potentially be infectious [22] . minimizing duration of contact is another 614 strategy that may be considered based on study protocols, current federal and institutional 615 guidances, and current scientific consensus on impact of briefer contact times (protocols) in 616 reducing risk to operators and patients. 617 618 social/physical distancing parameters as defined by governments and regulatory authorities 619 vary among countries, states and counties and change over time as a regional covid-19 620 situation develops. the following procedures are therefore region and institute specific, and 621 subject to ongoing risk-burden evaluation. as applicable, social distancing should be maintained 622 in all offices. the allowed density of staff in given rooms should be considered along with the 623 need for and mechanism of minimizing face-to-face interaction (e.g. by using chat, emails or 624 telephones). as applicable to the specific time and protocol, it may be prudent to wear masks 625 and maintain a recommended interpersonal distance. if and when patients should wear masks 626 for necessary clinical treatments should be determined. for studies and therapies where 627 wearing masks hinders the efficacy, transparent face masks could be considered. 628during nibs procedures, it is often not possible to maintain the recommended physical 629 distance, at least for some amount of time. for instance, applying electrodes for tes or 630 adjusting the position of tms coils requires direct contact between the person applying nibs 631 and the person receiving nibs. robotic tms provides some opportunity for tms administration 632 with operators further removed from participants (easily by 2 meters/ 6 feet except for brief 633 localization to navigation, though the participant can be trained to do this). however, such 634 devices will not be available to all labs and clinics. in these instances, protective measures are 635 important to reduce the inhalation and expiration of aerosols, and the amount of time, during 636 which the recommended physical distance cannot be complied with, should be restricted to a 637 minimum possible. 638 639 6.2 personal protective equipment (ppe) 640 ppe can take many forms such as wearing face masks that should cover both mouth and nose. 641there are different safety standards for these masks, and we recommend that medical and 642 research personnel in constant contact with potentially infected persons (including participants 643 and patients, but also co-workers) wear those with the highest safety standards (e.g. n95 644 masks). importantly, the masks should be regularly changed (with maximal wear time differing 645 as per the specific type and make of the mask) as otherwise they might even be 646 counterproductive due to the accumulation of viral material at the inner side of the mask. if 647 appropriate, patients and participants may be provided with single use or disinfected multiple 648 use masks by the neuromodulation labs. 649 650 as appropriate, in addition to masks, medical and research personnel may consider wearing 651 transparent visors, or protective eye wear covering the upper parts of the face and especially 652 the eyes, through which viral material can also easily enter the organism. visors that cover the 653 whole front of the face extending way down below the chin may supplement face masks for 654 researchers and participants. in theory, the appeal of visors without masks is allowing better 655 verbal communication, compared to face masks, which limit articulation and comprehensibility of 656 speech sounds i.e., the "muffling" effect-b but such considerations are secondary to safety. the 657 appropriateness of visors and other ppe (e.g. goggles, protective coats) in various social and 658 clinical environments will ultimately depend on current regional and institutional guidances. in 659 some regions and institutions, current recommendations are to use both a surgical mask and 660 visor for direct interactions with patients. 661 662 moreover, medical and research personnel should wear single use gloves when touching 663 participants and patients, and the latter may also want to be provided with such gloves when 664 touching apparel that will be touched by others, such as input devices, computer keyboards, 665 desks, etc. 666 667as with all covid-19 safety procedures, regional and institutional guidances, applied judiciously 669 to specific protocols considering changing conditions, will determine which procedures should 670 be implemented and which can be abbreviated. our recommendations here thus index possible 671 applicable procedures. 672 673 besides body-worn protective measures, room dividers and transparent shields can be 674 considered for installation in facilities that are not already designed for one-on-one visits. these 675 devices constitute a physical barrier protecting spread of aerosols throughout the room from 676 participants and patients to personnel and will be especially important at patient receptions. 677provisions of hand washing opportunities, or hand sanitizers for patients and participants at the 678 entrance to research and treatment premises are also generally recommended, and they should 679 be provided in a way that they can be regularly and easily used by medical and research personnel, after each new contact with a new person. additional measures to minimize airborne 681 particles being transmitted are regular ventilation of research and treatment laboratories, regular 682 disinfection of surfaces, such as doorknobs, apparel, furniture, research equipment and visors 683 as well as shields, ideally after each use by a new person, is highly recommended. within 684 elevators, covering all buttons with plastic membranes that are changed daily is advised. tissue 685 paper or small wooden pieces can be provided to push the button without skin contact. 686 687 special consideration should be given for employing single-use equipment when possible. for 688 example, within tes, a variety of single-use and multi-use electrodes is available. maximizing 689 the use of single-use devices that contact the participant/patient serves to minimize potential 690 translocation of virally active material from one participant to the other. where devices must be 691 used across participants, antibacterial disinfection may not be sufficient. in all cases, all 692 research equipment should be sanitized/disinfected before and after use. in this, special 693 consideration as to which type of disinfectant is used needs to be applied, as the functionality of 694 some electrodes may be negatively affected when disinfected with alcohol-based disinfectants. 695one potential alternative to alcohol-based disinfectants is the use of hydrogen peroxide. we 696 recommend referring to manufacturer information to evaluate possible disinfection routines. all 697 disposable supplies should be discarded in appropriate bio-waste repositories. note that most of 698 the considerations regarding sanitization protocols should not only be applied to laboratories 699 and treatment facilities, but also for the off-site home use mentioned above in this paper. 700the following disinfection and sanitization protocols are aiming to give research facilities some 701 flexibility to re-start nibs clinical services and research operations during the current covid-19 702 pandemic and possibly similar outbreaks in the future for patients with non-covid-19 needs or 703 complex chronic disease management requirements. 704• after the nibs session is over, the environmental surfaces in the stimulation 705 room should be sanitized using a 1% hypochlorite solution, with a disposable 706 antiseptic cloth [23] . also, all the stimulation equipment, including magnetic coil 707 (for tms) stimulator, electrode/stimulator cables, eeg cap, tape measure, 708 electrodes and sponge pockets should be sanitized. follow manufacturer specific 709 guidance on how to clean the stimulator. furthermore, it is prudent to check for 710 any leaked fluids from the participant on the stimulation chair. 711• the stimulator trolley and treatment chair should be wiped with a permitted 712 cleaning product (normally bacillocid is allowed, but it is better to check with the 713 manufacturer). 714• if an mri/meg-compatible stimulator is available for concurrent application of 715 nibs during the recording of neuroimaging or electrophysiological data, then the 716 gantry and the rf coil should be sanitized with a permitted cleaning product. the 717 mri table also should be sanitized with any of the approved products. the coils 718 need to be disinfected once again after the scanner room is thoroughly sanitized, 719 then the next patient or participant may be taken [24] . it is necessary to ensure 720 that the metal nose piece of surgical masks, if applicable, is not ferromagnetic 721[25]. 722 723an additional aspect that requires consideration is the inclusion of individuals that belong to 725 high(er) risks groups, both on the side of the personnel and the research participants or 726 patients. currently, older age, a history of cardiovascular diseases and diseases affecting the 727 respiratory system (e.g. asthma, smoking), but also diabetes, obesity and cancer or other 728 diseases affecting the immune system directly or through immuno-depressant treatment (e.g. on a critical note, many of these measures are not based on concrete evidence on their 744 effectiveness. there is still insufficient knowledge about which of them are necessary and 745 sufficient to prevent further spread of the virus. however, to the best of our current knowledge, 746 they can be expressed as strongly recommended. another critical aspect is whether the 747 measures can be implemented consistently. in many countries, for instance, masks but even 748 disinfectants are still not available in the required quantities and using the limited number of 749 protective measures for protection of healthcare workers treating covid-19 patients should be 750 given higher priority than using it for neuromodulation research. checklist, which every person entering the research or treatment premises has to provide, as 756 well as by temperature measurements at the entrance to the research facilities. all of the latter, 757 however, may be of limited validity, as many persons infected by sars-cov-2 have been 758 reported to be asymptomatic, and do not develop the associated disease (and thus will neither 759 show symptoms, including fever). many institutions have plans to implement either rapid 760 covid-19 testing and/or covid-19antibody testing of faculty and staff prior to reentry into the 761 workplace. in addition, some institutions are considering requiring all study participants to 762 undergo rapid covid-19 testing prior to in person study activity. availability and implementation 763 of these tests will vary across institutions. 764the scientific basis for sars-cov-2-related immunity and reliability of antibody testing remains 766 under development. subject to ongoing scientific insight and respecting regional and 767 institutional guidance, screening for antibodies in the blood of staff or participants could be one 768 element supporting the basis for an "immunity passport" or "risk-free certificate" that would 769 enable individuals to return to work or research assuming that they are protected against re-770 infection. in this respect it should be noted though that a previous infection and the development 771 of immunity may not protect against another episode of infection, and development of the 772 disease (see e.g.[28]). however, whether the immunity passport policy will apply systematically 773 or not, there is value in specific protocols and based on broader covid-19 situation factors in 774 applying such tests during recruitment procedures to improve patient-clinician safety or trial 775 integrity. significantly increased the risk of social isolation and associated depression in people with 787 aphasia. indeed, language and cognitive problems limit the use of digital media (i.e. cellular 788 and/or social network) to maintain social contact. patients with motor symptoms have also been 789 penalized as a result of covid-19 since it might be more difficult for them to move or get 790 around with limited caregiver and physical or occupational therapy support. stroke patients 791 being in an older age category increase the risk of contracting the virus and potentially having a 792 worse outcome; thus, in order to contain the exposure, they will probably be forced to stay-at-793 home for a longer period than young people augmenting the possibility of psychological distress 794 and depression. to address these mental health issues, researchers from the aphasia research 795lab at the irccs santa lucia foundation in rome have launched an online interview in the 796 aphasic population to evaluate whether anxiety and fear towards covid-19 contagion would 797 discourage the restart of rehabilitation. one concern is that patients worried about covid-19 798 may be deprioritizing their neurorehabilitation needs and may develop an attitude of resistance 799 towards clinical research, deemed non-essential. 800assuming that regulatory agencies and medical centers will hopefully lift the research and 801 clinical treatment suspensions in the coming months when appropriate mitigations plans are in 802 place, it is important to consider that tdcs protocols for motor and/or aphasia rehabilitation will 803 be hampered by the difficulty in maintaining an adequate safety distance during electrodes 804 application and even more importantly by the mandatory use of masks. indeed, for language 805 and cognitive interventions, it is extremely important that both the therapist and the patient 806 understand each other, being able to see their mouth's movements (i.e. 'lip-reading' is known to 807 facilitate communication). transparent face shields without masks might be a good alternative 808 option here. however, these will not resolve the question of electrode application while keeping 809 a safety distance. another possibility is to develop remote, but supervised and controlled 810 interventions at the patient's home using home-based tdcs devices. as appealing as this sounds, considering that most patients have cognitive and physical limitations in applying the 812 'kit' and that nibs approaches require a peripheral intervention (e.g. traditional speech therapy 813 or physical-occupational therapies), it will be challenging to provide these combined approaches 814 in a patient home. for stroke patients, there might be also an option to develop remote 815 intervention in an outpatient clinical setting ensuring that there is enough separation and 816 physical distance between the patient and the investigators. there is no doubt that requests will 817 be made to regulatory agencies to allow for clinical research in stroke recovery to be conducted 818 in a remote way or at the patient's home by integrating tdcs with other telerehabilitation 819 techniques and digital interventions e.g. computer delivered rehabilitation. in this way, we may 820 resolve the issue related to language distortion due to wearing a cover that, masking not only considering the construct, telerehabilitation in children has been reported to initially involve 977 face-to-face discussion and education for both the parents and the child [55] . additionally, 978 specific considerations are indicated for pediatric populations, and integration of parents. in a 979 pediatric telerehabilitation study aiming to increase treatment opportunities in cognitive training 980 for children, corti et al. integrated assessments of the feasibility of interventions and the study 981 design in the home setting [55] . key aspects of these assessments included 'accessibility, 982 training compliance, technical smoothness and training motivation', along with assessments of 983 recruitment, enrollment and retention. the authors found integration of the assessments to 984 establish the study well-suited and remarkably high adherence to the protocol. integrating a covid-19 response to continue neuromodulation in the pediatric population with 1015 perinatal stroke and resultant cerebral palsy, as well as lack of access recruitment feedback 1016 garnered from our previous work with families nationally and internationally, this remote 1017 investigation will inform future larger externally-funded studies to remotely integrate children 1018 with mobility, financial, and access challenges (e.g. rural communities). 1019 week with 1 day per week in lab/clinic for stimulation. at present, the act trial has randomized 1044 307 of 360 older adults targeted for randomization in the trial. as this trial works with a 1045 population at high risk for poor covid-19 outcomes, in-person study activities were stopped on 1046march 13, 2020. at this time, 22 participants were actively in the intervention phase of the trial. 1047as act is a definitive phase iii trial near its completion, a late phase change to at-home tdcs procedures would significantly undermine trial integrity for evaluation of definitive benefits from 1049 tdcs paired with cognitive training, as only a small subset of participants would receive the 1050 alternative intervention approach. even were the current covid-19 outbreak to occur earlier in 1051 the trial, a significant change in intervention procedures would likely not be feasible for a phase 1052 iii trial. in addition, the primary outcome measure in the act trial is currently not available 1053 through telemedicine, further preventing continuation of trial activities through a fully remote 1054 process. in act, 22 participants whose interventions were interrupted will need to be replaced. 1055in addition, approximately 40 participants will miss the timing of their final 1 year follow-up 1056 assessment and mri visits as of the current date. careful consideration with the trials data 1057 safety monitoring board and funding agency program office will need to be given regarding 1058 whether these 40 participants will need to be replaced in the trial as well. pre-covid-19, act 1059 was within 14 months of completion. with the loss of 22 participants, the study will likely not be 1060 completed for 24-26 months. should the 40 participants missing their 1 year time point need to 1061 be replaced, trial completion could be delayed to 36 months or more. while the extent of delay 1062 is still to be determined, this serves as a poignant example of how covid-19 is directly 1063 impacting the speed of progress in medical science. this example also further highlights the 1064 critical importance of advancing remotely supervised methods of neuromodulation 1065 administration. in act, participants complete cognitive training at home for a large portion of the 1066 trial. were this initially paired with remote tdcs, the overall impact on act would be 1067 significantly reduced. however, lack of availability of primary outcome measures for remote 1068 online or tele-administration would have still led the act trial to pause activities. thus, it is also 1069 important to note that there is a strong need for overarching work attempting to facilitate remote 1070 assessment activities for clinical trials. 1071 1072this section focuses on not simply accommodating the pandemic situation but using this period 1074 to update or enhance existing nibs practices using techniques that have already been 1075 validated. we specifically consider telemedicine approaches using tdcs (9.1), accelerating in-1076 clinic tms procedures (9.2), and introducing new nibs protocols to address existing and 1077 emerging covid-19 morbidities (9.3). that said, there has been some concern that the response to theta burst stimulation is highly ability to distill the power of electromagnetic induction as a brain stimulation tool into a 1217 briefcase-sized device has the potential to revolutionize non-invasive neuromodulation as a field. to see this materialize from a fantasy to a reality on the tails of the covid-19 crisis could, 1219 in fact, be one of the biggest achievements the neuromodulation field may gain from this 1220 experience. it will, however, take talent, time, and investment to make this happen. one should 1221 also balance the safety balance of reducing exposure to the coronavirus with the exposure to 1222 the yet unclear risks of patient self-application of home-based tms. 1223 1224 9.2.5. consideration of tdcs as alternative or adjunctive treatment. as discussed above 1225 (section 9.1). tdcs can be deployed at home with no or minimal required in-person interactions. 1226on a situation based, providing tdcs as an alternative to tms or optimized the benefits of tms 1227 (e.g. tdcs for maintenance of tms therapy) can be considered [97, 98] . 1228in conclusion many of the tms treatment trials that were temporarily halted in march 2020 1230 around the world have begun to put strategies in place to return to enrollment and execution. 1231these decisions should be made with sensitivity to many factors including the potential risk of 1232 covid-19 exposure to the participants and staff for in-person visits and the potential benefit to 1233 participants & patients of the intervention. those trials involved structural or functional imaging 1234 remains restricted based on the opening of imaging facilities. similarly, any tms trials involving 1235 parallel in-person protocols (e.g. rehabilitation) are considered in totality. while there will be 1236 many factors that influence this decision for each tms study, there are some common themes 1237 that will minimize risk (electronic visits when possible, accelerated treatment courses, shorter 1238 pulse sequences like theta burst, use of technological methods such as neuronavigation and 1239 scalp modeling to improve rigor and decrease contact) that not only improve the risk benefit 1240 ratio but will likely lead to a reimagination of the future of tms delivery-perhaps even launching 1241 a new industry that merges the portability and affordability of tdcs devices with the benefits of 1242 electromagnetic induction as a mechanism of inciting brain change. survey data were collected from april 30, 2020 to may 6, 2020. to date, data on 9 institutes have been collected from 7 countries. phase 0 refers to the challenges that affected clinical activities with respect to covid-19. phase 1 refers to the activities that have been implemented in response to the pandemic. phase 2 refers to the precautions planned or already implemented during the reopening of nibs clinics.name of the institution • cessation of non-essential in-person research activities o followed by determination of compatibility with continuation through valid remote assessment and/or intervention methods• movement of study teams to remote work to adhere with stay-at-home mandates o special consideration required for remote access to resources (hardware, software, etc.)• potential continuation of patient studies defined as essential care (e.g., depression), institution-specific determination• allow reduced numbers of study team members to remain at work to continue essential study activities (e.g. shift or staggered working patterns)• communication with all participants currently enrolled in ongoing studies to provide information regarding how their participation in the study will be impacted by any stay-athome mandates.o as applicable, communication to participants around any potential risk of covid-19 transmission in relation to ongoing participation.• provide participants with additional information regarding available local resources (e.g. telemental health services, community assistance programs, etc.)• training specific staff or consider additional personnel resources for coordinating covid-19 safety procedures• continue remote/teleworking activities such as analyzing data, manuscript writing, grant preparation, virtual meetings, adverse event follow-up, etc.• plan for study procedure changes to maximize participant safety and social/physical distancing (e.g., ppe and other safety procedures, facility and equipment disinfection)• plan for possible re-integration strategies (tiered, split, etc.) and how the team will adjust to accommodate institutional strategies• prioritize study activities that will occur in person once stay-at-home mandates are lifted to account for overburden of study teams due to prior missed visits, upcoming follow-up assessments, and need for new participants to replace those with interrupted and unrecoverable intervention schedules.• consider revision of ongoing studies to minimize person-to-person contacts through remote/online/teleassessment for questionnaires, self-report measures and other items not requiring in-person administration• consider necessary redesign of study space to minimize participant contact time during intervention delivery• further evaluation of feasibility for movement to remote assessment and intervention administration as a precaution for future covid-19 related stay-at-home mandates.• consider procedures for implementation of rapid covid-19 testing and antibody assays noting and depending on any limitations in current testing and antibody assays regarding sensitivity, specificity or established relevance to risk.• explore e-consenting procedures and e-questionnaires etc.• consult reputable sources (irb, cdc, fda, etc.) for guidance on the timeline for study restart.• devise a mitigation plan to limit exposure to covid-19 or any other infectious agent for study subject/participant as well as research staff• immediate implementation of planned procedures and updated safety precautions (i.e. standard operating procedure documents), with appropriate staff training.• if appropriate procedures for participant/patient safety (ppe, facility design, etc.) and other required procedures are implemented following the first wave of covid-19, consider how the implementation of rapid covid-19 testing and antibody assays may allow for the continuation of appropriate in-person activities that were immediately discontinued in the initial emergency response to the first covid-19 outbreak. this decision will be institution specific.• consider creating a financial plan involving possible sources and a calculation on the costs in case of subsequent outbreaks (e.g. the acquisition of all necessary equipment)infectious diseases vary by geographic region and population, and they change over time. when moving from one region to another, humans are exposed to a variety of potential pathogens and also serve as part of the global dispersal process.1 microbes picked up at one time and in one place may manifest in disease (and potentially be transmitted) far away in time and place. because many microbes have the capacity to persist in the human host for months, years or even decades, the relevant time frame for study of geographic exposures becomes a lifetime. furthermore, microbes also move and change and reach humans via multiple channels.caring for patients requires an understanding of the basic factors that underlie the geography of human diseases and events that cause shifts in the distribution and burden of specific diseases. current travel capacity contributes to massive population movements and rapid shifts in diseases and their distributions, but technology also provides communication channels that aid clinicians who care for patients with unfamiliar medical problems. this chapter reviews the factors that shape the global distribution of infectious diseases and the forces that are expected to shift distributions in the future. examples illustrate the range of factors that affect the distribution and expression of infectious diseases.2 many authors have traced the origins and spread of infectious diseases through history. a century and a half ago, john snow noted that epidemics of cholera followed major routes of commerce and appeared first at seaports when entering a new region. yersinia pestis, the cause of plague, accompanied trade caravans and moved across oceans with rats on ships. exploration of the new world by europeans introduced a range of human pathogens that killed one-third or more of the local populations in some areas of the americas. the plants and animals introduced as a result of this exploration have also had profound and long-lasting consequences for the ecology and economics of the new environment.3 the speed, reach and volume of today's travel are unprecedented in human history and offer multiple potential routes to move biologic species around the globe. pathogens of animals and plants are being transported as well, and this can affect global food security.4 establishment of arthropod vectors, such as mosquitoes, that are competent to transmit human pathogens in new geographic areas expands the regions that are vulnerable to outbreaks of some vector-borne infections. this chapter focuses only on pathogens that directly affect human health and on their sources (table 106-1 ). when thinking about geography of human infections, it is useful to consider both the origin of the organism and the conveyor or immediate source for the human (figure 106-1 ).this chapter addresses three key issues:•factors influencing geographic distribution: why are some infectious diseases found only in focal geographic regions or in isolated populations?•factors influencing the burden of disease: why does the impact from widely distributed infections vary markedly from one region or one population to another? and•factors influencing emergence of disease: what allows or facilitates the introduction, persistence and spread of an infection in a new region and what makes a region or population resistant to the introduction of an infection? many microbes require a specific arthropod vector for transmission or an animal reservoir host and hence inhabit circumscribed regions. malaria is a vector-borne infection that cannot become established in a region unless a competent vector is present. the presence of a competent vector is a necessary but not sufficient condition for human infection. the mosquito must have a source of malarial parasites (gametocytemic human or, rarely, nonhuman primates), appropriate bioclimatic conditions and access to other humans. the ambient temperature influences the human biting rate of the mosquito, the incubation period for the parasite in the mosquito and the daily survival rate of the mosquito. prevailing temperature and humidity must allow the mosquito to survive long enough for the malarial parasite to undergo maturation to reach an infective state for humans. competent vectors exist in many areas with no malaria transmission, because the other conditions are not met. these areas are at risk of the introduction of malaria, as illustrated by several recent examples in the usa and elsewhere.7, 8 an estimated 77% of the world's population lived in areas with malaria transmission in 1900. by 2002 about 48% lived in at-risk areas, but because of population growth and migration the total global population exposed to malaria had increased by 2 billion since 1900 (see figure 106-2 ).9 for example, in africa, the population in malaria endemic zones increased by almost 200 million people between 2000 and 2010.10 this contrasts with the situation in the usa, where malaria was endemic in many areas into the 20th century (figure 106-3 ), with estimates of more than 600 000 cases in 1914. even before extensive mosquito control programs were instituted, transmission declined. demographic factors (population shifts from rural to urban areas), improved housing with screened doors and windows, and the availability of treatment were among the factors that contributed to this decrease.the distribution of onchocerciasis in africa is notable for its association with rivers.11 the vector of this filarial parasite, the black fly (genus simulium), lays her eggs on vegetation and rocks of rapidly flowing rivers and usually inhabits a region within 5–10 km on either side of a river. another name for onchocerciasis, river blindness, describes the epidemiology as well as one consequence of infection.other pathogens have complex cycles of development that require one or more intermediate hosts. distribution may remain relatively fixed, even when infected humans travel widely, if other regions do not supply the right combination and geographic proximity of hosts (figure 106-4 ). although persons with schistosomiasis visit many regions of the world, the parasite cannot be introduced into a new region unless an appropriate snail host is present, excreted eggs (in urine or feces) are released into fresh water where they reach the snail hosts, and humans subsequently have contact with the untreated water.12 however, local ecologic changes and climate change can be associated with expansion of transmission in endemic areas or increased intensity of transmission, and this has been identified as a possible consequence of warming temperatures in china.13 (for a more detailed consideration of the influence of climate change on the distribution of infectious diseases, see chapter 4.)ebola and marburg viruses are viruses that have focal distributions but have caused dramatic human outbreaks with high mortality. they also infect nonhuman primates and threaten the survival of great apes.14 recent studies suggest that bats may be the reservoir hosts.15, 16 because these infections can be spread from person to person, secondary household and nosocomial spread in several instances has amplified what began as an isolated event. lack of adequate resources in hospitals in many developing regions contributes to the spread of infections within hospitals and clinics.cultural practices can lead to unusual infections in isolated areas. residents of the highlands of papua new guinea developed kuru after ingestion (or percutaneous inoculation) of human tissue during the preparation of the tissues of dead relatives.the presence of a pathogen in a region may reflect the biologic properties of the organism, its need for a certain physicochemical environment or its dependence on specific arthropods, plants or animals to provide the milieu where it can sustain its life cycle (box 106-1 ). the presence of a pathogen in a region does not equate with human disease, because mechanisms must exist for the pathogen to reach a susceptible human host for human disease to occur. exploration of new regions or changes in land use may place humans in an environment where they come into contact with microbes that were previously unrecognized as human pathogens.box 106-1biologic attributes of organisms that influence their epidemiology host rangeduration of survival in hostroute of exit from hostroute of entry into humaninoculum needed to establish infectionvirulencecapacity to survive outside hostresistance to antimicrobials and chemicals among the infectious diseases that impose the greatest burden of death globally, most are widely distributed: respiratory tract infections (e.g. influenza, streptococcus pneumoniae and others), diarrheal infections, tuberculosis, measles, aids and hepatitis b.16 most of these infections are spread from person to person. the world health organization estimated that about 65% of infectious diseases deaths globally in 1995 were due to infections transmitted from person to person.17 burden from these diseases is unevenly distributed across populations and among different countries. poor sanitation, lack of clean water, crowded living conditions and lack of vaccination contribute to the disproportionate burden from many of these infections in low- and middle-income countries (lmic). in industrialized countries, pockets of high risk persist. disadvantaged populations have higher rates of tuberculosis, hiv and many other infectious and noninfectious diseases. rates of reported cases of tuberculosis vary widely by region and within countries (table 106-2 ).18 figure 106-5 shows the effect of crowded living conditions on rates of tuberculosis in england and wales in 1992.19 among welfare applicants and recipients addicted to drugs or alcohol in new york city, the rate of tuberculosis was 744 per 100 000 person years, or more than 70 times the overall rate for the usa.20 the impact of an infection also derives from the access to effective therapy. treatment of a patient with active tuberculosis can cure the individual and eliminate a source of infection for others in the community.diphtheria, controlled in many parts of the world through the use of immunization, resurged in new independent states of the former soviet union in the 1990s, a reminder of the tenuous control over many infectious diseases.21 populations in other countries also felt the impact as cases related to exposures in the russian federation were reported in poland, finland, germany and the usa. serologic studies in america and europe suggest that up to 60% of adults may be susceptible to diphtheria.travelers to tropical and lmic can pick up geographically focal, often vector-borne or animal-associated infections,22 but travelers most often acquire infections with a worldwide distribution that are common in areas lacking good sanitation.23 food- and water-borne infections lead to travelers' diarrhea, which is caused by multiple agents, typhoid fever and hepatitis a. respiratory tract infections may be acquired from other travelers as well as from local residents. boxes 106-2 and 106-3 note factors that influence the types and abundance of microbes in a community and the probability of exposure to pathogens.box 106-2factors that influence the types and abundance of microbes in a community •biogeoclimatic conditions.•socioeconomic conditions.•public health infrastructure.•urban versus rural environment.•density and mobility of population.•season of the year.•animal populations. box 106-3factors that influence the probability of exposure to pathogens •living accommodation.•level of sanitation.•occupational and recreational activities.•food preparation and preferences.•sexual activities and other behavior.•contact with pets, other animals, vectors.•time spent in the area. hepatitis a virus remains a common cause of infection in lmic where most persons are infected at a young age and become immune for life. infection in young children is typically mild or inapparent. persons living in areas of high transmission may be unaware of the presence of high levels of transmission, although nonimmune; older people (such as travelers) who enter the environment may develop severe, and occasionally fatal, infection. countries with an improving standard of living may observe a paradoxical increase in the incidence of hepatitis a disease as the age of exposure increases, shifting the age of infection to a time when jaundice and other symptoms are more likely to occur.travelers also contribute to the global spread of infectious diseases.24, 25 neisseria meningitidis, a global pathogen, occurs in seasonal epidemics in parts of africa (figure 106-6 ).26 irritation of the throat by the dry, dusty air probably contributes to invasion by colonizing bacteria.27 pilgrims carried an epidemic strain of n. meningitidis type a from southern asia to mecca in 1987. other pilgrims who became colonized with the epidemic strain introduced it into sub-saharan africa, where it caused a wave of epidemics in 1988 and 1989. the epidemic clone spread to several countries.28 in 1996 in africa, major outbreaks of meningococcal meningitis occurred (>185 000 reported cases with a case fatality rate of ~10%) caused by n. meningitidis serogroup a, clone iii-1.29 in canada, a virulent group c, et-15 strain of n. meningitidis was associated with an increased case fatality rate.30 in these examples, the virulence of the microbe and travel and trade acted synergistically to change the epidemiology and burden of disease. in 2000, serogroup w135 n. meningitidis caused an outbreak of infection in pilgrims to the hajj and spread to their contacts and others around the world. studies using serotyping, multilocus sequence typing, multilocus dna fingerprints and other techniques found identical w135 isolates in multiple countries. before this outbreak, pilgrims from many countries received a vaccine that protected against serotype a but not w135. the polysaccharide meningococcal vaccine reduces risk of disease in the vaccinated individual but does not prevent oropharyngeal carriage or transmission of n. meningitidis.31 organisms that survive primarily or entirely in the human host and are spread from person to person (e.g. by sexual or other close contact) can be carried to any part of the world. the spread of hiv in recent decades to all parts of the world is a reminder of the rapid and broad reach of travel networks. although the infection has also spread via blood and shared needles, it has been the human host engaging in sex and reproduction who has been the origin for the majority of the infections worldwide. person-to-person spread accounted for the rapid worldwide distribution of severe acute respiratory syndrome (sars), a coronavirus infection, in the spring of 2003, after the virus emerged from an animal reservoir, most likely bats, and infected farmed civets.36 multidrug-resistant (mdr) tuberculosis has continued to increase. the world health organization estimated that 450 000 cases and 170 000 deaths from mdr tuberculosis occurred in 2012.18 extensively drug-resistant (xdr) tuberculosis, which is virtually untreatable, has been reported by 92 countries. almost 10% of mdr-tb cases are xdr-tb.18 humans also carry resistance genes and virulence factors that can be transferred to and exchanged with other microbes.37 dengue fever is a mosquito-borne viral infection found in most tropical and subtropical regions globally. an estimated 96 million people have symptomatic infection each year.38 viremic humans regularly enter regions infested with aedes aegypti, the principal vector of dengue, transporting the virus for new outbreaks. because four serotypes of dengue virus exist and infection with one serotype does not confer lasting immunity against other serotypes, a person can be infected more than once. one study found the risk of developing severe dengue after repeat infection was 82–103 times greater than after primary infection.39 in an outbreak in cuba, 98.5% of cases of dengue shock syndrome (dss) or dengue hemorrhagic fever (dhf) were in persons with a prior dengue infection.40 risk factors for severe dengue identified in epidemiological studies include young age, virus strain, and host genetics.41 factors that have aided the spread of dengue include increasing travel to and from tropical regions; expansion of the regions infested with aedes aegypti and aedes albopictus; population growth and increasing urbanization in tropical areas; the use of nonbiodegradable and other containers that make ideal breeding sites for the mosquito; inadequate vector control programs and increasing resistance of vectors to insecticides.in 2001 the vector that was implicated in an outbreak of dengue in hawaii42 was aedes albopictus, a mosquito species that has been introduced into new regions in recent decades, probably primarily by shipping used tires and other items.43 the virus responsible for the hawaii outbreak was similar to dengue isolates from tahiti, suggesting that viremic travelers introduced the virus from the south pacific.although large dengue epidemics occurred in the usa in the 20th century, few cases have been acquired in the usa in recent years, despite the presence of epidemic disease in adjacent areas of mexico and the presence of a competent vector (aedes aegypti) in south-eastern usa (figure 106-7 ).26 aedes albopictus has even broader distribution in continental usa. the presence of screened dwellings and air conditioning may make an area relatively resistant to spread of infection, even if a competent vector infests a region. since 2009 a few cases of local dengue transmission have occurred in key west, florida,43 and serologic studies have also documented that dengue infections are occurring in texas.44 chikungunya, a mosquito-borne alphavirus originally isolated in tanzania in 1953, has spread from africa, causing massive outbreaks in the indian ocean islands, india, and other parts of asia since 2005. in the summer of 2007 an outbreak caused hundreds of cases (175 laboratory confirmed) in north-eastern italy. the index case was a visitor from india. the vector implicated was aedes albopictus, postulated to have been introduced via used tires.45 mutations in the virus may have enabled it to replicate more efficiently in aedes albopictus mosquitoes, the asian tiger mosquito, which is now widely distributed outside of asia.46 it can survive cooler temperatures than aedes aegypti.beginning in late 2013 local chikungunya transmission was documented in the caribbean islands. the virus has now spread widely in central and south america.47 chikungunya virus is introduced into new areas by viremic travelers and can cause high attack rates in susceptible populations; persistent and disabling joint pain can follow acute illness, especially in older individuals.48 cholera illustrates the complex interactions between microbe, environment and host.49 vibrio cholerae lives in close association with marine life, binding to chitin in crustacean shells and colonizing surfaces of algae, phytoplankton, zooplankton and water plants. v. cholerae can persist within the aquatic environment for months or years, often in a viable but dormant state, noncultivable by usual techniques. environmental factors, including temperature, salinity, ph and sea-water nutrients, affect the persistence, abundance and viability of the organisms, and hence influence human epidemics.under conditions of population crowding, poor sanitation and lack of clean water, cholera can have a devastating impact, as was shown by the massive outbreak of el tor cholera in rwandan refugees in goma, zaire, which caused 12 000 deaths in july 1994.50 toxigenic vibrio cholerae o1 was introduced into haiti in 2010 in the aftermath of the earthquake.51 as of march 2013, it had caused >650 000 illnesses and >8000 deaths. studies suggest that it was introduced by un mission personnel who lacked sanitary disposal of their waste. subsequently a tributary of the artibonite river was contaminated with a pathogenic strain of south asian type vibrio cholerae.the organism can be carried by humans who can introduce it into new regions. trade probably also plays a critical role. ballast water, picked up by boats in multiple locations and discharged at another time and place, carries a wide range of species.52, 53 in earlier studies of the ballast and bilge of cargo ships in the usa gulf of mexico, researchers were able to identify v. cholerae identical to the strains causing epidemic disease in latin america.54 the globalized food market moves pathogens from one region to another. an outbreak of cholera in maryland, usa, was traced to imported, contaminated commercial frozen coconut milk.55 alfalfa sprouts grown from contaminated seed sent to a dutch shipper caused outbreaks of salmonella spp. on two continents, the usa and finland.56 commercial movement of fruits and vegetables redistributes resistance factors along with the microbes.travel and trade are key features in the epidemiology of the infection cyclospora, a cause of gastroenteritis. for many years cases were often associated with living in or travel to areas where sanitary facilities were poor. in the summer of 1996, a large us outbreak occurred in persons who had not traveled. over a period of a few months, 1465 cases of cyclosporiasis were reported from 20 states. the outbreak was linked to raspberries imported from guatemala.57 in the past, visceral leishmaniasis in brazil was primarily a rural disease. recently, however, several cities have reported large outbreaks of visceral leishmaniasis.58 reasons for the change in epidemiology include geoclimatic and economic factors (drought, lack of farm land, famine), leading to migration of large numbers of persons, who settle in densely populated peri-urban areas that lack basic sanitation. domestic animals, such as dogs and chickens, are sources of blood meals for the sand fly vector of leishmaniasis. outbreaks, affecting especially children and young adults, have occurred in many cities in brazil. malnutrition contributes to disease severity.disease–disease interactions also alter the epidemiology of infections. visceral leishmaniasis has become an important infection in hiv-infected people in spain and other areas where the two infections coexist.59 the presence of hiv leads to increased risk of progression of infection; disease can also appear years after exposure.movement of nonhuman species can affect infections in humans. importation of wild animals from ghana into the usa led to an outbreak of monkeypox, an infection previously known to exist in africa. humans became infected by handling domestic prairie dogs (sold as pets) that had been housed with the imported wild animals from africa.60 aedes albopictus introduced into the usa via used tires shipped from asia61 has since become established in at least 21 contiguous states of the usa and in hawaii. aedes albopictus can transmit dengue and chikungunya viruses and is a competent laboratory vector of la crosse, yellow fever and other viruses. multiple strains of eastern equine encephalitis virus have been isolated from aedes albopictus in florida.current transportation systems regularly carry all forms of life, including potential vectors, along with people and cargo. in an experiment conducted several years ago, mosquitoes, house flies and beetles in special cages were placed in the wheel bays of a boeing 747 aircraft and carried on flights lasting up to 7 hours. temperatures were as low as −62°f (−52°c) outside and ranged from 46°f to 77°f (8–25°c) in the wheel bays. survival rates were greater than 99% for the beetles, 84% for the mosquitoes and 93% for the flies.62 occasional cases of so-called airport malaria – cases of malaria near airports in temperate regions – attest to the occasional transport and survival of an infective mosquito.in the usa, transportation of raccoons in the late 1970s from florida to the area between virginia and west virginia (in order to stock hunting clubs) unintentionally introduced a rabies virus variant into the animals of the region. from there, the rabies enzootic spread for hundreds of miles, reaching raccoons in suburban and densely populated regions of the north-east usa. spill-over of the rabies virus variant into cats, dogs and other animal populations and direct raccoon–human interactions have had costly consequences.63 highly pathogenic avian influenza a (h5n1) is a global concern.64 it is entrenched in poultry populations in asia and africa and has caused outbreaks in europe and the middle east. although the virus causes high mortality in infected humans, thus far h5n1 has not been able to establish sustained transmission from person to person. most humans appear to have been infected via close contact with poultry or their products. although the virus can be carried by migratory birds,65 most introductions appear to have been related to movement of poultry and poultry products. in south east asia risk was associated with duck abundance, human population and rice cropping intensity.66 geographic exposures influence how one thinks about probable diagnoses in a given patient. in mexico, for example, more than 50% of patients with late-onset seizures have computed tomography (ct) evidence of the parasitic infection, neurocysticercosis.67 in peru, 29% of persons born outside lima who had onset of seizures after 20 years of age had serologic evidence of cysticercosis.68 in northern thailand, melioidosis is a common cause of sepsis, accounting for 40% of all deaths from community-acquired sepsis.69 in considering the consequences of exposures in other geographic regions, relevant data in assessing the probability of various infections include the duration of visit, activities and living conditions during the stay and the time lapsed since the visit. among british travelers to west africa, the relative risk of malaria was 80.3 times higher for persons staying for 6–12 months than among those staying 1 week.70 in malawi, the risk of schistosome infection increased directly with duration of stay. seroprevalence was 11% for those present for 1 year or less, but this increased to 48% among those present for 4 years or longer.71 in a study of persons with cysticercosis, the average time between acquisition of infection and onset of symptoms was about 7 years.72 for malaria, it is necessary to know not only whether infection can be acquired in a specific location but also the species of parasites present and the patterns of resistance to antimalarial agents. figure 106-8 shows the distribution of malaria. analysis of data from the geosentinel surveillance network, a network that uses travelers as a sentinel population, finds marked differences in the spectrum of disease in relation to the place of exposure.22, 73 expression of disease may vary depending on age of first exposure, immunologic status of the host, genetic factors and the number and timing of subsequent exposures. temporary residents of endemic regions have different patterns of response to a number of helminths from those of long-term residents. in cases of loiasis, temporary residents have immunologic hyperresponsiveness, high-grade eosinophilia and severe symptoms that are not seen in long-term residents of the same area.74 genetic factors can affect susceptibility to infection or expression of disease. some persons, for example, are genetically resistant to infection with parvovirus because they lack appropriate receptors on their erythrocytes.75 persons lacking duffy factor cannot be infected with the malarial parasite, p. vivax.knowledge about the geographic distribution of diseases is essential for informed evaluation and care of patients, who increasingly have had exposures in multiple geographic regions. recent travel and trade patterns have led to more frequent contact with populations from low latitude areas, regions with greater species richness.76 infectious diseases are dynamic and will continue to change in distribution, and access to real time epidemiologic outbreak surveillance data such as that provided by promed (www.promedmail.org) is a vital tool for clinicians. changes in virulence and shifts in resistance patterns will also require ongoing surveillance and communication to healthcare providers. multiple factors favor even more rapid change, perhaps in unexpected ways, in the future: rapidity and volume of travel, increasing urbanization (especially in developing regions), the globalization of trade, multiple technologic changes that favor mass processing and broad dispersal, and the backdrop of ongoing microbial adaptation and change, which may be hastened by alterations in the physicochemical environment.  references available online at expertconsult.com . the schwartzreport tracks emerging trends that will affect the world, particularly the united states. for explore it focuses on matters of health in the broadest sense of that term, including medical issues, changes in the biosphere, technology, and policy considerations, all of which will shape our culture and our lives.perhaps it is because i research and publish the daily schwartzreport. the many stories i have done on climate change have certainly sensitized me to what is happening. maybe it's just curiosity, or maybe it's fear. whatever the reason, as i travel now i find myself looking around and thinking: what will be the impact of climate change on this community? i notice how they are dealing with the homeless, because migration is going to be a big deal, so this trend is only going to get worse. what's the food situation like? how good are the bridges? how do they handle sanitation demands at large events? it is going to be a huge problem. and all of it impacts, most particularly, health care.in the united states on 30 january 2020, a thursday, the centers for disease control confirmed the first human-to-human transmission of the virus in the country, a 60 year old man returning from wuhan, china, the center of the outbreak. 1 a few hours later the world health organization declared the fast-spreading outbreak a global health emergency. 2 a few hours later, president trump closed the borders, quarantined hundreds of travelers who had just arrived in the u.s. and gave an interview. as quoted from cnbc: "president donald trump said the u.s. government was working closely with china to contain the coronavirus outbreak that has killed at least 171 people, predicting "a very good ending" for the united states."we are working very closely with china and other countries, and we think it's going to have a very good ending for us, that i can assure you," trump added u.s. officials believe "we have it all under control," adding that it's a "very small problem in this country." 3 four days later 17,438 cases had been identified and there were 362 known deaths. four days after that the virus, still centered in china, had infected 34,546 people by that time and killed 720 people worldwide. 4 you will be reading this several months after i write it, and so will know how this plays out. but the numbers alone aren't the point i am trying to make. it is that this virus in spite of all medical advances arose very quickly and has had worldwide effects. just as the aids pandemic has infected 75 million and killed 32 million as of 2019; 5 or the much smaller (worldwide) ebola hemorrhagic fever african epidemic which killed 11,000. certainly we have come a long way the spanish flu pandemic of 1918, the deadliest pandemic on record, which infected an estimated 500 million worldwide, roughly a third of the world's population, and killed 20 to 50 million, including and estimated 675,000 americans. 6 what i am trying to show with these illustrations is that a century of experience and data has taught us these afflictions appear in spite of all the advances of medicine, and cannot be anticipated. the question that haunts my mind is, how would the united states handle such a pandemic outbreak if it occurred as the coronavirus did in china, just as some kind of major climate change crisis was also stressing the american healthcare system. are we prepared? i don't think so, do you?the reality is that not only america but the world is utterly unprepared for these outbreaks, and when one adds the migrations that climate change will compel things look very bleak indeed. the international organization for migration in geneva is generally considered the best source on information on this issue, and their source is oxford professor norman myers. he says that by 2050, which is to say just 30 years from now, "when global warming takes hold there could be as many as 200 million people overtaken by disruptions of monsoon systems and other rainfall regimes, by droughts of unprecedented severity and duration, and by sea-level rise and coastal flooding." 7 this rise in migration trend is already underway. the united nations reports, "the climate crisis is already having an effect: according to the internal displacement monitoring centre, 17.2 million people had to leave their homes last year, because of disasters that negatively affected their lives. slow changes in the environment, such as ocean acidification, desertification and coastal erosion, are also directly impacting people's livelihoods and their capacity to survive in their places of origin." 8 but i want to focus on the america's internal migrations particularly. just consider the internal migrants projected to abandon coastal cities and towns because of flooding due to sea rise.a multi-university re. search team led by caleb robinson of georgia institute of technology's school computational science and engineering department did the calculations (see fig. 1 ) and projected that sea rise alone will make 13 million people internal migrants. 9 the team's commentary is chilling, "the impacts of slr (sea level rise) are potentially catastrophic. about 30% of the urban land on earth was located in high-frequency flood zones in 2000, and it is projected to increase to 40% by 2030 taking urban growth and slr into account [14] . in the united states alone, 123.3 million people, or 39% of the total population, lived in coastal counties in 2010, with a predicted 8% increase by the year 2020. by the year 2100, a projected 13.1 million people in the united states alone would be living on land that will be considered flooded with a slr of 6 feet (1.8 m)."as oceans expand and encroach into previously habitable land, affected people-climate migrants-will move towards locations explore 000 (2020) 1à4explore journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/jsch further inland, looking for food and shelter in areas that are less susceptible to increased flooding or extreme weather events. . ..we argue that the comprehensive impacts of slr on human populations, when considering migration, expand far beyond the coastal areas." 10 climate change, migration, and epidemics; what lessons should we draw from those trends? how prepared is america to deal them? ask yourself: where i practice how would the emts, clinics, hospitals, my practice itself, handle the stresses to come over the next three decades? whether it is people fleeing, people in transit, or people arriving, how would sanitation, housing, healthcare, and food support be done where you live?i want to argue that we as a nation are headed to a disaster of a proportion nationwide never experienced in our history. and it is occurring at the same time that the illness profit system that passes for healthcare in america is collapsing. is this a political statement? only in the sense that it is going to require politics to solve it. let's put partisanship aside and just look at the objectively verifiable data starting with the demographic which is going to live through what is occurring.we are an aging population. according to the u.s. census bureau in less that 20 years the old will outnumber the young for the first time in u.s. history. they report, "already, the middle-aged outnumber children, but the country will reach a new milestone in 2034 (previously 2035). that year, the u.s. census bureau projects that older adults will edge out children in population size: people age 65 and over are expected to number 77.0 million (previously 78.0 million), while children under age 18 will number 76.5 million (previously 76.7 million)." 11 so we are getting older and less vital. also, lifespan in america has been going downward for the last three years, after more than a century of increasing steadily.steven wolf of center on society and health, department of family medicine and population health, virginia commonwealth university school of medicine, richmond, and heidi schoonmaker of eastern virginia medical school, norfolk, teamed up to really climb inside of this life expectancy decline, and their report in jama should be a clock stopper. they found that, "us life expectancy increased for most of the past 60 years, but the rate of increase slowed over time and life expectancy decreased after 2014. a major contributor has been an increase in mortality from specific causes (e.g., drug overdoses, suicides, organ system diseases) among young and middle-aged adults of all racial groups, with an onset as early as the 1990s and with the largest relative increases occurring in the ohio valley and new england. the implications for public health and the economy are substantial, making it vital to understand the underlying causes." 12 and all of this is occurring in a nation whose healthcare system currently ranks, according the to the world health organization, a lowly 37th in the world. far from preparing for climate change and what it means, the united states is going backwards, dismantling the fragile system it has.twenty percent of the people living in the united states live in what is defined as a rural area. rural counties constitute approximately 97% of the land mass of america. about 20% of the population live in one of these counties à that's just under 66 million men, women, and children, although this population is skewed older; 17.5% are older than 65, compared to urban areas where that percentage is 13.8% in some states more than 50% of the older population lives in these rural areas. 13 so we have climate change coming on in rural areas where there is an older population that already requires more healthcare that average. 14 so what is actually happening? since the u.s. healthcare system places profit above health, hospitals are closing right and left (see fig. 2 ) because they aren't profitable enough, and the covid-19 crisis will show us what happens in such a healthcare system.in 2016 about 41% of rural hospitals nationally operated at a negative margin, meaning they lost more money than they produced from operations. texas and mississippi had the highest number of economically vulnerable facilities, that year. 15 three years later, in 2019, more than 20% of our nation's rural hospitals, or 430 hospitals across 43 states were near collapse. at least 155 rural hospitals have closed since 2005. 16 i have been documenting this in these pages since 2005. once the reality is faced that healthcare is calibrated to profit not wellbeing, it is easy to see why hospital corporations are closing rural hospitals. at present we have a situation where the healthcare system is disintegrating at the very time it is going to be most needed.think about those hospitals closing. each time a rural hospital closes, there are tragic consequences for the local community and surrounding counties. while the medical consequences are the most obvious, there is also loss of sales tax revenue, reduction in supporting businesses such as pharmacies and clinics. there are also fewer professionals, including doctors, nurses and pharmacists, and fewer students in local schools.david mosley and daniel debehnke, md, studied this exact issue and reported: "the closing of a rural hospital often signals the beginning of progressive decline and deterioration of small rural towns and counties. hospitals often serve as financial and professional anchors as well as source of pride for its small rural community. it also often means loss of other employers or inability to recruit new employers due to lack of nearby health care. when a rural hospital closes its doors, unemployment often rises, and average income drops." 17 there are no nurses, doctors, pharmacists or ers for local farmers, ranchers, growers and assorted men, women and children who love living and working in america's vast rural regions. rural communities and rural citizens are often left with no options for routine primary care, maternity care or emergency care. even basic medical supplies are often hard to find. just think about one example of what would happen if 13 million americans were on the move in desperation. consider diabetes.according to the centers for disease control, in 2017 "more than 100 million u.s. adults are now living with diabetes or prediabetes." the report found that in 2015, 30.3 million americans à 9.4 percent of the u.s. population were diabetic. another 84.1 million had prediabetes, a condition that if not treated often leads to type 2 diabetes within five years. 18 and the numbers in 2020 are larger because they have been going up.assume for the moment equal distribution of diabetic sufferers amongst the internal migrants, although in actuality that will not be the case. coastal southern states, where climate change will particularly cause internal migration, have the highest diabetes rate in the country. but just assume equal distribution. if there are 13 million internal migrants, 9.4% would be over a million men, women, and children, 1222,000 to be exact. if you have been taking insulin for more than 10 years without it you probably wouldn't live no more than 10 days. 19 do you think all those migrants will be well stocked with the insulin they need? no neither do i.if you live and practice in a city of a hundred thousand, or a town of 50,000, could your emergency rooms handle 10,000 or 5000 additional diabetics desperate, probably unable to pay for their daily insulin? insulin is not optional. how would your city or town even set up the system to meet the demand? would your pharmacies have enough on hand?and it isn't just the diabetes; if people weren't getting their dosages regularly a whole range of serious health complications such as cardiovascular events, or kidney disease will arise and require care.in this essay i have just touched on three aspects of the crisis humanity faces, pandemics, climate change, and diabetes. but that is a very partial list. to really get the full picture would require more than an essay; one would have to add: extreme weather events from hurricanes to heatwaves, the decline of life-sustaining ecosystems, food security and dwindling stores of fresh water. each one of these alone poses a monumental challenge to humanity in the 21st century. taken together as is likely to happen the situation becomes cataclysmic.america is not prepared for any of this, not even close. how bad could it get. at the university of massachusetts in boston, at the center for governance and sustainability a team led by the center's director professor maria ivanova as that question. and their conclusion? looking at the combination of variables they see affecting the world they said these factors, "have the potential to impact and amplify one another in ways that might cascade to create global systemic collapse." 20 erik franklin, a researcher at the university of hawaii's institute of marine biology concurs, "human society will be faced with the devastating combined impacts of multiple interacting climate hazards. they are happening now and will continue to get worse." 21 if any group must lead the preparation fight to prepare us i think it must be america's healthcare professionals; the people actually on the line. however, comfortable you are. no matter how convinced you are that this chain of crises won't touch you, or that you can handle it, you won't, and you can't. not with the infrastructure and illness profit system we have today.i think a significant part of the budget now going to the military should be redirected into the rebuilding of a new system based on universality and fostering wellbeing. it is going to require a different consciousness. a different way of thinking. a different worldview. and just as they say, you either become part of the problem or part of the solution.the people's republic of china-or mainland china-has emerged as the second largest economic power in the world with an average 10 percent growth of gross domestic product (gdp) a year (world bank 2015 ). the country was formerly administered by a huge, bureaucratic, communist politburo. it has undergone a post-mao era's reform in 1978 to incorporate economic growth within its own fragmented, authoritarian polity (mcgregor 2011 ; zhao 2008 ) . as a consequence, at the start of deng xiaoping's economic reform and openness policy, the industrialized china lifted around 500 million of its 1.3 billion citizens out of poverty (world bank 2015 ; french and crabbe 2010 , p. xxiv) . however, china maintains its system of authoritarianism, notwithstanding regular cries for "western style democracy" by chinese students and citizens such as those of the tiananmen square protest in april 1989 (leslie 2014 ) moreover, it is also well documented that western diseases or chronic non-communicable diseases are prevalent due to rapid changes in lifestyle, such as, cardiovascular diseases, diabetes, obesity, lung cancer etc. (french and crabbe 2010 , pp. 6-8) . the emergence of communicable diseases has been well documented in good case studies, such as those of bubonic plague in the nineteenth century (pryor 1975 , pp. 61-70) and the epidemics or pandemics in the contemporary globalization period of severe acute respiratory syndrome (sars), bird fl u or h5n1, hiv/ aids, or even persistent tuberculosis and malaria. in addition, mental health-related issues such as high suicide rates, depression, and mental disorders are on the rise (huang 2013 , p. 4; macpherson 2008 , pp. 39-49) . all of these health hazards and ecological mishaps have had not only the microbes and some individuals to blame; socio-politico-cultural determinants are in fact the culprits. the low chance of the poor getting good education, the absence of strong civic organizations, morally corrupt interest groups and bureaucracies in food production and environmental regulation and control, public health policies, sanitary standards, healthcare funding, gender-related factors, the one-child policy, and the top-down health communication strategies could be mentioned as partly responsible as well (french and crabbe 2010 , pp. xiii-xiv; huang 2013 , p. 21; wermuth 2003 , p. 63) . not only domestic factors but also external factors such as globalization, policies of the world trade organization (wto), the world bank and the international monetary fund (imf) affect china's inequalities (harris and seid 2004 , p. 25) .given this background, this chapter aims to discuss how globalization has been affecting public health in china; why economic progress brought about inequalities; how these inequalities have been impacting public health in china; and what the current status of public health is in china and hong kong.cases of epidemics that broke out in the past, such as bubonic plague, bird fl u and sars, will be analyzed for both the public health and health communication policies. health communication strategies regarding these infectious/communicable diseases have been explored. the same approach has been used with current epidemics such as hiv/aids and ongoing historical diseases such as malaria and tuberculosis (tb). at the same time, policies to mitigate pollutants in the air and water will be also discussed.moreover, the chapter will assess communication strategies and policies on non-communicable disease (ncd) and public health policies. this includes food safety and regulations concerning alcohol and tobacco control to prevent the onset of diabetes, obesity, cardiovascular disease, and cancers.the concept of globalization must not be referred to as a phenomenon exclusively belonging to the twentieth and twenty-fi rst centuries. according to hopkins ( 2002 ) , globalization is a new term that denotes ongoing historical processes from before the 1500s up to the present day. according to lie ( 2003 , pp. 101-116) , globalization can be understood as a fl ow of cultural products from one location to another. the location can be nations, communities, institutions, or individuals. unfortunately, the global fl ows cannot be smooth because of nation states' boundaries, geocultural boundaries, such as east and west, and geo-economic boundaries, such as the north-south divide (powell and steel 2011 ) . globalization makes some regions become centers of economic growth while others are outliers or closer to the periphery. this affects the life of the people in those regions a great deal. harris and seid ( 2004 ) explain that the transition from agrarian to industrial societies in most developing countries has been slower and more problematic than that in the developed nations as there are many people who did not benefi t from the developments.ncds (i.e. cardiovascular disease, especially coronary heart disease and stroke, cancer, chronic respiratory disease, and diabetes) kill about 36 million of the world population each year (who 2015 ) . social determinants that can be considered as negative consequences of globalization contributing to ncds among populations include migration of the population from traditional means of subsistence, urbanization without provision of standard housing and employment, and large unregulated marketing of tobacco products and alcoholic beverages (harris and seid 2004 , p. 16; yacht and beaglehole 2004 , pp. 214-215) . the globalized world-equipped with high-speed transportation-has resulted in mobility and migration being deemed responsible for the emergence of new patterns of infectious diseases and speeding up the transmission rate of those diseases. major infectious diseases have killed large populations: small pox (500 million people), measles (200 million), spanish fl u (80 million), bubonic plague (75 million), aids (40 million), and typhus (4 million) (who 2015 ) . although the incidence of infectious diseases dropped from 40 percent to 17.5 percent between 1990 and 2010, new diseases have emerged at the rate of one or more per year since the 1970s. according to the world health organization ( 2015 ), several new infectious diseases are, for instance, the severe acute respiratory associated coronavirus (sars-cov), henipaviruses (hendra and nipah), avian infl uenza virus, and the h1n1 virus (swine infl uenza). there are also historic, infectious diseases that are re-emerging, such as west nile fever, human monkey pox, dengue, tb, and malaria.uneven growth or socio-economic disparities/differentials/gaps between the haves and the have-nots posed by globalization as a threat to healthy individuals or communities can be studied in nine different approaches, according to wermuth's research ( 2003 , pp. 9-43) , described below.first, the 'health gradient' descriptive model, which linearizes the socioeconomic status (or ses) and health outcomes, can be used to (partially) explain that high level of income, education, and occupation have some association with a lower death rate (anderson and armstead 1995 , pp. 213-215) . to elaborate, low-income people and paupers face a short life expectancy at birth as they have less access to appropriate healthcare, nutrition, living conditions including sanitation, and later in life they are more prone to chronic stress because of unstable jobs or unemployment prospects. second, being healthy or not is a consequence of bio-psychosocial effects (anderson and armstead 1995 , pp. 213-225) : the sociodemographic (i.e. age, ethnicity, gender, and location) together with the socio-economic status (i.e. education, income, occupation, family wealth, perceived ses, economic mobility, childhood socio-economic status, material possessions, trading/bartering practices, and national income distribution); the socio-environmental and medical (i.e. residential characteristics, occupational environment, social support, social/professional hierarchy, and access to healthcare); the psychological and behavioral (i.e. psychological distress, personality factors, health promoting behaviors, and health-damaging behaviors); and physiological (cardiovascular, immune, muscular, endocrine, height, and weight).third, a paradigm for research on ses and health by williams ( 1990 , pp. 81-99) is based on the second approach but emphasizes the psycho-social factors that have an impact on health: health practices (smoking, alcohol, nutrition); social ties or social support; perceptions of control; stress (family, occupational, and residential).fourth, the general theoretical model of relationships between occupational quality and poor physical health of wickrama et al. ( 1997 , pp. 363-375) emphasizes the underlying occupational quality, social integration, and marital integration to sense of control of an individual which leads to health-risk behaviors and poor physical health.fifth, it was found by kennedy et al. ( 1996 ) that the degree of income inequality was correlated with states' mortality rates and infant mortality.sixth, the social capital-comprising the community cohesion and trust a person possesses-was suggested to be a good indicator of health by kawachi and kennedy ( 1997 ) . seventh, the model social, psychological, and physical pathways to health outcomes, developed by brunner and marmot ( 1999 ) , p. 20), reveals that social structure, social environment, and work affect the psychological aspects of an individual and are related to the health behaviors of that person. the brain of that individual subsequently creates neuroendocrine and immune responses that cause patho-physiological changes which consequently affect organ impairment and health in general.eighth, wilkinson ( 1997 ) stated that improvements of the standard of living and quality of life via globalization lower the rate of communicable or infectious diseases, but increase the rate of non-communicable diseases such as cardiovascular diseases among both the upper and lower social classes.ninth, the political economy not only consists of global political and economic forces, the state, government, social classes, public administration, policy making, and the distribution of sources between and among populations, but also concerns a world transnational trading system and the mobilization of labor and resources to maximize profi ts. in turn, it affects the living conditions of workers and their health. environmental changes, and changes in lifestyle as well as communications that come with globalization take tolls on public health. specifi cally in china, health can be examined through fi ve pathways, as suggested by harris and seid ( 2004 , p. 11 ): (a) economic growth, income distribution, and poverty; (b) democracy and governance; (c) health services; (d) nutrition and food security; and (e) other risk or mitigating factors. the latest data indicates that more than a quarter of the adult population in china, or around 350 million people, are overweight and obese (the economist 2014 ), and according to who ( 2014 ), 6.5 percent of female and 4.6 percent of male mainland chinese adults aged more than 20 are obese. the more affl uent hong kongers witness excess weight and obesity among 48.3 percent of males and 31.4 percent of females. obesity among children in both mainland china and in hong kong is on the rise. it is also worth noticing that 6.9 percent of male chinese children are obese, which is twice the percentage of the male adults (the economist 2014 ), and one out of every fi ve children in hong kong is obese (south china morning post 2015 ). it is also worth noting that obesity is expanding more in the rural areas than in the cities, as many farmers have sold their landholdings for development and moved to more sedentary lifestyles (the economist 2014 ). the cause of obesity in cities in china is due to the lack of public spaces for exercise, and the changes in eating patterns as people consume more meat, potatoes, cow's milk, beers, fast food/deep-fried foods than in the past; hence, oils and fats (especially transfat or hydrogenated fat used for producing margarine), monosodium glutamate, sugar, and salt are on the increase while not enough grains are being consumed (french and crabbe 2010 , pp. 49-73, 107) . obesity may lead to a lack of concentration, sleep apnoea, constipation, osteoarthritis, slipped discs, bad backs, pulled muscles and infertility (french and crabbe 2010 , pp. 7, 9-10) .the top ten causes of death in china are malignant neoplasms (28 percent), heart disease (21 percent), cerebrovascular disease (11 percent), diseases of the respiratory system (5 percent), injury and poisoning (3 percent), endocrine, nutritional and metabolic diseases (3 percent), diseases of the digestive systems (3 percent), diseases of the nervous systems (1 percent), diseases of the genitourinary system (1 percent), and infectious diseases (0.9 percent) (cdc 2014 ). ncds accounted for 87 percent of total deaths in china in 2014 (who 2014 ). french and crabbe ( 2010 , p. 7) reported that it was known in 2007 that bad diet, obesity and a lack of physical exercise are the factors that are associated with cancers among the women in shanghai. the cancer diagnosis rates in shanghai were more or less the same as those in the european union (eu). it is alarming that 11.6 percent of the population in the mainland is diabetic, according to the latest survey (the economist 2014 ). with reference to infectious diseases in mainland china, zhang and wilson ( 2012 ) hong kong public health and health communication policies, 1842 -1941 during the period before the second world war , the health policy and communication on the bubonic plague that broke out in tai ping shan in hong kong in 1896 was examined by pryor ( 1975 , p. 61 ). the plague bacillus was carried by rats to humans and through the air (pryor 1975 , p. 62, 68) . plague (or the black death) that killed 80,000 people was thought to have spread either from yunnan, in the south of china, or via a transportation route from india (pryor 1975 , pp. 62, 68) . one of the social determinants that helped spread the disease was the overcrowded tenements in which residents were divided in cubicles, some of which did not even have windows (pryor 1975 , p. 68) . the fi rst public health strategy was a bio-medical approach focused on quarantine, the rapid disposal of corpses, fumigation or disinfection of residences, and evacuation. hong kong, then a colony under the british, demolished every house in tai ping shan and rebuilt the area as a public park called blake garden (ng 2014 , p.149 ). this is a top-down approach.although the government executed the plan to battle the plague efficiently, this approach earned distrust and resistance from the local residents. ng ( 2014 , p. 149 ) describes how chinese families were known to hide the sick and even dead bodies in their homes to evade forced removal and mass burial, and many of them migrated to china. this incident emphasized that the policymakers have to ensure a good two-way communication and understand the local culture to gain acceptance and cooperation by the locals for the health policy to be successful.this biomedical approach to health communication worked when the british government set up a bacteriological facility in 1906, which is now the hong kong museum of medical sciences, and brought in experts from england, france, and japan to treat the infected and develop a vaccine. the bubonic plague was controlled in 1925 after 20,000 deaths, which is 70 times the number lost to sars in 2003 (ng 2014 , p. 149 ).during the second world war, public health in hong kong was expanded together with advances in vaccination. health communication strategies in those days, as analyzed from the narrative by macpherson ( 2008 , p. 20) , entailed a top-down, unilateral approach, as anti-tb campaigns were used to "educate" the public in terms of behavioral change communication. good governance and medical service were executed under a structural intervention plan. macpherson ( 2008 , p. 20) reported that the hong kongers at the health department did such a good job in health services and rehabilitation of the colony during the war that almost 2 million people immigrated to hong kong.hong kong public health and health communication policies, 1949 -97 macpherson ( 2008 writes that, in this period, hong kong focused more on the biomedical intervention of maternal and child healthcare services to reduce infant and neonatal mortality and eliminate vaccine-preventable diseases in children. in 1948, health communication in hong kong could therefore be called a participatory-based advocacy (servaes and malikhao 2010 ) . communication as a non-anti-tuberculosis association was formed. at the same time, a structural intervention approach to public health was implemented when the housing authority resettled the slum dwellers to standard residential areas. hong kong also collaborated with international organizations like who to create outreach services. it also limited the number of migrants from mainland china. the health communication strategy-combining social marketing of vaccinations with behavioral change interventions-came up with promotional activities such as giving away gifts to the children who had been vaccinated. this strategy was used to battle cholera and hepatitis infections (macpherson 2008 , pp. 23-24) . the public health of hong kong after 1997 will be analyzed in conjunction with that of mainland china as hong kong was returned to china under the one country, two systems arrangement after that particular year.the ministry of public health (moph) was set up in 1949. prevention was the work that the moph did, with mobile health teams all over the country. the mode of health communication was a mixture of social marketing and propaganda as health was prized close to national security. the government launched a series of "patriotic hygiene campaigns" to emphasize the importance of environmental sanitation. as analyzed by huang ( 2013 , pp. 31-33) , during the great "leap forward campaign" of 1958-59, the principle of public health was based on egalitarianism, and health services were free of charge and accessible as the state took care of society. the health communication policy in this period was top-down, authoritarian, and relied on one-way communication. mao dictated the public health policy in the 'anti-schistosomiasis campaign' in 1958, and came up with his own form of pest control which included sparrows as pests. this wrong policy led to a plague of locusts as there were not enough sparrows.in other words, a less thought-out policy led to an ecological imbalance. during the great cultural revolution period under mao, the barefoot doctor program was promoted as a national policy (huang 2013 , p. 43 ). this was a structural change intervention during which china trained peasants to become medical 'doctors' in the rural areas. moreover, during this period, health services and medical services were managed in a three-tier system (huang 2013 ) . public health and education policies were mixed up with political ideology and resulted in a step backward for china as shown by the epidemiological data in state statistics (macpherson 2008 , pp. 34-35) .changes took place during the economic reforms after mao passed away in 1976. in 1985, public health policies allowed the private health care establishments to reduce the role of the state (huang 2013 , pp. 57-58) . it was a structural change of the public health system. huang ( 2013 , p. 80) reported that this economic reform model in the health sector "jettisoned the maoist health model which emphasized quality and universalism". the profi t-oriented approach had a profound effect on preventive measures as the public needed to bear the cost of medical fees (macpherson 2008 , p. 36) . in 2006, it was found that historical diseases had re-emerged and new diseases such as hiv and aids, h5n1 or sars spread rapidly. hong kong has had a "socialist" health care system providing good service at minimal cost to the people (macpherson 2008 , p. 45) . in 2006, the hong kong sar government introduced private health insurance schemes for those who could afford them (macpherson 2008 , p. 45).the hiv/aids epidemic is a manifestation of a complex relationship between inequality, particularly gender inequality with regard to education and income, and poverty (sutherland and hsu 2012 , pp. 27, 43) . according to macpherson ( 2008 , p. 40) , the number of people living with hiv/aids (plwha) in hong kong remains low but the increase of hiv infection rates in guangdong and shenzhen, which borders hong kong, has triggered alarms. the hiv epidemic in china concerns three different socio-cultural and economic factors. the fi rst is a complex consequence of the poorly controlled blood, drug, and sex trades. the second is three socially marginalized populations: impoverished rural residents in central china, ethnic minorities in border regions, and female migrant workers in many cities. the third factor is homosexuality among chinese males (jun and worth 2010 , pp. 13-41) .macpherson ( 2008 , p. 40) reports an estimated 650,000 plwha and an estimated 60,000-80,000 new cases. ren et al. ( 2014 , pp. 267-284) studied the chinese newspapers' coverage of hiv transmissions over a decade and came up with the fi nding that hiv stigmatization in chinese newspaper was high. the media labeled and stereotyped plwha and their relatives. zhang ( 2010 , pp. 177-194) studied the source of hiv-related stigma and discrimination in china. these, according to him, can be traced to ideas and metaphors associated with the attitudes of government agencies, news media, and health professionals; stigma is exacerbating the hiv/ aids epidemic as the infected people will not disclose their status, not even to their intimate partners, for fear of being outcast and losing income. thus, health communication regarding hiv/aids in china is pretty negative and impedes the progress of public health. shi and chen ( 2014 , p. 295 ) conducted a quantitative content analysis about plwha on weibo, the chinese social networking application equivalent to twitter, and found that more than half of the messages in the hiv/aids weibo group were about social support, either informational or emotional.regarding the hiv/aids communication strategy of the government, macpherson ( 2008 , p. 40) reports that china denied having an hiv problem till 2002, one month after the global aids fund was announced. huang ( 2010 , pp. 47, 60) conducted ethnographic studies among female sex workers in china from 1996-2008 and contended that health knowledge alone will not be suffi cient to change hiv risktaking behavior. promoting condom use among sex workers often failed to consider the complex power relations between new sex workers from poor areas, their handlers, and the customers who wanted unprotected sex (huang 2010 , pp. 59-60) , and the government policy which used condoms as legal evidence to arrest and fi ne a sex worker before 2001. the nationwide condom use in local hotels was launched in 2004 and in entertainment areas in 2006 (huang 2010 , p. 62) . this is a structural change intervention in the fi ght against hiv/aids. in 2003, the chinese government launched the "four frees, one care" program consisting of free voluntary hiv testing and counseling; free anti-retroviral drugs for the poor, free medication for all pregnant plwh, and free schooling for the orphans of people who have died of aids (huang 2010 , p. 94) . the government also provides screening to prevent bloodborne infections, and a needle exchange program (huang 2010 , p. 94) . this has been a biomedical intervention. the government launched a nationwide awareness and safe sex campaign, which was a social marketing communication strategy. from the above mentioned stigmatization studies, there is a need for more in-depth content analyses of the messages the government sent out to assess their relevance and impact.sars broke out in guangdong province in the south of china in mid-november 2002 (huang 2013 , p. 89) . the mode of communication of the government of guangdong was denial and silence on grounds of secrecy (huang 2013 , p. 90) . furthermore, fragmented and poorly coordinated provincial policy could not reach the higher authority's decision-making bodies in time when the epidemic broke out. the disease reached hong kong in march 2003 (hung 2003 ). it was a success of hong kong's biomedical invention capacity that the scientists could identify the virus and a team of international experts could develop a vaccine against sars in may 2003 (hung 2003 ) . the hong kong public health specialists uncovered the fl aws in the infrastructure that had helped spread the disease, such as the bad sanitary drainage systems of apartment buildings that allowed mists of contaminated water to spread further. hung ( 2003 , p. 94) reports the public health strategies as follows:the prevention and control measures undertaken in hong kong include:(1) preventive education and publicity; (2) tracing the source of infection; (3) introducing fi ve major control measures (compulsory isolation and surveillance of contacts, stopping school and university education sessions, exchange of epidemiological information between hong kong and mainland china, temperature checking of travelers at points of entry and exit, district-wide cleansing campaigns); (4) strengthening collaboration and communication with mainland china and the who; and (5) developing a quick diagnostic test for sars.the sars crisis made the chinese government acknowledge that animalborne epidemics such as foot and mouth disease, swine vesicular disease, and avian infl uenza should no longer be kept as state secrets (huang 2013 , p. 94) . communicable or infectious diseases such as plague and cholera, as well as sars, highly pathogenic avian infl uenza, polio, and pulmonary anthrax, etc., should be reported within a given period of time. also, capacity building among bureaucratic organizations has been established in the years since (huang 2013 , pp. 93-94) .as ncds are determined partly by the quality of food, water, and air intake, the policies and measures to control and regulate food safety, and water and air pollution, should be analyzed. macpherson ( 2008 , pp. 42-43) reports:… there is no comprehensive environment protection law to give force to a maze of regulatory regimes and policies, and no systematic attempt to promote public discussion and awareness of environmental problems.regarding food safety, macpherson ( 2008 , p. 43) reports the serious lack of enforcement and unifi ed supervision to a set standard, even though china has over 200 laws and regulations on standard food safety. she also reports about fake drugs in china. mou ( 2014 , p. 330 ) studied the microblogging exchanges about food safety crises in china and found that the chinese government has not used micro-blogs to inform the public about food safety, even though half of the online users are micro-blog users, and that the authorities' intervention on social media was not suffi cient during the period of a food safety crisis. it is important that the time spent watching television and exposure to advertising and marketing strategies are analyzed. french and crabbe ( 2010 , p.134) report three explanations of a survey by ofcom (the independent regulator and competition authority for uk communications industries) into how hours of exposure to television programs and advertising correlate with poor diet, poor health, and obesity among children and adults. the reasons given were: (a) television viewing is a sedentary activity; (b) television viewing is associated with unhealthy snacking and eating high fat, high sugar, and high salt (hfss) pre-prepared and fast meals; (c) the exposure to advertisements of hfss food products is high. moreover, peers and children can infl uence hfss food choice by peer pressure (pester power) or nagging the parents for it. most importantly, marketing power via product promotions and special offers affects children's hfss food choice.health communication, if planned and executed wisely, can amount to more than informing people about diseases and disease prevention and cures; it can alter attitudes in favor of living healthily. it may, to a certain extent, induce positive health behavior but it will not be effective if the communicators pay less attention to the enabling polity and environment that can assist health behavior change.health communication research in china that borrows the western quantitative analyses pays less attention to the enabling environment in which the health communication takes place. the political and economic environments infl uence the public health policy. public health during outbreaks should be transparent and timely. thanks to advances in epidemiological and microbiological research, which form a pivotal part of biomedical intervention, disease control and prevention are possible. however, the examples of disease outbreaks in china show that exclusively top-down command and lack of coherent communication between and among the responsible authorities can aggravate the situation. from the analyses of the public health policies of china, one can see that the civic organizations were not encouraged in china to check and balance the information from the authorities and help monitor the outbreaks. participation is thus lacking in the health communication process in china. advocacy-communication can be seen from the social networking sites such as weibo and in microblogging. mostly, behavior change interventions and school-based interventions took place for introduction of vaccination and promoting a hygienic environment. capacity building, domestically in china and with hong kong special administrative region or with other nations in times of a health crisis, have always proven to be effective. law enforcement should be strengthened. moral ethics should be on the agenda of media advocacy to make the citizens and government offi cials realize that one cannot make profi ts at the cost of other people's lives, and that one should not discriminate or victimize others (malikhao 2016 ) . public ethics and vigilance on any issue that affects people's wellness and well-being should be on the top agenda of communication and public health to ensure a good environment and food safety as well as a public space for recreation and well-being.as 30, 11591, 7716, 3143, 1408 and 89 with mortality ratios nearly 0.67%, 11.39%, 8.77%, 76 1,9%, 6.4% and 1.2% respectively [1] . figure 1 shows the cumulative number of confirmed the highest burden of covid-19 is not only dependent on the health system but also depend 83 quickly response. for example, in italy, the first confirmed covid-19 cases on february 15 84 and then after few days thousands of people infected by covid-19. the problem is not that 85 the italy government didn't respond to the covid-19. the problem is that it always responded 86 slightly too slow and with slightly too much moderation. what has resulted in china reveals 87 that quarantine, social distance, and isolation of infected populations can contain the epidemic. 88 this impact of the covid-19 response in china is advocating for many countries where 89 covid-19 is starting to spread. however, it is unclear whether other countries can implement 90 the stringent measures china eventually adopted. singapore and hong kong, both of which 91 . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. (which was not certified by peer review)the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted april 25, 2020. in mathematical models, the incidence rate plays an important role in the transmission of 106 infectious diseases. the number of individuals who become infected per unit time is called the 107 incidence rate in the epidemiology perspective [11] . here, we consider the nonlinear incidence the rest of the paper is structured as follows: section 2 presents model descriptions. sections 122 we considered a modified slir compartmental model of covid-19 transmission with 123 nonlinear incidence between the following mutually exclusive compartments: s(t)susceptible 124 . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. (which was not certified by peer review)the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted april 25, 2020. 152 . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted april 25, 2020. given non-negative initial conditions for the system above, it is straightforward to show that 154 each of the state variables remain non-negative for all t > 0. moreover, summing equations 155 (1)-(4) we find that the size of the total population, n(t) satisfies 163 in this section we estimated the model parameters based on the available six countries covid-164 19 reported cases data from the worldometers.info [1] . figure . cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted april 25, 2020. sensitivity analysis is performed to investigate the parameters that process the greatest 197 influence on the model outputs [20, 21] . in this study, we performed the partial rank correlation in this paper, we presented a modified slir compartmental model with nonlinear incidence. 214 we estimate number of cases from covid-19 infection and apply it to data from the covid- within the six different countries we found that spain has the highest transmission rate than 221 the other selected countries, which may be increase massive number of covid-19 cases and 222 make worst situation in spain. we assume that initially spain government may be not taken is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted april 25, 2020. . https://doi.org /10.1101 /10. /2020 there are so many ways that we can control covid-19 transmission (i) wash your hands 233 regularly with soap and water or rubbing an alcohol-based sanitizer into your hands because 234 washing your hands kills viruses that may be on your hands, (ii) avoid touching your face as 235 much as possible because virus containing droplets on your hands can be transferred to your 236 eyes, mouth or nose where they can infect you, (iii) maintain at least 1.5 meters distance 237 between yourself and anyone who is coughing or sneezing because if you are too close to 238 someone you might breathe in droplets they cough or sneeze, (iv) make sure you and people 239 around you follow good respiratory hygiene. respiratory hygiene is important because droplets 240 spread virus. by following good respiratory hygiene you catch any droplets that might be in this country, health system is very poor which leads to the fewer number of reported cases.therefore, data from other countries, in particular the number of cases by date of covid-19 249 onset is necessary to better understand the variability in cases across settings. are to reduce contact rates as well as increase the treatment rate that will be most effective way cc-by-nc-nd 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. (which was not certified by peer review)the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted april 25, 2020. this study based on aggregated covid-19 surveillance data in australia, italy, spain, usa, 267 uk and canada taken from the worldometer. no confidential information included because 268 analyses were performed at the aggregate level. therefore, no ethical approval is required. 1. sterilisation (latin: sterilis = barren): this is a "process by which, an article, surface, or medium is freed of all living entities (including vegetative microorganisms and spores)". an article may be regarded as sterile if it can be demonstrated that the probability of viable microorganisms on it is less than one in a million as per pharmacopoeia definition (simpson & slack, 2006 ). 2. antisepsis (greek: anti = against; sèpsis = putrefaction): this is a "process by which, living tissues are freed of pathogens". this is usually done by destruction of pathogens or by growth inhibition. 3. disinfection (latin: dis = reversal of): it is defined as a "process by which, inanimate objects, or surfaces are freed of all pathogens". usually, disinfection does not affect spores. a disinfectant in higher dilution can act as an antiseptic. but, the reverse is not always true. prophylactic disinfection is defined as "measures applied before the onset of disease" and includes chlorination of drinking water, pasteurisation of milk, and washing of hands before clinical procedures. concurrent disinfection refers to "measures applied during illness, to prevent further spread of the disease" and includes disinfection of patient's excretions, secretions, linen, and materials used in treating the patient. terminal disinfection is defined as "measures applied after the patient has ceased to be a source of infection after cure, discharge, or death". this technique is obsolete. terminal disinfection is now replaced by terminal cleaning of rooms, including ventilation. rarely, bedding is fumigated (ananthanarayan & paniker, 2000; collins & grange, 1990; sathe & sathe, 1991) . 4. incineration (latin: cineris = ashes): incineration is "total combustion of all living and organic matter, by dry heat at not less than 800°c" 5. decontamination (latin: dis-or de-= reversal of; contamunätum = pollutant): this is a general term that indicates procedures put into practice to make equipment safe to handle. the word "contamination" may refer to chemical, microbiological or radioactive contamination (simpson & slack, 2006) . 6. sanitation (latin: sanitas = health): this refers to reduction in the number of pathogens (ananthanarayan & paniker, 2000) . sanitation includes cleaning, wet mopping, dust control, environmental hygiene, and safe disposal of waste.when microorganisms are subjected to a lethal process, the number of viable survivors decreases exponentially in relation to the extent of exposure to the lethal process. if a logarithm (to the base 10) of the number of surviving organisms is plotted against the lethal dose received such as duration of exposure to a particular temperature, the resulting curve is called the "survivor curve". this survivor curve is independent of the original population of microorganisms.ideally, the survival curve should be linear. extrapolation on the survivor curve helps in determining the lethal dose required to give 10 −6 survivors to meet the pharmacopoeia definition of "sterile" (simpson & slack, 2006) .while manufacturing sterile products, a figure known as "d value" is used. it is the abbreviation for "death rate value" (collins & grange, 1990) and is also called "decimal reduction value" (simpson & slack, 2006) . the "d value" is the time and dose of exposure, as determined in the laboratory, to reduce the viable count by one log, i.e. one order of magnitude = 1/10 (collins & grange, 1990) . "d value" is the time and dose of exposure required to inactivate 90 per cent of organisms in the initial population (simpson & slack, 2006) . the d value remains constant over the full range of the survivor curve. this means that the time and dose required to reduce the population of organisms from 10 6 to 10 5 is the same as that required to reduce the population of organisms from 10 5 to 10 4 (simpson & slack, 2006) . in order to ensure effectiveness of sterilisation, the magnitude of exposures used is many times more than the "d value", which is calculated according to the known "bio-burden" (collins & grange, 1990) .infection control involves: (a) good housekeeping (cleaning, wet mopping, and dust control), (b) using ppe (gloves, masks, etc.) , and (c) using physical or chemical methods to make the environmental conditions detrimental for pathogens. many physical methods act by chemical mechanisms. for example, heat kills the pathogens by denaturing cellular proteins (sathe & sathe, 1991) . the process of disinfection should be technically correct. many commonly used methods of disinfection are mentioned below, but the type of likely pathogens should be considered while choosing the type of disinfection.process. cleaning, per se, is also a valuable method of low-level disinfection. ultrasonic baths are useful in removing dried debris on instruments that are ordinarily difficult to clean. this partially reduces the bioburden. detergents have surface tension reducing property -they wash away many organisms. the dilution effect of thorough rinsing further reduces the burden and thus increases the probability of successful sterilisation (simpson & slack, 2006) . lipid membrane envelope of hiv is highly susceptible to surface tension reducing action of detergents. hence clothes and utensils may be decontaminated by washing with detergents.1. species or strain of microorganism: in general, vegetative organisms are more vulnerable, while spores are resistant to action of sterilising and disinfecting agents. there is an interspecies variation in the d value at 60°c -escherichia coli (few minutes) to salmonella enterica subtype senftenberg (one hour); d value at 70°c -staph aureus (less than 1 minute) and staph epidermidis (3 minutes) . prions (organisms that cause scrapie, bovine spongiform encephalopathy, and creutzfeldt-jakob disease) are killed at 134°c for 18 minutes. hence it is desirable to use gamma-sterilised disposable instruments for operating on nervous tissue including retina because risk of exposure to prions is high (simpson & slack, 2006 ). 2. growth conditions: organisms that grow under nutrient-rich conditions are more resistant to sterilising and disinfecting agents. resistance usually increases through the late logarithmic phase of microbial growth and declines erratically during the stationary phase. 3. spore formation: bacterial spores are more resistant, as compared to fungal spores. in general, disinfection processes have little or no action against bacterial spores. 4. micro-environment: the presence of organic matter (blood, body fluids, pus, faeces, urine) reduces the effectiveness of chlorine-releasing agents (simpson & slack, 2006) . presence of salt reduces effectiveness of ethylene oxide (simpson & slack, 2006) . chemical disinfectants will inactivate at least 10 5 viruses within few minutes. with the exception of phenols, many chemical disinfectants are inactivated in the presence of organic matter. hence thorough cleaning is necessary before disinfection (simpson & slack, 2006) . 5. bioburden: higher the initial bioburden (number of microorganisms) the lethal process must be more stringent and extensive to achieve high quality of sterility. 6. time factor: all microorganisms do not get killed instantly when exposed to physical agents or to chemical disinfectants because in any population of microorganisms, some will be more resistant than others (collins & grange, 1990) . higher the bioburden, longer will be the time taken to destroy all of them (simpson & slack, 2006) .1. concentration, stability of disinfectant, temperature, and ph during use. "inuse concentration" is the optimal concentration required to produce a standardised disinfecting effect (simpson & slack, 2006 ). 2. number, type, and accessibility of the microorganisms -gram-positive bacteria are more sensitive, as compared to gram-negative bacteria, mycobacteria, and bacterial spores; lipophilic and enveloped viruses are more sensitive, as compared to hydrophilic viruses, e.g. poliovirus. hepatitis b virus (hbv) is also relatively resistant to action of disinfectants. 3. presence of inactivators of disinfectants -organic (especially protein) substances, hard water, cork, plastics, organic matter, soaps, detergents, or another disinfectant. users should refer instructions of manufacturers regarding such inactivators (simpson & slack, 2006) .dehydration (also called "dessication") is lethal to most pathogens, since the organisms lose moisture. drying can be achieved by exposing the object or article to strong sunlight, or by keeping the object/article in desiccators (ananthanarayan & paniker, 2000) . vacuum drying is used to preserve the potency of vaccines and the nutritive value of foods. adequate ventilation acts by drying and diluting the number of suspended organisms in the air. delicate organisms such as meningococci are vulnerable to drying by air (sathe & sathe, 1991) . dehydration is unreliable because many viruses and spores are not destroyed. drying reduces the infectivity of the hiv. hence, dried serum and blood are not highly infectious. like other enveloped viruses, hiv must remain in moist state (or in solution) in order to be infectious. it is also susceptible to inactivation by physical and chemical agents in the moist state (cunningham, 1997) .dry heat acts by denaturing proteins of the microorganism. flaming: exposure of scalpels or necks of flasks to a flame for a few seconds is of uncertain efficiency. inoculating loops and needles are sometimes immersed in methylated spirit or alcohol and burnt off. but, this method does not produce sufficiently high temperature. in addition, there is the flammable risk of alcohol.the following items can be sterilised using the blue (oxidising) flame of a bunsen burner -spatulas, inoculating loops, glass slides. use disposable inoculating loops when dealing with highly pathogenic organisms. this is because flaming may cause "spluttering" of unburnt material, which is dangerous (simpson & slack, 2006) .incineration: unfortunately, many incinerators are inefficient for burning hospital waste. the waste may be merely scorched and the infected waste may escape with the smoke and pollute the atmosphere. the basic requirements in design of incinerators for hospital waste include: (a) easy attainability of high temperatures (at least 800°c) with the "load", and (b) presence of an "afterburner", i.e. a chamber, where smoke and other gaseous effluents are heated to similar or even higher temperatures (collins & grange, 1990) . it is essential to train incinerator operators on what type of materials can (or cannot) be burned and how to mix loads in order to ensure adequate combustion, with the minimum of toxic effluent. even an intrinsically efficient incinerator may fail if it is improperly used (collins & grange, 1990) . during the process of incineration, the pathogens are destroyed along with the contaminated article/object. this method is recommended for disposal of low-value non-reusable articles like soiled dressings, swabs, dry waste, etc., and for incinerating animal carcasses and biomedical waste (collins & grange, 1990; sathe & sathe, 1991) .hot air oven: the articles are wrapped in heat-resistant paper before they are placed in the hot air oven. the recommended temperature and duration is 160°c for 1 hour. this method is used for sterilising sharp instruments, glassware (syringes), dusting powders (french chalk, antibiotic powders), vaseline, and paraffin.moist heat is more lethal than dry heat. the cell wall of the microorganisms encloses protein particles in colloidal suspension. heat coagulates cellular protein, which results in death of microorganisms. coagulation of protein is instantly lethal and takes place at a lower temperature in the presence of moisture. hence, moist heat is more lethal than dry heat. the vegetative forms contain more moisture and therefore, their cellular proteins coagulate faster. spores contain less moisture and are consequently more resistant to action of heat (sathe & sathe, 1991) .pasteurisation: rapid heating, followed by sudden cooling destroys or inactivates most of the pathogenic organisms. pasteurisation is chiefly used for milk and milk products. the methods of pasteurisation are: (a) holder method -milk is heated to 63°c for half an hour and is rapidly cooled (b) flash process -also known as "high temperature, short time (htst) method". milk is rapidly heated to 72°c within 15 seconds and is quickly cooled (c) ultra-high temperature (uht) method -milk is superheated to 125°c in 15 seconds and is rapidly cooled. milk and milk products pasteurised by uht method have a longer shelf life.water baths: used for disinfecting sera and other products that are destroyed or denatured at high temperatures. the recommended temperature and duration is 60°c for 1 hour (ananthanarayan & paniker, 2000) .boiling: boiling destroys all vegetative organisms within 5 minutes. but, spores may remain viable (ananthanarayan & paniker, 2000) . moist heat is not suitable for woolens and may cause shrinkage. boiling is useful for disinfecting linen, crockery, utensils, bottles, and glassware. the articles should be thoroughly washed with soap or detergent before they are boiled. a bundle of clothes should be boiled at least for half an hour so that the moist heat can penetrate the bulky mass. sputum, collected in a metal container, should be boiled for 1 minute after adding some water (sathe & sathe, 1991) . hiv in solution is inactivated by heat at 56°c within 10-20 minutes. in lyophilised protein preparations, such as factor viii, hiv is killed at 68°c within 2 hours.types of steam: dry steam does not contain suspended droplets of water. wet steam contains suspended droplets of water at the same temperature and is less efficient as a sterilising agent. saturated steam holds all the water it can, in the form of transparent vapour. for effective sterilisation, steam should be both dry and saturated (simpson & slack, 2006) . superheated steam is at a higher temperature than the corresponding pressure would allow. this type of steam behaves in a manner similar to hot air and is less penetrative. mixture of steam at low temperature and formaldehyde gas combines the thermal effect of steam generated at subatmospheric pressure and chemical effect of formaldehyde gas to give effective sporicidal action. this method is useful for reprocessing heatsensitive instruments. however, safety requirements make the process unsuitable for routine hospital use (simpson & slack, 2006) .the autoclave (greek: auto = self; clavis = key) is essentially a pressure cooker. the autoclave has a cylindrical body made of strong alloy. the lid, made of gunmetal, can be sealed with "butterfly screws". the autoclave has an outlet for steam, a safety valve, and a pressure gauge. in modern autoclaves, the process, temperature, and time are controlled automatically. articles to be sterilised are kept on a perforated stage inside the autoclave cylinder. the water level is to be checked every time the autoclave is used and should be below this perforated stage. gas burner or electricity may be used for heating. autoclaving is a reliable method of sterilisation, which destroys all living entities (pathogenic as well as non-pathogenic microorganisms). vegetative organisms are killed instantly and most spores within 2 minutes. trained personnel are required for handling and maintenance. articles are moist soon after they are removed from the autoclave. sharp instruments lose their sharpness and hence cannot be autoclaved (collins & grange, 1990; sathe & sathe, 1991) . the autoclave is used in laboratories for sterilising all biochemical and bacteriological media, except those containing heat labile substances like blood, serum, or eggs (sathe & sathe, 1991) . in health care settings, autoclaves are used for sterilising linen, gloves, gowns, and surgical instruments (other than sharps). needles and syringes may also be autoclaved in certain situations though use of disposable, gamma-sterilised needles and syringes is recommended (collins & grange, 1990; sathe & sathe, 1991) .charles' law: the higher the pressure, the higher is the temperature, when the volume is constant. at normal atmospheric pressure (at sea level), water boils at 100°c. a pressure of 15 pounds per square inch (psi) is equivalent to one atmosphere pressure. metric (si) units are not used in autoclaving. when water is subjected to a pressure of 15 psi above the atmospheric pressure, water will boil at a temperature of 121°c if air is completely expelled from the closed container. if air is not expelled, water will boil at a lower temperature. pressure, per se, does not ensure effective sterilisation since microorganisms can withstand high pressures. pressure acts by raising the temperature at which water boils, and increasing penetration of steam. the raised temperature is instrumental in ensuring sterilisation (collins & grange, 1990) . latent heat of steam: for converting water into steam at the same temperature, an additional heat of 540 calories per gram has to be supplied. conversely, when 1 g of steam condenses back to form water at the same temperature, this heat is instantly released without any change in temperature. hence, this is called "latent heat" (latent = hidden). the latent heat is instantly delivered to the article on which the steam condenses resulting in instantaneous death of the microorganisms that may be present (collins & grange, 1990) .sudden reduction in volume during condensation: about 1,700 ml of steam at 100°c condenses on a relatively cooler surface to form 1 ml of water at 100°c and releases latent heat. condensation causes a local drop in pressure, which draws in more steam. this movement of steam continues till the article reaches temperature equilibrium (collins & grange, 1990) .action of moist heat: once the surface layer of the article/object has reached temperature equilibrium the steam does not condense on the surface layer since the temperature is the same. the steam penetrates into the next cooler layer and condenses. thus, moist heat under pressure is more penetrative. this action continues till the entire article or object is penetrated by steam (collins & grange, 1990) .before subjecting any article or instrument to autoclaving, it is essential that the lowest possible bioburden is present at the start of the process. any used article or instrument is to be soaked in a chemical disinfectant, cleaned with a detergent, followed by thorough rinsing. cleaning, per se, is also a valuable method of low-level disinfection. ultrasonic baths are useful in removing dried debris on instruments that are ordinarily difficult to clean. this partially reduces the bioburden. detergents have surface tension reducing property and wash away many organisms. the dilution effect of thorough rinsing further reduces the burden and thus increases the probability of successful sterilisation (simpson & slack, 2006) .since air is a bad conductor of heat, its presence inside the autoclave chamber reduces the maximum temperature that can be achieved, and thus diminishes the penetrating power of steam. steam under a pressure of 15 psi reaches a temperature of 121°c only when the air is completely removed. air can be removed from the autoclave chamber by a vacuum pump. alternatively, air can be removed by downward displacement. since cooler air (being heavier) tends to settle at the bottom of the chamber, steam is let in from the top to displace air downwards. when steam starts coming out of the discharge outlet, it indicates that the air is completely removed from the chamber. the steam outlet valve is then closed and the pressure inside the chamber is allowed to rise (collins & grange, 1990) .sterilisation time has the following components: (a) heating or penetration time: time taken to increase the temperature of the article to that of steam. (b) holding time: time during which the contents of the chamber are maintained at the selected temperature (usually 121°c at 15 psi). prions, the causative agents of scrapie, bovine spongiform encephalopathy, and creutzfeldt-jakob disease, are killed at 134°c for 18 minutes (simpson & slack, 2006) . hence, to ensure absolute sterility, a temperature of 135°c is to be attained. the holding time is determined by the thermal death point of heat-resistant bacterial spores. (c) safety period: this is usually 50 per cent of the holding time for dressing drums and is equal to the holding time for fabric bundles. it is essential to follow the instructions mentioned in the autoclave manufacturer's operating manual (collins & grange, 1990) .commonly, the pressure gauge is relied upon to check for the completeness of sterilisation. however, it is essential to have a thermometer fitted and to record the actual temperature attained, and the duration for which the temperature was maintained. equipment with vacuum-assisted air removal cycle are fitted with air detectors. temperature-sensitive probes (thermocouples) may be inserted into standard test packs (simpson & slack, 2006) . the bowie-dick test monitors the penetration of steam by a bubble of residual air in the pack (simpson & slack, 2006) . in the original test, an adhesive indicator tape is pasted on the surface of the articles or objects to be sterilised, before they are placed in the autoclave chamber. this indicator tape, usually green in colour, changes to black if the article has been exposed to the recommended temperature (collins & grange, 1990; sathe & sathe, 1991) . the change in colour should be uniform along the entire length of the indicator tape (simpson & slack, 2006) . biological indicators comprise dried spore suspensions of a reference heatresistant thermophilic spore-bearing bacterium such as bacillus stearothermophilus, bacillus thuringensis, or bacillus subtilis. spores of one of these organisms are kept in a sealed glass ampoule and placed inside the autoclave chamber. after the process of autoclaving, the ampoule is sent to the laboratory where the spores are incubated to check for bacterial growth. presence of growth indicates that the spores have remained viable. this procedure requires laboratory support, is expensive, and the results of the laboratory tests are not available immediately (collins & grange, 1990; sathe & sathe, 1991) . these biological indicators are no longer considered for routine testing. spore indicators are essential in low-temperature gaseous processes like ethylene oxide, in which physical measurements are not reliable (simpson & slack, 2006) .the manufacturer's operating manual should be carefully followed and autoclave operators should be trained. materials such as talcum powder cannot be penetrated by steam and should not be autoclaved. before using the autoclave, water should be maintained at a level recommended by the manufacturer. steam outlet and safety valve should be checked and cleaned if necessary. all articles should be wrapped in kraft paper or cloth and then placed in individual trays. the barrel and plunger of the syringes should be disassembled and wrapped in cloth or kraft paper. linen should be wrapped in loose flat bundles since larger bundles would need longer time for sterilisation. the thermo-chemical indicator tape is stuck on the cloth covering each tray. it is important to ensure that all the air is expelled, since a mixture of air and steam will not have the same penetrative effect as saturated steam alone. the steam outlet is closed only after all the air in the cylinder is expelled and excess steam starts coming out from the steam outlet. the temperature, pressure, and the sterilisation time are recorded. the "holding time" is counted after the steam outlet is closed. it is safer to rely on the temperature attained and the time period for which this temperature is maintained. to ensure absolute sterility, a temperature of 135°c is to be attained. the autoclave should cool on its own. autoclaved articles should be prevented from contamination during drying, transportation, and storage. for sterilising small quantities, a domestic pressure cooker may be used. the "holding time" is counted after the first "whistle" (expulsion of steam) from the steam outlet of the pressure cooker (collins & grange, 1990; sathe & sathe, 1991) .ionising radiation: the articles/objects exposed to ionising radiation do not get heated. hence, this method, also called "cold sterilisation", is the most costeffective and safe method of sterilisation. sterilisation is achieved by using highspeed electrons (beta-rays) from a linear accelerator or gamma-rays from an isotope such as cobalt-60. a dose of 255 kilo gray is adequate for large-scale sterilisation (simpson & slack, 2006) . the articles travel through the facility on a conveyor belt. ionising radiation is used for large-scale sterilisation of prepacked single-use syringes, needles, catheters, antibiotics, ophthalmic medicines, microbiological media, heat-sensitive plastics, and other heat-sensitive instruments (ananthanarayan & paniker, 2000) .non-ionising radiation: substances exposed to non-ionising radiation get heated. short wave radiation (such as ultraviolet rays) is more bactericidal than long wave radiation (such as infrared rays). infrared radiation is used for sterilising glassware. ultraviolet (uv) radiation is a low-energy, non-ionising type of radiation, with poor penetrating power. ultraviolet rays are lethal to microorganisms under optimal conditions. uv lamps produce effective uv radiation with wavelength of 240-280 nm. the uv rays with shortest wavelength that reach the earth's surface have a wavelength of 290 nm. uv lamps are used for sterilising closed areas, such as operation theatres, wards, neonatal intensive care units, and laboratory safety cabinets (simpson & slack, 2006) . commercially available household water purifiers use uv radiation for sterilising small quantities of water for laboratory or household use. its disinfecting action on water is impaired if water is turbid. uv light is also used for therapeutic purpose, to accelerate the conjugation of bilirubin in neonates with jaundice. it should be noted that eye protection is essential because exposure to uv light may lead to premature cataract.lipophilic viruses such as hiv, hbv, and cytomegalovirus are highly sensitive to chemical disinfectants (gangakhedkar, 1999) . disinfectants rapidly inactivate hiv in suspension but are less effective against hiv in dried body fluids (cunningham et al., 1997) . hiv is inactivated by 70 per cent isopropanol (3-5 minutes) , 70 per cent ethanol (3-5 minutes), 2 per cent povidone iodine (15 minutes), 4 per cent formalin (30 minutes), 2 per cent glutaraldehyde (30 minutes), household bleach (diluted) containing 1 per cent available chlorine (30 minutes), and 6 per cent hydrogen peroxide (30 minutes). for decontaminating used medical equipment, 2 per cent glutaraldehyde may be used.criteria for selecting disinfectants: (a) area of health care facility, where the disinfectant will be used (b) spectrum of action -bacteria, lipophilic and hydrophilic viruses, mycobacteria, fungi, and spores (c) rapidity of action and residual effect -antimicrobial action is to be sustained for prolonged periods (d) should not cause allergy or irritate the skin or mucous membrane (e) microorganisms should not develop resistance on repeated use (f) odour and colour should be acceptable (g) should not stain skin or clothing factors affecting disinfection: before disinfection, the articles or surfaces must first be thoroughly cleaned with detergent and thoroughly rinsed with water. effective chemical disinfection depends on multiple variables such as concentration of the disinfectant, temperature and ph, presence of organic substances, and contact period (period of exposure to the disinfectant). since it is difficult to consider all the variables that can affect chemical disinfection, it would be easier to follow the manufacturer's guidelines. a minimum "contact period" of 30 minutes is recommended.the hospital infection control committee (hicc) should agree on a sterilisation and disinfection policy and procedures involved. once the policy is finalised, all concerned staff members should be made aware of the policy and trained in the standard operating procedure (sop). the sterilisation and disinfection policy should mention choice of sterilising or disinfecting process is required for equipment, instrument, skin, mucous membrane, furniture, floors, and biomedical waste. the available choices or options are to be restricted to avoid unnecessary costs, confusion, and chemical hazards. the processes are categorised and the sops for items in the hospital that are to be disinfected or sterilised are described. copies of the sop should be circulated to all concerned staff members. the policy and sops may be updated periodically by the hicc (simpson & slack, 2006) .1. details of methodology 2. site where the procedure is to be done 3. time schedule for the procedure 4. persons responsible for carrying out the various steps in the entire procedure 5. safety precautions and type of protective equipment to be worn during each procedure 6. supervision of entire procedure including safety considerationsunder ideal conditions, chemical disinfectants destroy most of the vegetative microorganisms. few kill bacterial spores, fungi, and viruses that have lipid capsids (collins & grange, 1990) . presence of organic materials, protein, hard water, rubber, and plastics may impair the action of some disinfectants. the recommendations of the manufacturer are to be followed for correct dilution, storage after dilution, and use. nearly all the chemical disinfectants are toxic or harmful to the eyes, skin, and lungs. therefore, they should be cautiously selected and used. disinfectants are not a substitute for efficient cleaning with detergent and water. if pre-diluted to working concentrations, chemical disinfectants may rapidly lose their strength on storage. in health care settings, sterilisation by autoclaving is the most reliable method. when neither autoclaving, nor boiling is possible, chemical disinfectants are to be used.unfortunately, chemical disinfectants are overused and abused, and then they are most inefficient and may give a false sense of security. disinfectants that are used in health care settings should be monitored regularly (chitnis, 1997) . a wide range of testing methods has been developed for medical and veterinary use. in europe, standardisation of test methods include: (a) simple screening tests of rate of kill, (b) laboratory tests simulating in-use conditions (skin antisepsis and inanimate surface disinfection tests), and (c) in-use tests on equipment and samples of disinfectants (in "in-use dilutions"). these tests determine survival and multiplication of contaminating pathogens. in-use tests are used for monitoring effectiveness of the disinfectant or antiseptic and monitoring method of use. the rideal walker coefficient (rwc), also known as carbolic coefficient or phenol coefficient, compares the bactericidal power of a given disinfectant with that of phenol. a major limitation of this test is that it compares disinfectants, without the presence of organic matter such as pus, faecal matter, blood, or body fluids (chitnis, 1997) . chick martin test compares the disinfecting action of two disinfectants in the presence of organic matter (chitnis, 1997) . capacity test of kelsey and sykes gives guidelines for the dilution of the disinfectant to be used (kelsey & sykes, 1969) . after a particular disinfectant is selected at the desired dilution using the capacity test of kelsey and sykes, routine monitoring should be done using the "in use" test of maurer (maurer, 1969) .phenols are relatively cheap, stable, and not readily inactivated by organic matter with the exception of chlorxylenol. adding ethylene diamine tetraacetic acid (edta), as a chelating agent, can improve the activity against gram-negative organisms. black and white phenols (insoluble in water) leave stains on surfaces and clear soluble phenols are replacing these. corrosive phenols are used for disinfection of floors, in discarding jars in laboratories, disinfection of excreta, etc. non-corrosive phenols, such as chlorxylenol are less irritant and are used for topical antisepsis (chitnis, 1997) . with the exception of chlorhexidine, phenols are incompatible with cationic detergents. contact with rubber and plastic is to be avoided since they may get absorbed. due to slow release of phenol fumes in closed environments and corrosive action on skin, phenols are being replaced in hospitals by detergents for cleaning, and by hypochlorites for disinfection (simpson & slack, 2006) .carbolic acid: joseph lister first used carbolic acid (pure phenol) for antisepsis. crystals of carbolic acid are colourless, but when exposed to air, they turn pinkish and then dark red. pure phenol is not a good disinfectant. it is toxic to tissues and can penetrate intact (unbroken) skin. carbolic acid is used as a standard to compare the disinfecting power of disinfectants. for phenol, rideal walker coefficient is one. it is added to fuchsin dye to prepare carbol fuchsin, which is used for staining acid-fast bacilli. formerly, carbolic acid was used as 0.5 per cent solution in glycerine as mouthwash, ear drops, and topical antipruritic; as analgesic in dentistry; and as 5 per cent solution in almond oil for sclerosing haemorrhoids.crude phenol (household phenyl): this is a mixture of phenol and cresol and is available as a dark, oily liquid, used as general-purpose household disinfectant in a concentration of 1-2 per cent. phenyl is effective, even in the presence of organic matter, against most gram-positive and gram-negative bacteria. however, it is an irritant to living tissues and is not effective against spores and acid-fast bacilli.cresol: this is a mixture of ortho-, meta-, and para-isomers of methyl phenol. it is effective against both gram-positive and gram-negative bacteria and is safer than pure phenol. but, it is an irritant to living tissues and only mildly effective against acid fast bacilli. it is used as an all-purpose disinfectant in the following concentrations: for faeces or sputum (10 per cent); for floors in wards and operation theatres (5 per cent).saponified cresols: lysol, izal, and cyllin are emulsions of cresol, prepared by mixing with surface-active agents. these are very powerful disinfectants. being irritants to living tissues, they are used as all-purpose disinfectants for faeces, sputum, and floors in wards and operation theatres, and for the sterilisation of sharp instruments like scalpels.chlorhexidine (hibitane): it is a chlorinated phenol containing cationic biguanide (chitnis, 1997) . it is effective against vegetative forms of gram-positive, gram-negative bacteria and fungi, and has moderate action on mycobacterium tuberculosis. it is fast acting and has residual action for 5-6 hours. hibitane is effective over a wide range of ph (5-8) and can be safely used on living tissues (skin and mucous membrane). however, this disinfectant is not effective against spores and is inactivated by soap (anionic detergents), organic matter, hard water, and natural materials like cork liners of bottle closures. it is combined with compatible (cationic) detergent and used for hand wash or combined with 70-90 per cent alcohol for use as "hand rub". hibitane is a component of savlon (cetrimide + hibitane) and is used as a skin antiseptic for wounds and burns. hibitane is also available as lotion or cream (ananthnarayan & paniker, 2000; sathe & sathe, 1991) .hexachlorophane: it is a chlorinated diphenyl (bis-phenol) and has a restricted role as a disinfectant due to its limitations (chitnis, 1997) . it is very effective against gram-positive organisms and is compatible with soap, i.e. anionic detergents (ananthnarayan & paniker, 2000; sathe & sathe, 1991) . in infants, hexachlorophane may get absorbed through the skin and cause neurotoxicity. hence, a concentration of more than 3 per cent should not be used in neonatal units. triclosan is used for controlling outbreaks of methicillin-resistant staphylococcus aureus (mrsa) in nurseries (simpson & slack, 2006) . it is poorly effective against gram-negative organisms, mycobacteria, fungi, and viruses. hexachlorophane is used in germicidal soaps and in deodorants to prevent bacterial decomposition of apocrine sweat. as a topical ointment, it is employed in the treatment of seborrhoeic dermatitis and impetigo (ananthanarayan & paniker, 2000; chitnis, 1997) .chloroxylenol: this is chlorinated derivative of phenol is available as concentrated solution, liquid soap, and soap cake under the brand name dettol. being relatively safe, it is used as a household skin antiseptic and for disinfecting plastic equipment. it requires a minimum contact period of 15 minutes for action on gram-positive bacteria and more time is required in case of gram-negative bacteria (ananthanarayan & paniker, 2000; chitnis, 1997) chloroxylenol is easily inactivated by organic matter and hard water and is not recommended for hospital use (simpson & slack, 2006) .triclosan: it is chemically phenyl ether and is highly effective against grampositive bacteria. it has moderate activity against gram-negative bacteria, fungi, and viruses (chitnis, 1997) . triclosan is used for controlling outbreaks of mrsa in nurseries (simpson & slack, 2006) .ethyl, isopropyl, and methyl alcohols have rapid and high levels of initial activity, but no residual activity. optimal disinfecting activity is at 70-90 per cent concentration; antimicrobial activity decreases at both higher (more than 90 per cent), and lower (less than 70 per cent) concentrations (chitnis, 1997; simpson & slack, 2006) . alcohols have good action on viruses, limited action on mycobacteria, and no action on spores, with reduced activity in presence of organic matter. alcohol-based formulations of chlorhexidine, savlon, and povidone iodine are used for hand-washing (simpson & slack, 2006) . ethanol (synonym: ethyl alcohol): 100 per cent ethyl alcohol (called "absolute alcohol") has poor antiseptic and disinfectant properties, while 60-70 per cent ethyl alcohol is a good general purpose skin antiseptic and can also be used to dilute other antiseptics, such as tincture iodine, chlorhexidine, and savlon. it inactivates vegetative bacteria in a few seconds. being a fat solvent, it can dissolve sebaceous secretions on the skin. however, its action on spores, viruses, and fungi is not reliable. it is volatile in warm climates. methyl alcohol is added to ethyl alcohol to prepare methylated spirit to prevent consumption.isopropanol (synonym: isopropyl alcohol): it is more bactericidal, more of a fat solvent, and less volatile than ethanol. however, it is more toxic than ethanol, and its action on spores, viruses, and fungi is not reliable. isopropanol is used at 70 per cent for skin antisepsis and for disinfecting clinical thermometers, incubators, and cabinets.methylated spirit (synonyms: rectified spirit, denatured spirit): methyl alcohol is added to ethyl alcohol to prepare methylated spirit to prevent consumption. a 70 per cent solution has bactericidal, fungicidal, and virucidal action. however, it is a volatile compound. it is used for decontaminating surfaces, such as metals and table tops, where use of household bleach and hypochlorites is contraindicated. a mixture of 70 per cent methyl alcohol and 1 per cent glycerine is used as a handwashing antiseptic (called "alcohol hand wash"), in all clinical settings. glycerine is used in a concentration of 1 per cent as emollient to counter the drying effect of alcohol on the skin (simpson & slack, 2006) .most aldehyde disinfectants are based on formulations of glutaraldehyde or formaldehyde, alone or in combination. since they are an irritant to the eyes, skin, and respiratory mucosa, health and safety authorities in many countries control their use. aldehydes are to be used only with adequate protection (protective clothing, safety hoods) of staff and ventilation of the working environment (air scavenging equipment). the treated equipment is to be thoroughly rinsed with sterile water to remove toxic residues. all chlorine-releasing agents should be removed from areas where formaldehyde fumigation is to be done, in order to prevent release of carcinogenic products (simpson & slack, 2006) .glutaraldehyde: when buffered with sodium bicarbonate to ph 7.5-8.5, this has potent bactericidal, mycobactericidal, sporicidal, fungicidal, and virucidal action. the buffered solutions should be used within 2 weeks of preparation (chitnis, 1997) . alkaline-buffered solution of glutaraldehyde is claimed to have a residual effect for several days but this will depend on the amount of contaminating organic material (simpson & slack, 2006) . after disinfection with glutaraldehyde, the equipment should be thoroughly washed with sterile water. it is available under the brand name cidex. a 2 per cent solution provides a high level of disinfection, which approximates sterilisation. it is the only disinfectant that can be reused. it is less toxic than formaldehyde and does not damage optical lenses and cementing material of endoscopes. however, glutaraldehyde has a strong odour and is expensive, as compared to formaldehyde. at alkaline ph (more than 8.5), glutaraldehyde gets polymerised, resulting in loss of antimicrobial activity. it is used for disinfecting sharp instruments, surfaces/instruments (which are destroyed by household bleach and sodium hypochlorite), face masks, catheters, endoscopes, endotracheal tubes, and respirators. an aqueous solution of 2 per cent is used topically for treatment of idiopathic hyperhidrosis of the palms and soles. flexible endoscopes are to be disinfected by special closed washer-disinfector systems. these systems use oxidising agents, such as peracetic acid, chlorine dioxide, and super-oxidised water (simpson & slack, 2006) .formaldehyde: commercially available formaldehyde (formalin) contains 35-40 per cent formaldehyde. the vapours are toxic and irritant. a solution used in 1:10 dilution (containing 3.5-4 per cent formaldehyde) inactivates vegetative forms of bacteria, viruses, and fungi in less than 30 minutes. any equipment that is disinfected with formaldeyde should be thoroughly rinsed with sterile distilled water before reuse (chitnis, 1997) . it is a cheap disinfectant, which kills all vegetative bacteria, most viruses, and fungal spores, while mycobacteria and bacterial spores are killed slowly. it does not damage metals or fabric, but is an irritant to the eyes and respiratory tract. it can damage optical lenses and cementing material used in endoscopes. formaldehyde tablets (used for disinfection of equipment and nursery incubators) are not reliable and need to be subjected to quality control after use (chitnis, 1997) . as aqueous solution (formalin), it is used for preserving biological specimens and cadavers, and for destroying anthrax spores in animal hair and woollen products. woollen products are soaked in a 2 per cent solution of formalin at 40°c temperature for 2 minutes. hair and bristles are soaked in a 2 per cent solution at 60°c temperature for 6 hours. this process is called "duckering". a mixture containing one part formalin + one part glycerine + 20 parts water is used as a liquid spray for disinfecting walls and furniture in operation theatres, prior to fumigation. a 3 per cent solution may be used for removal of warts on palms and soles. formalin in a concentration of 4 per cent is recommended for decontamination of spills of blood and body fluids. formaldehyde vapour is used for fumigating operation theatres, wards, beds, books, and mattresses. formaldehyde vapour is generated in special fumigators or by pouring 280 ml of 40 per cent formalin on 45 g of potassium permanganate (kmno 4 ) crystals per 1,000 cubic feet of space. the exposure period for fumigation is 36-48 hours (chitnis, 1997) . the excess gas is neutralised using ammonia vapour.halogens (compounds of chlorine and iodine) are relatively inexpensive and have a broad spectrum of action. hence, they are commonly used for decontamination of surfaces (chitnis, 1997) . however, they are required in higher concentrations in the presence of organic substances such as blood, body fluids, excretions, or secretions.compounds of chlorine kill vegetative organisms and inactivate most viruses by strong oxidising effect of nascent chlorine. the disinfecting power of all chlorine compounds is expressed as "percentage of available chlorine" for solid compounds and as "percentage" or "parts per million" (ppm) for solutions. all chlorine-releasing agents should be removed from areas where formaldehyde fumigation is to be done, in order to prevent release of carcinogenic products (simpson & slack, 2006) . chlorine-releasing agents are corrosive and most compounds deteriorate rapidly (ananthanarayan & paniker, 2000; chitnis, 1997) .sodium hypochlorite: this compound is available as solution containing 5 per cent available chlorine, powder containing 60 per cent available chlorine, or tablets containing 1.5 g of available chlorine per tablet. the solution is available under various brand names such as milton's solution, saaf, chlorwat, kloroklin. it is bactericidal, virucidal, cheap, and more effective than bleaching powder (caocl 2 ) solution. however, it deteriorates rapidly, corrodes nickel and chromium plating of metallic instruments, and has an offensive odour. sodium hypochlorite is most commonly used for bleaching and disinfecting linen and clothing: decontaminating spills of blood and body fluids; sterilising infant feeding bottles; and emergency disinfection of drinking water, fruits, and raw vegetables during epidemics.household bleach: also commercially available as fabric stain remover under various brand names, the solution contains 5 per cent available chlorine. it is bactericidal, virucidal, relatively cheap, and more effective than the solution of bleaching powder (calcium hypochlorite). for disinfecting materials and surfaces contaminated by blood or body fluids, household bleach should be made available in plastic recyclable bottles in hospitals and clinics. household bleach deteriorates rapidly, corrodes galvanised buckets, nickel and chromium plating of metallic instruments, and has an offensive odour. the bleaching action may affect fabric and carpets while disinfecting spillage of blood or body fluids (simpson & slack, 2006) .bleaching powder: chemically, this is calcium hypochlorite (caocl), also called "chlorinated lime". bleaching powder is an unstable compound and should contain 33 per cent of available chlorine. when stabilised by mixing with lime (calcium oxide) it is called "stabilised bleach" or "tropicalised chloride of lime" (tcl). bleaching powder is used in powder form or as a freshly prepared solution. a 1 per cent solution of bleaching powder can be prepared by mixing one-fourth teaspoonful (1 g) of bleaching powder in 1 l of water. this gives a chlorine concentration of 1,000 ppm. the minimum contact period is half an hour. the ocl − ion is responsible for disinfection. uses of bleaching powder: (a) decontaminating spills of blood and body fluids, (b) as a deodorant and disinfectant for toilets and bathrooms, (c) chlorination of water in wells (2.5 g of bleaching powder per 1,000 l of well water; contact period = 1 hour), (d) disinfection of faeces and urine (400 g of bleaching powder per litre; contact period = one hour), and (e) preparing eusol, which was formerly used in dressing wounds.povidone iodine: an "iodophor" is a loose complex of elemental iodine or triiodide with an anionic detergent, which increases solubility of iodine and functions as sustained-release iodine reservoir. "povidone iodine" is a water-soluble complex of iodine and polyvinyl pyrrolidone (simpson & slack, 2006) . povidone iodine, which is available under various brand names, such as betadine and microshield, is an intermediate level disinfectant with bactericidal, fungicidal, and virucidal action. it does not stain or irritate the skin and is water miscible. however, it has poor residual effect. a freshly prepared dilution of povidone iodine is to be used everyday. it is relatively expensive and should not be used on copper and aluminium (chitnis, 1997) . it is used as a 0.75-1 per cent solution for hand wash; for disinfecting instrument trays, head-rests, and equipment; and for decontaminating spills of blood and body fluids. aqueous or alcohol-based povidone iodine is used for skin antisepsis (preoperative preparation), peritoneal wash, and treating superficial mycoses, such as tinea circinata (ringworm) and oral/vaginal moniliasis. one per cent solution used as gargles for pharyngitis. due to its virucidal action, it is used for local treatment of wound in case of dog bite.sodium dichloroisocyanurate (nadcc): also known as "troclosene", this compound is available as white powder, granules, and tablets. nadcc powder containing 60 per cent available chlorine is recommended for decontamination of blood spills. the chemical is readily soluble in water. in solution, combined forms of chlorine (di-and mono-chloroisocyanurate) exist in a 50:50 equilibrium with hypochlorous acid (hocl) and nascent chlorine (cl) -combined forms of chlorine. as the chlorine is used up, the free chlorine is released from combined forms so as to maintain the 50:50 equilibrium. the process continues till all the combined chlorine is depleted. nadcc is used for disinfection of drinking water, decontamination of floors, blood spills, laboratory glassware, bedpans, and urine bottles. nadcc kills bacteria, mycobacteria, fungi, viruses, and spores. its disinfecting action is not generally affected by presence of organic matter such as faeces, algae, blood, pus, and serum. it has a long shelf life (up to 2 years) and is effective over a wide ph range of 4-9. it is relatively less corrosive to metals and relatively safe. the antidote for accidental ingestion is drinking plenty of milk.anionic detergents: common soap is an anionic detergent. hard soap contains saturated fatty acids and hydroxide of sodium, or potassium; while soft soap contains unsaturated fatty acids and hydroxide of sodium, or potassium. anionic detergents reduce surface tension and wash away microorganisms, sebaceous secretions from the skin, and dirt. soaps are moderately bacteriostatic against gram-positive bacteria. they are used for washing hands and body parts, and for soap water enema (evacuation enema). however, soaps are incompatible with cationic detergents and are precipitated by hard water.cationic detergents: these quaternary ammonium compounds are water-soluble and act mainly on gram-positive vegetative bacteria. they reduce surface tension and wash away microorganisms, sebaceous secretions from the skin, and dirt. these compounds are heat-stable, even on autoclaving and are most active at neutral ph and slightly alkaline ph. however, they have no effect on most gram-negative organisms and mycobacteria, and are inactivated by anionic detergents (common soap) and acidic ph. cationic detergents combine with protein in organic matter such as pus, sputum, blood, and body fluids, and thus get inactivated. they are adsorbed by cotton, rubber, and porous material and potentially hazardous to neural tissue. cationic detergents are used as general-purpose skin antiseptics in 1:1,000 dilution. for burns and wounds, 1:2,000 dilution is recommended. they are also used as disinfectants in 1:2,000 dilution for nylon (not rubber) tubings and catheters; and in 1:20,000 dilution for irrigation of bladder and urethra in catheterised patients. for preventing nappy rash, nappies may be washed in 1:8,000 dilution. a 5 per cent w/v (weight by volume) solution is recommended for topical use for treatment of dandruff (pityriasis capitis). benzalkonium chloride is a quaternary ammonium compound with strong action against gram-positive bacteria. when edta is added as a chelating agent, it acts on gram-negative organisms also (chitnis, 1997) .savlon: this is a combination of cetavlon (or cetrimide, a cationic detergent) and chlorhexidine (hibitane). though it is inactivated by anionic detergents (common soap) and acidic ph, its advantages are its solubility in water and alcohol. when diluted with alcohol, it is a better disinfectant than when diluted with water. it reduces surface tension and washes away microorganisms and dirt. it is effective against gram-positive, gram-negative bacteria, and fungi. it is heat stable even on autoclaving and acts through a wide ph range of 5-8, but most effective at neutral and slightly alkaline ph. savlon is effective even in the presence of organic matter. it is chiefly used as a skin antiseptic for general use. a 1 per cent solution of savlon is used for disinfecting plastic appliances, clinical thermometers, and cheatle's forceps. the solution is to be changed daily.hydrogen peroxide (h 2 o 2 ) is an unstable compound. a solution containing 6 per cent w/v (weight by volume) releases 20 times its volume of nascent oxygen (o). such a solution is called 20 volumes h 2 o 2 . it releases nascent oxygen (o), when applied to tissues. nascent oxygen (o) prevents multiplication of anaerobic bacteria and inactivates hiv in 30 minutes. effervescence mechanically removes tissue debris from inaccessible regions. it has good microbicidal and deodorant action (simpson & slack, 2006) . however, presence of proteinaceous organic matter reduces its activity (chitnis, 1997) . release of nascent oxygen (o) and effervescence are of short duration. h 2 o 2 should not be used in closed cavities, such as urinary bladder, due to its effervescence. it is to be stored in amber colour bottles and kept in a cold place. being highly reactive and corrosive to skin and metals, it should not be used on copper, aluminium, brass, or zinc (simpson & slack, 2006) . h 2 o 2 is used for irrigating wounds, abscesses, and septic pockets to remove anaerobic conditions. in 1:8 dilution it is used as a deodorant gargle and mouthwash. it is also used for removing earwax and for disinfecting ventilators (chitnis, 1997) .peracetic acid, chlorine dioxide, and superoxidised water are used as oxidising agents for disinfecting flexible endoscopes in special closed washer-disinfector systems (simpson & slack, 2006) . endoscopes are immersed in 0.35 per cent peracetic acid or 1100 ppm chlorine dioxide (clo 2 ) for 5 minutes. this alternative method is used since personnel handling glutaraldehyde may develop adverse reactions (gangakhedkar, 1999) .ethylene oxide is a highly penetrative, non-corrosive, and microbicidal gas. it is used in industry for sterilising heat-sensitive medical devices, such as prosthetic heart valves and plastic catheters. the devices to be sterilised are exposed to ethylene oxide gas at a concentration of 700-1,000 mg per litre for about 2 hours. when using ethylene oxide gas, the process of disinfection is complex, and requires appropriate temperature (45-60°celsius) and high relative humidity (more than 70 per cent) for action, followed by post-treatment aeration (simpson & slack, 2006) . before sterilisation the devices to be sterilised should be cleaned thoroughly and wrapped in a material that allows the gas to permeate (chitnis, 1997) . presence of salt reduces effectiveness of ethylene oxide (simpson & slack, 2006) . during sterilisation adequate precautions should be taken because the gas is inflammable and is potentially explosive. it is also toxic to personnel. after sterilisation the product is aerated to remove residual gas (simpson & slack, 2006) .for preventing transmission of blood-borne pathogens including hiv and hbv, the recommended concentrations of disinfectants are given below. "clean" condition indicates that the item or surface has been already cleaned and is free from organic contamination. "dirty" condition refers to contamination of item, article, or surface with organic substances such as blood, body fluids, and excretions.chlorine releasing compounds 1. household bleach containing 5 per cent available chlorine: for "clean" condition -1:50 dilution (20 ml/litre), and for "dirty" condition -1:5 dilution (200 ml/litre) 2. sodium hypochlorite solution containing 5 per cent available chlorine (0.1 per cent = 1,000 ppm = 1 g/l; 1.0 per cent = 10,000 ppm = 10 g/l): for "clean" condition -0.1 per cent or 1:50 dilution (20 ml/litre), and for "dirty" condition 1.0 per cent or 1:5 dilution (200 ml/litre) 3. calcium hypochlorite (bleaching powder) containing 70 per cent available chlorine: for "clean" condition -1.4 g per litre, and for "dirty" condition -14 g per litre 4. sodium dichloroisocyanurate (nadcc) powder containing 60 per cent available chlorine: for "clean" condition -1.7 g per litre, and for "dirty" condition −17 g per litre.5. sodium hypochlorite-based tablets containing 1.5 g of available chlorine per tablet: for "clean condition -1 tablet per litre, and for "dirty" condition -4 tablets per litre. 6. chloramine containing 25 per cent available chlorine: for "clean" condition -20 g per litre, and for "dirty" condition -20 or 40 g per litre. chloramine releases chlorine slowly. the solution is freshly prepared every day, in non-metallic containers. acids should not be used concomitantly since they displace chlorine gas.iodine compounds 1. tincture of iodine (iodine 0.5 per cent + alcohol 70 per cent): for both "clean" and "dirty" conditions -2.5 per cent. 2. povidone iodine usually 10 per cent solution containing 1 per cent available iodine: for both "clean" and "dirty" conditions -2.5 per cent. freshly prepared dilution is to be used everyday. povidone iodine should not be used on copper and aluminium.barrier nursing refers to use of physical or chemical barriers by all categories of hospital personnel and is not restricted to nursing staff. the objective of barrier nursing is to prevent the spread of pathogens through the intermediary of hospital staff. health care providers with cuts, injuries, or infectious diseases should not be involved in patient care. while imparting mouth-to-mouth resuscitation, the risk of transmission of hiv is low. however, it is safer to use a barrier. placing at least a gauze piece on the patient's mouth is to be advocated (gangakhedkar, 1999) . pre-requisites for barrier nursing are: 1. induction and periodic in-service training to all staff in asepsis 2. disinfection and periodic health check-up of personnel to rule out carrier state 3. fully functional and efficient central sterile supplies department (cssd) 4. availability of stand-by autoclave 5. availability of separate isolation ward or special infectious disease hospital.during epidemics, makeshift arrangement may be made in school buildings and community centres, or home isolations can be organised the procedures for effective barrier nursing include: (a) repeated hand washing after attending to each patient, (b) concurrent and terminal disinfection, (c) using ppe, (d) establishing multidisciplinary hicc, (e) periodic supervision of disinfection, and (f) microbiological surveillance.barrier nursing is indicated in high-risk areas such as infectious disease wards and hospitals, neonatal wards, premature baby units, intensive care units, postoperative wards, and burns wards.there are three types of barrier nursing techniques. in cubicle nursing, patients suffering from the same type of disease are kept in a cubicle and a separate set of ppe is kept for each cubicle. cohort nursing is practised in premature baby and neonatal units. a group of babies born on the same day are cared for by a nurse. in task nursing, each nurse performs a given task such as giving tablets or making beds, and washes her hands after attending to each patient.synonym: universal work precautions. the basic principle is that blood and body fluids from all patients ought to be considered potentially infected, irrespective of their serological status. in health care facilities, hepatitis b is much more transmissible than hiv, while hepatitis c is considered to be of intermediate risk. however, hiv/aids has caused fear in the minds of lay persons and also health care personnel due to its: (a) association with sexual minorities, socially marginalised groups, and heterosexual promiscuity, (b) lack of preventive vaccine or curative therapy, and (c) fear of impending death if infected with hiv (gangakhedkar, 1999) .the rapidly increasing prevalence rates of hiv infection in the general population increases the likelihood of occupational exposure to hiv. transmission of hiv may be direct (contact with blood or body fluids) or through infected instruments. the major risk of transmission is through percutaneous exposure to infected blood or body fluids. though infective doses of hiv are present in csf, semen, blood, and cervico-vaginal secretions, hiv is present in different concentrations in almost all body fluids -amniotic, synovial, pleural, peritoneal, pericardial, sweat, faeces, nasal secretions, sputum, tears, urine, and breast milk of infected persons. though csf has the highest concentration of hiv, the likelihood of accidental occupational exposure to csf is extremely low (cdc, 1988) . the risk of transmission of hiv through exchange of fluids (other than sexual fluids and blood) tends to be extremely low or insignificant unless there is visible contamination with blood (gandakhedkar, 1999) . lipophilic viruses such as hiv, hbv, and cytomegalovirus are highly sensitive to chemical disinfectants. in comparison, mycobacteria, pseudomonas, staphy-lococci, spore-forming bacteria, fungi (candida, cryptococci), and hydrophilic viruses (polio virus, rhino virus) are not very susceptible to chemical disinfectants (gangakhedkar, 1999) .it has been argued that universal precautions are too costly and time-consuming to be applied in case of every patient in every health care facility. the suggested alternative is to screen all patients for hiv antibodies before routine invasive procedures or surgery so that specific extra safety precautions can be taken. extra safety precautions include selection of trained and experienced staff, restricting staff in the operating room to a bare minimum, and use of "surgical armour" for hiv-positive patients (2-3 pairs of gloves, impervious head gear, full-length waterproof apron, goggles, and rubber boots). some surgeons are uncomfortable in such gear and feel their dexterity is compromised.the pros and cons (mitchell et al., 1997; gangakhedkar, 1999) are given below.argument 1: mandatory hiv screening will uncover previously undiagnosed hiv infection and special protective gear can be used for hiv-infected patients. from the community point of view, routine screening along with suitable counselling may limit hiv transmission by detecting more hiv-positive persons who would have otherwise remained undetected. initiation of arv therapy and follow up may prolong survival (rhame & mahi, 1988) .counterpoint 1: mandatory screening will not identify hiv-infected individuals during window period when there is high viraemia. a non-reactive hiv test during the window period may lead to complacency among staff and it is possible that procedures may be undertaken without adequate precautions. on the other hand, false positive results may lead to unnecessary panic among staff. it is possible that hiv-infected patients may be refused health care causing mental agony for the patient. often, patients may require emergency surgery before hiv test result becomes available. mandatory screening for hiv will not protect against hepatitis b/c and other unknown blood-borne pathogens. mandatory screening cannot replace universal precautions since most cases of accidental occupational transmission have occurred from patients with known hiv infection. a study of 1,307 consecutive surgical procedures at san francisco general hospital found that knowledge of patient's hiv sero-status did not decrease the risk of occupational exposure (gerberding et al., 1990) .argument 2: use of protective gear and disposables is expensive. counterpoint 2: mandatory screening for all patients before surgery is more expensive than the cost of universal precautions. universal precautions are meant to protect against exposure to a range of blood-borne pathogens, besides hiv.argument 3: mandatory screening of patients before surgery is similar to mandatory screening of donated blood, organs, and tissues. counterpoint 3: before hiv testing, it is obligatory to counsel the patient and obtain informed consent. in case some patients refuse hiv testing their treatment cannot be compromised. mandatory screening of donated blood, organs, and tissues does not require the donor's consent. mandatory screening of patients raises issues regarding human rights and confidentiality and may hamper doctor-patient relationship. these issues do not arise while screening donated blood, organs, and tissues. screening cannot prevent patient-to-patient cross infection. hence, universal precautions are necessary.argument 4: using universal precautions in all procedures is time-consuming and will delay emergency procedures. counterpoint 4: in most countries including india, it is mandatory to impart pre-test counselling and obtain informed consent before blood is collected for hiv testing. these procedures are also time-consuming and will delay emergency procedures. moreover, result of the hiv test is also not available immediately, or may be inconclusive. practising universal precautions is less time-consuming than waiting for result of hiv test.1. hand washing 2. careful handling and disposal of sharps 3. safe decontamination of spills of blood and body fluids 4. safe techniques and safe method of transporting biological material 5. using single-use injection vials. 6. decontaminating, pre-cleaning and sterilising or disinfecting all multiuse equipment before reuse 7. disposal of disposable and reusable items/materials as appropriate 8. compliance with hospital protocol and norms on sterilisation and disinfection 9. using ppe and provision for their regular and adequate supplies 10. covering wounds and weeping skin lesions with waterproof dressing 11. immunising health care providers with hepatitis b vaccine 12. segregation and safe disposal of biomedical waste 13. periodic training of personnel to prevent occupational exposure 14. establishing needle-stick audit and spills audit to prevent recurrenceorganisms present on the skin are categorised as: (a) resident organisms: these survive and multiply in the superficial layers of the skin and include coagulase-negative staphylococci, diphtheroids, and candida; (b) transient organisms: these pathogens are acquired from infected or colonised patients or from the hospital environment. they survive for a limited time period on the skin of health care providers. examples include escherichia coli and staphylococcus aureus.the transfer of microorganisms through the hands of health care providers is the most important mode of transmission of hospital-associated infections (sathe & sathe, 1991) . hand washing is the most important measure to prevent the spread of infections. there are three types of hand washing as described below.social hand washing: this involves the use of plain soap and water. most of the transient organisms are removed from moderately soiled hands. this type of hand washing is indicated whenever hands are soiled, before handling food, before eating or feeding patients, after using the toilet, and before and after nursing procedures, such as bed-making. surfaces of both hands are to be cleaned using plain soap and water. the cleaning of hands should be carried out for at least 10-15 seconds. hands should be rinsed under a stream of running water and dried with a disposable paper towel. in the absence of running water, stored water from an elevated drum with a spout or tap may be used as running water. alternatively, a clean bowl containing pathogen-free water may be used. the bowl is to be cleaned and water changed after each use. in the absence of paper towel, a clean cloth may be used for drying hands and this cloth is to be discarded in a laundry bag after each use.hygienic hand washing: in this method, hands are washed using antiseptics. four per cent chlorhexidine (hibitane) or povidone-iodine containing 0.75 per cent available iodine diluted in water is used. alternatively, 0.5 per cent chlorhexidine (hibitane) or povidone-iodine containing 0.75 per cent available iodine in 70 per cent isopropanol or 70 per cent ethanol is used. other antiseptics are diluted as per manufacturer's guidelines. hygienic hand washing is indicated in any situation where microbial contamination or contact with blood or body fluids of patients is likely to occur; before handling immunocompromised patients; and before and after using gloves. hands are to be washed thoroughly with the antiseptic, at least for 10-15 seconds. subsequently, hands are rinsed and dried, as mentioned above. alternatively, alcohol hand wash or alcohol rub is used, wherein the hands get automatically dry. rinsing and drying of hands is not required. alcohol hand wash solution contains 70 per cent methyl alcohol with 1 per cent glycerine (used as an emollient to prevent the skin-drying effect of alcohol).surgical hand washing: in this method, antiseptics are used for destroying transient organisms and decreasing the resident organisms. this method is indicated while carrying out invasive procedures to prevent wound contamination, when there is a risk of possible damage to gloves. during the washing procedure, it is mandatory to scrub hands, fingernails, and forearms (up to the elbows) at least twice. while washing, the hands are kept in an upright position with forearms flexed at the elbow. this ensures that water from the unwashed areas does not drip down to the washed (disinfected) areas. after washing, the tap is closed using the elbow. alternatively, a foot-operated tap may be provided. the washed area is dried using a sterile towel or a disposable sterile paper towel. after drying, surgical gown and gloves are worn.if the exposed person has not been previously vaccinated against hepatitis b, hepatitis b immunoglobulin in a dose of 0.06 ml per kg body weight is given intramuscularly. additionally, complete primary course of hepatitis b vaccine is given. if the exposed person has previously received a complete course of hepatitis b vaccine, booster dose of the vaccine is given (naco, training manual for doctors).double gloves are to be worn (outer pair should be half size larger) during surgical procedures or where prolonged contact with blood or body fluids is likely. this prevents perforation of both the gloves at the same site and reduces risk of contact with blood or body fluids. generally, needle stick injuries occur on the index finger and thumb of the non-dominant hand during procedures such as suturing. injuries are usually caused by rash approach or lack of caution due to fatigue at the end of a surgical procedure. exercising caution reduces risk of needle stick injury. sharp instruments should never be handed over during a surgical procedure but should be placed on a tray so that the surgeon picks up the instrument by its blunt end. needles should not be recapped after use. used sharps (needles and other sharp instruments) are disposed off in a punctureresistant container filled with freshly prepared 1 per cent hypochlorite solution.the needles should remain in the solution for at least half an hour. used syringes are disposed of after heat-sealing their nozzles to prevent their reuse. alternatively, used syringes are sent for incineration. workers involved in disposal of sharps or infectious hospital waste must wear thick india rubber gloves that are reusable (gangakhedkar, 1999) .all body fluids and tissues from each and every patient should be considered potentially infectious, irrespective of the patient's hiv status. body fluids and tissues should be sealed in a tightly closed inner container, which should be placed in a leak-proof transparent bag with a clearly visible "biohazard" label.all spills of blood or body fluids are potentially infectious. health care personnel should adhere to the following procedure: (a) wear heavy duty india rubber gloves throughout the procedure, (b) cover the spill with absorbent material (paper napkin, thick blotting material, old newspaper), (c) pour freshly prepared hypochlorite solution containing 1 per cent available chlorine (10 gm per litre or 10,000 ppm) around the spill and over the absorbent material, (d) cover with absorbent material and place it in a waste container for contaminated waste, (e) wipe the surface again with disinfectant, (f) sweep the broken glass or fractured plastic containers, collect in a plastic scoop and dispose of in contaminated waste container, and (g) report all spills to hospital authorities. hospital authorities should maintain a written record of all such incidents. after critical analysis they should issue recommendations to prevent recurrences.universal biosafety precautions are to be strictly followed while handling and cleaning the dead body and the trolley. hiv-positive cadaver is to be labelled on the right arm with a red patch, which is suggestive of hiv seropositivity, but maintains confidentiality. in order to maintain confidentiality, hiv status of the deceased should not be mentioned in the "cause of death" certificate. the secondary or opportunistic infection is to be mentioned as the cause of death. the details of the deceased are to be mentioned in a routine mortuary register. all natural orifices are plugged with cotton wool soaked in 1 per cent sodium hypochlorite, 2 per cent glutaraldehyde, or 10 per cent formalin to prevent spillage or seepage of body fluids from the cadaver. the body should be double-bagged in heavy plastic, irrespective of the hiv status of the deceased (gangakhedkar, 1999) . if the deceased was known to be hiv-positive, the seropositive status of the deceased should be confided to the next of kin before handing over the body so that the relatives can take due precautions. the next of kin are to be advised that the body should be preferably be cremated. however, religious sentiments should be respected. after handing over the dead body to the next of kin, the following decontamination procedure must be adhered to, irrespective of the hiv status of the deceased: (a) first clean the trolley with soap and water, (b) repeat the cleaning process using 1 per cent sodium hypochlorite, 2 per cent glutaraldehyde, or 10 per cent formalin, (c) leave some of the disinfectant solu-tion on the trolley for 1 hour, (d) subsequently, clean again with soap and water. where possible, all materials that have been used in the diagnosis, nursing care, or treatment of the deceased should be incinerated.post-mortem examination: the number of persons in the autopsy room should be kept to a minimum. all persons should wear ppe (gown, impermeable apron, head cover, mask, gloves, and boots). all collected specimens (except specimens for culture or where fresh specimens are required) must be placed in 10 per cent formalin. after autopsy, the body should be double-bagged in heavy plastic, irrespective of the hiv status of the deceased. while handing over the body to relatives, they should be instructed not to disturb the plastic double bag before disposing of the body. if the deceased was known to be hiv-positive, the next of kin should be advised as mentioned above. after handing over the dead body to the next of kin, the decontamination procedure mentioned above is to be followed, irrespective of the hiv status of the deceased (gangakhedkar, 1999) .embalming: strict adherence to universal precautions is essential while embalming. body fluids and faecal matter are decontaminated using 0.5 per cent hypochlorite solution (gangakhedkar, 1999) .cadavers for anatomical dissection: all cadavers are injected intra-arterially with 10 per cent formalin before they are provided for anatomical dissection. hiv does not survive under these conditions. experimentally, it has been shown that hiv gets inactivated within 48 hours even with one-tenth of this concentration of formalin (gangakhedkar, 1999) .ppe for blood-borne pathogens include -disposable solid front gowns (tied at the back) with cuffed sleeves, impermeable (waterproof) aprons, impervious head gear or head cover ("bouffant") with face mask, disposable gloves (surgical gloves and latex examination gloves with cuff), alcohol ("waterless") hand wash solution, absorbent laboratory mat, disposable bags with "biohazard" labels, rubber boots or shoe (foot) covers, and non-fog goggles or uvex glasses (cdc, 2003a).face masks: health care personnel should discard face masks after 4-6 hours of use. before performing procedures or surgeries where splashing of blood or body fluids is likely, it is better to wear safety hoods. surgical masks are not splash-proof (cdc, 2003b) .goggles (eye wear): protective eye wear is to be worn before performing invasive procedures. alcohol-based solutions are used to disinfect goggles prior to reuse. uvex goggles may be worn with glasses (cdc, 2003a).latex gloves: latex is the milky, viscous sap of certain rubber-yielding trees that coagulates on exposure to air. being a natural product, the availability of latex gloves is limited. indiscriminate use of latex gloves would be wasteful. heavy-duty india rubber gloves should be used by workers involved in disposal of hospital waste. they should not wear latex gloves. the indications for using latex gloves are: (a) major surgical and invasive procedures, (b) procedures involving contact with blood (collecting blood by venepuncture, starting and removing intravenous lines, (c) procedures involving contact with body fluids (internal body examinations: per vaginal, per rectal, oral, dental), and (d) examination of infectious lesions -stis and contagious infections of skin and mucosa.gloves should not be regarded as a substitute for hand washing. hand washing is mandatory before sterile gloves are worn and after removing gloves. gloves are not complete impermeable barriers because there is a risk of puncture or tear during surgery. gloves should be changed after a procedure on a patient and even between two procedures on the same patient. if the gloves are torn during a procedure resulting in splash of blood or body fluids on the skin, the method for decontamination is as follows: (a) remove the torn gloves under running tap water, (b) wash hands thoroughly with soap and water for 2 minutes, (c) dip hands for 15 seconds in undiluted savlon, and (d) wear a fresh pair of gloves before resuming the procedure (gangakhedkar, 1999) .gloves are sterilised by gamma radiation or autoclaving. gamma-radiation sterilised disposable items should be used where possible. ideally, surgical and examination gloves are to be used only once. while dealing with highly infectious diseases, gloves should never be washed or reused (cdc, 2003a) . however, in resource-poor settings, reuse of gloves may be considered if not used in highly infectious situations. in such cases, gloves are to be reprocessed using the following procedure: (a) rinse gloved hands thoroughly in hypochlorite solution; then rinse gloved hands thoroughly under running tap water to remove residues of hypochlorite, which may cause deterioration of gloves; (b) wash gloved hands with soap or detergent and water; then rinse gloved hands thoroughly under running tap water to remove residues of soap or detergent, since these agents may enhance penetration of liquids through undetected holes in the gloves; (c) remove gloves and hang them up by their cuffs to dry; (d) wash hands thoroughly again with soap and water, (e) before reusing gloves, test for holes in the gloves by filling each glove with 325 ml water and 25 ml air at room temperature; twist them through 360°and place them in a rack for 2 minutes; detect leakage by visual and tactile means; and (f) dust gloves with french chalk powder or talcum powder before sending them for autoclaving (gangakhedkar, 1999) .arrange all necessary equipment, material before starting the procedure. wear and remove ppe in the order mentioned below. decontaminate all used ppe, seal them in disposal bags and send for incineration. do not reuse ppe.procedure for wearing ppe: wear shoe covers or rubber boots with trousers tucked inside. wear face mask, head cover, and goggles. rubber boots are preferable where the floor is likely to be wet or heavily contaminated. after surgical hand wash, wear impermeable (waterproof) apron. wear gloves with gown-sleeve cuff tucked into the glove.procedure for removing ppe: wash gloved hands in hand-wash solution (containing more than 60 per cent alcohol) such as sterillium. using gloved hands, remove boots and place in receptacle containing 1 per cent bleach. using gloved hands, remove the waterproof apron, gown, and shoe covers, without contaminating the clothing underneath. touch only the outside of apron, gown, and shoe covers. place the waterproof apron, gown, and shoe covers in a disposal bag with "biohazard" label. remove outer gloves in such a way that fingers are under the cuff of the second glove. this will avoid contact between the skin and the outside of the inner glove. wash hands in hand-wash solution (mentioned above). remove goggles and place in receptacle for cleaning with alcohol-based disinfectant. the person cleaning the goggles should use the same ppe procedures. remove head cover and mask. place it in a disposal bag with "biohazard" label. wash hands thoroughly up to elbow in hand-wash solution (mentioned above). then, wash hands up to elbow, thoroughly with soapy water. change into street clothing and wash hands once again in soapy water.in 1998, the indian government notified that all establishments (hospitals, nursing homes, animal houses, blood banks, research institutions) that generate biomedical waste should get registered and should install a suitable biomedical waste treatment or disposal facility in their premises, or set up a common facility. as per the government notification, biomedical waste is any waste, which is generated during the diagnosis, treatment, or immunisation of human beings or animals or in research activities pertaining thereto or in the production or testing of biological products, and other products mentioned in schedule-i of the biomedical waste (management and handling) rules, 1998 (moef, 1998 .segregation of waste: all waste must be segregated into the containers/bags at the point of generation itself and properly labelled as provided in the rules. the biomedical waste shall not be mixed with other waste.transportation of waste: requisite information such as "category of waste", sender's name and address, receiver's name and address, shall be provided while transporting the waste.storage and disposal of waste: the waste must be disposed of within a period of 48 hours and in case of storage beyond this period, specific permission of the prescribed authority shall be obtained. an annual report shall be submitted by 31 january every year to the prescribed authority in the prescribed format.record keeping: records shall be maintained pertaining to the generation, collection, reception, storage, transportation, treatment, disposal and/or any other form of handling of biomedical waste. the records should be kept ready for inspection any time. any accident involving biomedical waste should be reported to the prescribed authority.local authorities: municipal corporations and councils have been made responsible for providing suitable site for common disposal or incineration in the area under their jurisdiction and taking an initiative for providing common waste treatment facility (cwtf) so that the biomedical waste generated in various institutions can be handled, treated, and disposed of in a scientific manner. municipal corporations and councils must continue lifting non-biomedical waste, as well as treated biomedical waste for disposal in dumping grounds.different types of waste are collected in category-specific colour-coded containers or bags at the site of generation of waste (table 1) . at this stage, wastes are segregated into different streams. incorrect classification of wastes at this stage may create many problems later. if the infectious waste (which forms a small part of total hospital waste) is mixed with other non-infectious hospital waste, the entire waste will need to be treated as "infectious" waste (an expensive option). otherwise, the entire hospital waste would have the potential to cause infection during handling and disposal. segregation helps in reducing the bulk of waste, preventing the spread of infection to general waste, and reducing treatment cost and overall cost of waste handling and disposal in health care settings.the category-specific colour codes for the containers or bags have been notified by the government of india (table 1 ). the bags are tied tightly after they are three-fourths full. waste should not be stored at the place of generation for more than 2 days. date of collection and other details of biomedical waste should be clearly mentioned on red labels.the biomedical waste containers should be provided with a well fitting lid; protected from insects, birds, animals, and rain; and should not be accessible to rag pickers and scavengers. all waste should be transported without spillage in vehicles specifically authorised for this purpose.this checklist contains six indicators and may be used to assess the status of infection control measures in health care settings.health care-associated infections are responsible for thousands of deaths worldwide each year. 1 approximately 5% of all nosocomial infections are because of viral exposure, 2 and, in pediatric wards, viruses account for at least 30% of health care-associated infections. studies have shown viruses to be common in health care environments and capable of surviving for extended periods of time on environmental surfaces. 3 in these settings, health care workers, medical devices, and environmental surfaces can act as both a reservoir for infection and a mode of transmission of infection to patients and staff. 4, 5 in 2003, the nosocomial transmission of viral disease proved to be a major contributor to a worldwide outbreak of severe acute respiratory syndrome (sars), caused by a novel human coronavirus (cov) (sars-cov). outbreaks of sars occurred in multiple health care facilities, infecting patients, staff, visitors, and volunteers. 6 sars-cov was also found on environmental surfaces in hospitals where outbreaks occurred, 7 and studies demonstrated that it could survive on surfaces for 24 to 72 hours. 8 airborne transmission was the main route of spread; however, rabenau et al 9 observed that ''there are a number of instances when transmission occurred through other means that are often still not well defined, '' and other studies of outbreak settings showed that providing handwashing facilities reduced transmission in hospitals, 10 suggesting that hands and surfaces could have played a role in transmission. the outbreak highlighted the need for effective and quick evaluation of means for controlling the spread of nosocomial infection. 11 disinfection of hospital surfaces is an effective measure for reducing the risk of exposure for health care workers and patients; 12 appropriate disinfection of contaminated surfaces and equipment is crucial in interrupting the spread of viruses such as sars-cov. 8, [13] [14] [15] however, to assist in the selection of appropriate germicidal agents for use against coronaviruses on hospital surfaces and equipment, data are needed on the effectiveness of commonly used hospital germicides against coronaviruses. these data must accurately reflect disinfectant efficacy against viruses under the conditions in which they occur on surfaces, such as desiccation and embedding in proteinaceous matrices. many previous disinfection studies have used liquid suspension methods for testing germicide efficacy. [16] [17] [18] these studies report greater efficacy against viruses than studies performed with carrier methods. viruses may be more resistant on surfaces than in suspension because they can adsorb to the surface or become embedded in organic material 19 and may be more difficult to inactivate with chemical germicides than viruses suspended in liquid. thus, it is possible that suspension tests overestimate the level of antimicrobial activity of germicides against viruses on surfaces. carrier-based methods may more closely resemble real environmental conditions in which viruses contaminate surfaces and provide a more conservative estimate of germicide activity against viruses that are dried onto environmental surfaces.this study was undertaken using the carrier method to evaluate 6 chemical germicides commonly used in health care settings for their efficacy in reducing infectivity of coronaviruses on environmental surfaces. the germicides selected were 4 surface germicides and 2 hand sanitizers. although hand sanitizers are not used for surface disinfection, the quantitative carrier test can help determine whether or not the active ingredients are effective against coronaviruses. germicide evaluation was done using 2 non-human coronaviruses as surrogates for the coronaviridae family and pathogenic human coronavirus such as sars-cov. the family coronaviridae is divided into 3 groups. groups i and ii include human, mammalian, and avian coronaviruses, and group iii consists of avian coronaviruses. although sars is thought to be related to the group 2 coronaviruses, 20 and phylogenetic analyses have indicated it may be closely related to mouse hepatitis virus (mhv), 21 there is still disagreement about the exact placement of sars-cov within the coronavirus family. 22 based on this uncertainty, 1 representative of each group of mammalian coronaviruses was included in the study to determine whether there was any difference in their survival and persistence in water. the 2 viruses included in the study were transmissible gastroenteritis virus (tgev), a diarrheal pathogen of swine and a member of the group i coronaviruses, and mouse hepatitis virus (mhv), a pathogen of laboratory mice and a member of the group ii coronaviruses. 20 mhv and tgev were kindly provided by r. baric, university of north carolina, chapel hill. tgev was grown in swine testicular cell cultures. mhv was grown in delayed brain tumor cell cultures. viral stocks were propagated by infecting confluent layers of host cell cultures in flasks, harvesting cell lysates, clarifying by centrifugation (3,000g, 30 minutes, 48c), and storing resulting supernatants as virus stock at 2808c. viral titers were determined by the plaque assay method on confluent host cell layers in 60-mm petri dishes with overlay medium consisting of 1% agarose, eagle's minimum essential medium, 10% bovine serum replacement (fetal clone ii; hyclone, logan, ut), 10% lactalbumin hydrolysate, and gentamicin (0.1 mg/ml)/ kanamycin (0.05 mg/ml). cell layers were stained with a second overlay containing 1% neutral red at 48 hours postinfection, and plaques were visualized at 72 hours postinfection.hard water was prepared according to the usepa opp microbiology laboratory standard operating procedure for disinfectant sample preparation 23 for hard water preparation 12 ml of solution a and 12 ml of solution b were added to a volumetric flask and brought up to 1 l with sterile deionized water. this solution was diluted with 2 additional liters of sterile deionized water. final solution was adjusted to ph 7.6 to 8.0 by drop wise addition of sodium hydroxide or citric acid. a hardness testing kit (hach model 5-ep mg/l no. 1454-01; hach corp, loveland, co) was used to confirm that hardness of the prepared water was 380 to 400 mg/l caco 3 .six hospital-grade germicides were tested. the germicide types, active ingredients, and use-dilutions are summarized in table 1 . germicides requiring dilution were prepared on the day of the experiment, using hard water as the diluent. all germicides were used by the manufacturer's expiration date.neutralizing solutions were used to inactivate germicide activity after the experimental contact time. vesphene iise (steris corp, mentor, oh), 70% ethanol, clorox anywhere spray (clorox co, oakland, ca), and purell sanitizing hand gel (johnson & johnson inc, new brunswick, nj) were neutralized using 3% glycine. chlorine bleach was neutralized with 0.1% thiosulfate and cidex-opa (johnson & johnson inc, new brunswick, nj) with 0.5% sodium bisulfite. to prevent cytotoxicity in cell culture assays, each neutralizing solution, with the exception of 3% glycine, was prepared as a stock solution and diluted to the use concentration with cell culture medium. glycine was prepared by adding 2.5 ml cell culture medium to 47.5 ml of a 3% glycine solution. sodium thiosulfate was prepared as a 10% (wt/vol) stock solution and diluted with cell culture medium to a use concentration of 0.1%. sodium bisulfite was prepared as a 5% stock solution and diluted in cell culture medium to a use concentration of 0.5%.test surfaces were 1-cm 2 stainless steel carriers with a no. 4 polish. the quantitative carrier test method used was adapted from sattar et al. 19 each germicide experiment used 3 control carriers (no germicide applied) and 3 test carriers (germicide applied). each experiment was performed in duplicate. each carrier was placed in a 24-well plate, and 20 ml of virus suspension was applied. the virus was allowed to dry for 2 hours. after drying, 50 ml of use-dilution germicide was placed on the dried virus suspension on 3 test carriers, and 50 ml of cell culture medium was placed on 3 control carriers. after 1-minute contact time, 950 ml of neutralizing solution was added to the 3 test carriers to halt virucidal activity, and 950 ml of cell culture medium was added to the control carriers. to elute viruses from carriers, 150 ml of 15% beef extract (ph 7.5) was then added to all 6 carriers. carriers were agitated on a shaking platform (60 rpm) for 20 minutes. the liquid from each well was then recovered, diluted, and assayed for virus infectivity as previously described. to determine the reduction in virus infectivity, the concentration of virus per 20-ml sample volume was calculated. reduction in viral titer was calculated using difference in virus concentration between test carriers and control carriers. log 10 reductions were calculated for each germicide based on 6 independent exposure trials.statistical analysis was performed using sas 9.1 (2008; sas institute inc, cary, nc). a 1-way analysis of variance (anova) was used to compare the log 10 reduction among germicides. additionally, a 2-way anova was performed to compare the efficacy of all surface germicides between the 2 virus types.reductions of mhv and tgev infectivity on surfaces by hospital germicides are shown in table 2 . for mhv, only 70% ethanol and purell hand gel (62% ethanol) produced a log 10 infectious virus titer reduction factor .2.5 after 1-minute contact time. hypochlorite (1:100 use dilution) was least effective, producing a log 10 reduction factor ,1. hypochlorite, vesphene iise, cidex-opa, and clorox anywhere spray each produced a log 10 reduction factor of ,2.5, with log 10 reduction factors of 0.62, 1.33, 1.71, and 1.98, respectively. statistical analysis using 1-way anova showed that the mean log 10 reduction factors for the 6 germicides differed significantly (p , .0001).for tgev, infectivity reduction factors of .3-log 10 were observed for 70% ethanol (3.19) , purell hand gel (4.04), and clorox anywhere spray (3.57). vesphene and cidex against tgev produced intermediate log 10 infectivity reduction factors of 2.03 and 2.27, respectively. as seen with mhv, hypochlorite exposure resulted in an infectious tgev titer log 10 reduction factor ,1 (0.35). statistical analysis using 1-way anova showed that the mean log 10 reduction factors were significantly different (p , .0001) among the 6 germicides.analysis of the mean log 10 reductions of mhv and tgev by germicides was done using the tukey multiple comparison test to determine whether reductions by individual germicides significantly differed from one another (p , .05) ( table 3 ). in addition, 2-way anova was used to compare 2 independent variables, germicide and virus type, and their influence on the log 10 virus reduction factor. this analysis aids in determining how much of the variability in reduction is explained by each of these 2 variables, as well as potential interaction between them. using 2-way anova, infectivity reduction results are statistically significant (p , .0001). a type iii sum of squares test was used to examine variation among mean reduction results. germicide had a greater influence on log 10 viral reduction (p , .0001) than did the virus type (tgev vs mhv) (p 5 .0008). additionally, when interaction between germicide and virus type was evaluated using the anova test, it was determined that there is a statistically significant interaction between virus type and germicide type (p 5 .0001).health care-associated transmission can play an important role in the spread of coronavirus infection, and coronavirus nucleic acids have been found on hospital surfaces in outbreak settings. 7 data from surrogate coronaviruses suggest that these viruses can survive for long periods on hard surfaces, potentially posing a continued risk of infection if health care surfaces are not adequately disinfected. the efficacy of 6 hospital surface germicides was tested against 2 coronaviruses, mhv and tgev, used as surrogates for sars-cov. these findings expand the available data on disinfection beyond what has been previously studied using other surrogates such as human coronavirus 229e. although 229e shares some tissue tropism with sars, there are important differences. studies of sars patients and outbreaks demonstrated that sars-cov is also a fecally shed virus, with intestinal tissue tropism; 229e lacks this. this may indicate important differences in resistance to environmental stressors because fecally shed viruses must be able to survive the conditions in the gastrointestinal tract, including extremes of ph, abundance of other microbes, and bile salts. this gastrointestinal tropism has played an important role in at least 1 major outbreak; this suggests that surrogates such as mhv (a virus with multiple tropisms) and tgev (an enteric virus) that reflect this diversity in tissue tropism are necessary.a log 10 viral reduction factor of .3 has been previously suggested as a benchmark for effective virucidal activity against coronaviruses and other viruses on surfaces. 3, 15, 17, 24 the results of this study show that, of the commonly used hospital germicides tested, only the ethanol-based germicides were able to achieve this level of reduction of infectious virus after 1 minute of contact time. for mhv, the 3 ethanol-based germicides (71%, 70%, and 62% ethanol) gave the greatest reduction in infectivity, with log 10 reduction factors ranging from 1.5 to 4.9. this was greater than the reductions observed with hypochlorite, phenolic, and orthophthalaldehyde based germicides. these same performance trends are evident in tests of these germicides against tgev. the ethanol-based germicides gave log 10 infectivity reduction factors ranging from 2.9 to 4.6, greater than those observed for hypochlorite, phenolic, and orthophthalaldehyde germicides. the phenolic and orthophthalaldehyde germicides had greater virucidal activity against tgev than against mhv. however, only the reductions in infectivity by orthophthalaldehyde were significantly different between mhv and tgev. statistical analysis indicates that mean log 10 viral reductions differed significantly based on both the type of germicide and the type of virus tested and that there are interaction effects between germicide and virus type. hence, both the selection of germicide and the type of virus will influence the resultant magnitude of reduction of virus infectivity titer.several previous studies have determined that surface disinfection is an important method for preventing viral transmission from surfaces to humans. 17 the risk of acquiring infection decreases proportionately to the amount of viral agent present on surfaces. 3 this study shows that ethanol-based germicides achieve the greatest reduction in viral titer on surfaces. these findings are consistent with previous studies of coronavirus disinfection, but this study provides more precise estimates of inactivation on surfaces than have been previously observed with other human coronaviruses, such as 229e. some previous studies of chemical disinfection of 229e have been limited by cytotoxicity problems that limited the ability to measure infectious virus reduction. 25 sattar et al 26 found that 70% ethanol reduced human coronavirus 229e dried onto a stainless steel surface by .99.9%. this study shows that the actual reduction is slightly greater than 3-log 10 (3.9 for tgev and 3.19 for mhv). the available data on disinfection of sars-cov itself are not extensive, partly because of the challenges of working with sars. much of the available data focuses on alcohols. seventy percent ethanol was found in 1 study to inactivate sars by .3 log 10 . 27 rabenau et al 9 reported a log 10 reduction factor of .5 after 30-second contact time using 78% ethanol and 70% propoanol, a reduction that was actually greater than what they observed with other germicides classified as chemical steriliants. these results support the findings of this study that ethanol-based disinfectants are efficacious against coronaviruses. however, flammability limits the use of ethanol for spills or contamination events involving large surface areas.other studies show that disinfectant efficacy can vary by virus type, with nonenveloped viruses such as adenovirus differing from enveloped viruses such as the coronaviruses. studies of hospital germicide efficacy against adenovirus 8 using the same carrier-based method with 1-minute contact times found greater log 10 reduction factors by opa (4.37) than were observed in this study for tgev (2.27) and mhv (1.71). in contrast, vesphene iise reduced adenovirus 8 by a log 10 reduction factor of only 0.41, compared with 1.33 for mhv and 2.03 for tgev in this study. reduction of adenovirus 8 by 70% ethanol was similar to that observed for coronavirus in this study, but 0.12% hypochlorite reduced adenovirus 8 approximately 4-log 10 greater than reductions observed for coronaviruses with 0.06% hypochlorite. 5 this suggests that disinfection efficacy may differ greatly by virus type and that nonenveloped viruses may not be appropriate surrogates for predicting the effects of disinfectants on enveloped viruses such as coronavirus and influenza.hypochlorite demonstrated a log 10 reduction factor ,1 after 1 minute for both tgev and mhv when applied at the 1:100 (0.06%) use-dilution prescribed by the manufacturer. previous studies of coronavirus disinfection have found higher reductions with concentrations of hypochlorite greater than the recommended usedilution, suggesting these results are consistent with a concentration-dependent effect. sattar et al 26 reported 99.9% reduction of viral titer for human coronavirus 229e when 0.10% and 0.50% sodium hypochlorite solutions were tested with 1-minute contact times. commercial marketers of sodium hypochlorite recommend contact time of 5 minutes. in actual use, it is likely that contact times are shorter than this, and increases in concentration may be necessary to offset the use of shorter contact times. the results of this study suggest that the 1:100 use-dilution should not be recommended for use on surfaces with suspected contamination by coronaviruses. hypochlorite is an important environmental surface disinfectant in health care; without the flammability and rapid evaporation of ethanol, it is suitable for large surface area spills. increases in both sodium hypochlorite concentration and contact time should be evaluated to determine whether these factors would improve virucidal activity of hypochlorite on hard surfaces to achieve a .3-log 10 reduction performance target.organic matter may play an important role in the poor performance of hypochlorite on surfaces observed in this study. a concentration of 600 mg/l on a surface produced a log 10 reduction factor ,1 of mhv and tgev in this study. the poor performance of hypochlorite against viruses dried into surfaces may be due to the high oxidant demand exerted by the proteinaceous cell culture medium matrix in which the viruses were suspended. this results in consumption of available hypochlorite by the proteins and other organic compounds (eg, amino acids) present in the matrix, rendering it unavailable for disinfection. use of viruses suspended in a proteinaceous matrix simulates the real world conditions under which viruses shed by human hosts occur in health care environments. viruses are not shed by an infected host as single purified particles; they occur as aggregates, surrounded by membranes and embedded in feces, mucus, and other proteinaceous matrices. together, these results suggest that changing the recommended use-dilution of hypochlorite may address the problem of oxidant demand exerted by proteinaceous material such as body fluids and result in effective inactivation of coronaviruses shed from human hosts.hypochlorite, phenolic, and opa disinfectants tested reduced infectious viral titer by ,3 log 10 after 1-minute contact time. opa is used as a high-level disinfectant for semicritical equipment such as endoscopes; 28 viruses can be deposited on the surfaces of semicritical equipment items during patient care. these results suggest that sufficient contact time is crucial to ensure that inactivation of viruses on the surfaces of semicritical equipment items takes place. according to the manufacturer, the phenolic disinfectant tested demonstrated a 3-to 4-log 10 reduction in viral titer after 10 minutes contact time when tested against another surrogate www.ajicjournal.org vol. 39 no. 5 coronavirus, avian infectious bronchitis virus. the results from this study, using 1-minute contact time, suggest that virucidal efficacy is greatly compromised if germicides are not used according to label directions and contact time is shorter than manufacturer recommended contact times.enveloped viruses of great nosocomial importance and pandemic potential, such as sars cov and avian influenza, are extremely challenging to work with in the laboratory. in the event of re-emergence of sars-cov, and in the context of pandemic influenza control, data are needed to guide decisions on appropriate disinfection of health care surfaces for control of viral transmission. tgev and mhv are nonpathogenic to humans and easily propagated and assayed in cell culture by plaque and quantal mpn assays. 29, 30 this study shows that these types of surrogate viruses can help expand our knowledge of practical aspects of virus control, such as inactivation by disinfectants, for viruses of public health importance.it also increases the available data both for disinfectants that have previously been studied with sars co-v and disinfectants that have not. previous studies using sars have evaluated benzalkonium chloride and magnesium monoperphthalate-based products, 16 povidone iodine, 27 formalin, and glutaraldehyde. 31 this current study included sodium hypochlorite and a phenolic, which have not been evaluated in previous studies. previous investigators have tested several types and concentrations of alcohols, including isopropanol, propanol, and ethanol, for which varying results have been observed in studies of sars. the data from this study can add to existing knowledge to help clarify how effective alcohols are against coronaviruses on surfaces.four of the 6 germicides tested showed greater reductions of tgev compared with mhv. this suggests that mhv is potentially a more conservative surrogate for evaluating disinfectant efficacy against sars-cov. these studies should be replicated using sars-cov to determine which surrogate virus is a more suitable model for the response of sars to these germicides. there is still an important role to be played by surrogate viruses, especially for the evaluation of new disinfectants or the re-evaluation of use of current disinfectants (such as changes in dose and contact time); the available data suggest that both tgev and mhv may serve as conservative surrogates for modeling control of sars-cov by health care germicides in worst case scenarios.since the advent of the coronavirus disease 2019 (co-vid-19) pandemic, endoscopy of gastrointestinal (gi) tract and ear-nose-throat procedures, which perform a wide range of aerosolgenerating procedures, have been the focus of significant attention with multiple guidelines and statements from different societies giving instruction and recommendation to protect both patients and medical staff from contracting severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus-2 (sars-cov-2) infection. [1] [2] [3] [4] however, there has yet to be recommendations or guidance for safe practices in the gastrointestinal motility laboratory (gml), where aerosol-generating procedures are often performed.the gml serves as the clinical hub of functional gi diseases related investigations such as gi manometry and ph studies. it also performs an array of other diagnostic and therapeutic procedures from the urea breath test to capsule endoscopy. gml procedures are often performed without sedation and involve repeated nasaloro-pharyngeal intubation during procedures, causing the patient to cough or wretch, which increases the risk of aerosolization and contamination of healthcare environmental surfaces. hence, appropriate precaution needs to be taken to minimize the risk of covid-19 to healthcare workers performing these procedures. 1, 5, 6 the asian neurogastroenterology and motility association (anma) is the representative society for the standard of functional gi diseases care in asia. anma is committed to guiding the protection and care of both patients and the medical staff during gml procedures. during the covid-19 pandemic, anma aims to provide recommendations for safe and good clinical practice regarding gml activities. these statements are based on the best available evidence and expert opinions. anma recommends that all gml strictly adhere to institutional, local, and state advisories and guidelines for infection control.the current guidelines made certain assumptions that the government or local authority does not limit the running of the hospital to urgent admissions through the emergency department only. we based these guidelines on the best available current evidence of co-vid-19, which is rapidly evolving as well as existing practices of disinfection for contagious respiratory diseases. these guidelines are based on current knowledge of covid-19, which is rapidly evolving, and existing practices of disinfection in hospitals while treating viral and other contagious diseases. we hope to provide a reference point for gml staff from doctors to medical technologists to carry out procedures safely during the covid-19 pandemic. this guideline is useful when the transmission rate of covid-19 is still high. it may or may not apply to future respiratory viral infections because each virus has a unique disease pattern.the anma president appointed the lead author to form a writing committee based on their expertise in the field. the job of the writing committee was to review current literature and regulation regarding the activities of gml around the globe during co-vid-19. the writing committee was tasked to produce evidencebased statements to guide the gml staff on how to handle at-risk patients or high-risk procedures during covid-19. altogether, 17 experts from around asia were invited, and all of them agreed to join the writing committee. the lead author and president of anma, predetermined 7 chapters for development. the writers were divided into 3 groups, with each group focusing on 2 to 3 chapters. during the writing process, several online voting and discussion processes were conducted to reach an agreement for contentious issues. the 3 group leaders would then resolve any discrepancies in the statements by reaching a consensus. the final manuscript was reviewed by 2 infectious disease experts and then finally by 2 senior anma council committee members. back are potentially high-risk procedures. 11. when either a high-risk patient or high-risk procedure is involved, standard, droplet, and airborne precautions with full personal protective equipment (ppe) are highly recommended, and the procedure should be performed in negative-pressure rooms whenever possible. 12. for low-risk patients undergoing low-risk procedures, standard precautions are highly recommended, or as determined by their respective institutions. 13. environmental decontamination should be performed in between cases with at least a 30-minute interval. 14. all non-disposable and non-dedicated gml equipment should be disinfected and reprocessed between cases. 15. gml staff should actively follow-up and advise patients to contact gml if they develop covid-19 within 14 days of undergoing gml procedures. 16. stepwise resumption of non-urgent elective gml investi-gations can be done based on international and local co-vid-19 pandemic situation. statement 1: regular planning and assessment of routine gastrointestinal motility laboratory workflow is essential during the covid-19 outbreak.many gmls may not be adequately equipped to handle outbreaks such as covid-19. most are placed next to or near to the endoscopy suite and may not have the characteristics or requirements typical of an airborne infection isolation room (aiir). some laboratories have separate rooms for upper gi, lower gi procedures, and breath testing. during the writing process and experts discussion, we realized that some gmls do not perform all the core procedures (for example wireless motility capsule, hydrogen and methane breath test). some of the core procedures are performed by other endoscopy centers or diagnostic laboratories (for example urea breath test and video capsule endoscopy). besides, some laboratories perform research and advanced diagnostic and therapeutic procedures on top of the core tests (table 1 ). all these characteristics need to be taken into consideration when planning workflow during the outbreak. it is essential to start with triaging of patients at the registration counter with risk evaluation, temperature check, provision of surgical masks and hand-sanitizers. patients should have a safe distance of 2 meters apart in the sitting area. it may be advisable to review and revise the workflow based on new research, changing epidemiology and policies (fig. 1) . depending on the local staffing level, only the absolute minimum number of staff that can ensure the running of the procedure safely needs to be present in the room. splitting gml staff into 2 teams is also a good policy to avoid cross-infection and to ensure continuity of the laboratory. the sars-cov-2 is easily killed and vulnerable due to its lipid shell, but it may remain infectious in aerosols for hours and viable on surfaces for days. 6, 8 it is not clear if there is fecal transmission despite the finding of viral shedding in stools. 9,10 recommended disinfectants include 62-71% ethanol, 0.5% hydrogen peroxide, or 0.1% sodium hypochlorite that effectively inactivates the virus within 1 minute. 11 procedure rooms should be regularly disinfected and thoroughly cleaned before and after routine use. for highrisk patients and motility procedures, full ppe should be available. gml staff may also consider the use of virucidal povidone-iodine 7% gargle or mouthwash. 12 at the end of the day, staff ensures the safe disposal of ppe and other disposable consumables and complete sanitization of the gml room. inventory of a motility laboratory can be categorized into either reusable (eg, high-resolution manometer) or disposable (eg, ph catheter). for reusable items, after use, these should be disinfected and cleaned as per recommendations from the manufacturer and hospital guidelines. typically for the high-resolution manometer, it should be immersed and wiped with an enzymatic cleaning solution, then rinsed with warm tap water and later soaked in an approved disinfectant (eg, cidex ortho-phthalaldehyde [advanced sterilization produces, irvine, ca, usa] or peracetic acid). ideally, a dedicated reusable probe should be reserved for high-risk covid-19 patients. however, in less resourceful laboratories, it is essential to document the covid-19 status for each patient performed with the probe. all disposable items must be disposed of safely after the procedure and not be reused.all gastrointestinal motility laboratory staffs should undergo training for standard infection control and proper usage of personal protective equipment.healthcare providers in the gml including nursing staff or medical technologists should undergo standard infection control training, which includes strategies concerning infection control in gml, triaging of patients, disinfection policy, and proper wearing and removing of ppe. appropriate knowledge of infection control is fundamental to protect gml staff and patients. the definition of a confirmed, probable, and suspected covid-19 case by the world health organization should be reviewed by healthcare providers to triage the patients. standard infection control education must include hand hygiene and disinfection of equipment. components of full ppe include surgical masks or n95/equivalent (filtering facepiece [ffp] 2/3) respirators, goggles or face shields or both, hair nets or hoods, isolation gowns (long-sleeved and water-resistant), and single/double gloves (fig. 2) . 13 all gml staffs should familiarize themselves with risk stratification of different patients, level of risk of procedure, and type of patients so that the appropriate ppe and infection control procedures are followed. 14 all staff should undergo adequate training to wear a suitable n95/equivalent respirator that has been fit-tested for the right model and size, as well as optimal training on donning and doffing of ppe. 15 ppe training of gml staff shall include (1) demonstration of all individual components of ppe to the trainees along with an explanation of utility and proper wearing of each component, (2) stepwise demonstration of the complete procedure of donning and doffing by one of the trainers or refer to online sources, and (3) emphasis on critical points like performing optimal hand hygiene with alcohol-based hand sanitizer before donning of ppe and during as well as after the process of doffing (fig. 3-5 ) gml staff should also be taught regarding the safe disposal of "used/doffed" n95/ equivalent respirators and other components of ppe. there should be a provision of separate designated areas/cubicles for donning and doffing of gml staff. disinfection of the gml equipment and the procedure area should be performed before and after the procedure with recommended disinfectant. 11 to minimize the risk of exposure to staff and to ensure fair use of ppe, only essential personnel (gml physician and trained technician/nurse) should be inside the gml procedure room with appropriate ppe. the gml patient shall be wearing a triple-layer surgical mask all the time until it is needed to be adjusted for the performance of the upper gi gml procedure as applicable.statement 5: all patients should be triaged. gastrointestinal motility laboratory procedures for high-risk patients should ideally be decided by a multidisciplinary team or be postponed.a confirmed case of covid-19 required laboratory evidence according to the world health organization, irrespective of signs and symptoms. 16 a probable case is a suspected case with the inconclusive covid-19 test result. a suspected case fulfils the following 3 criteria: (1) patients presenting with acute respiratory signs and symptoms with no other known etiology and a history of travelling to, or a resident in, countries with local transmission of covid-19 during 14 days before the start of any symptom; (2) patients presenting with acute respiratory signs and symptoms who have positive contacts with a confirmed or probable case of covid-19 in the past 14 days before the start of any symptom; and (3) patients with a severe acute respiratory illness requiring hospitalization and with no other cause that fully explains the clinical presentation. co-vid-19 can cause various respiratory and gi symptoms. 17 patients infected with covid-19 often present with fever, cough, fatigue, anorexia, and breathlessness. a small proportion of patients also had diarrhea, nausea/vomiting, and abdominal pain. 18 on the day before or day of the gml procedure, all patients need to undergo pre-screening, and patients classified ( table 2) based on the following information collected:• presence of respiratory symptoms (cough, sore throat, runny nose, dyspnea, and anosmia) • body temperature above 37.5℃ • close contact with the confirmed or suspected patients of covid-19 within the past 14 days • history of travel or residence in an area of high covid- 19 prevalence within the last 14 days any decision to provide gml procedures for high-risk patients should be based on the urgency of procedures ideally involving a multidisciplinary team, including infectious disease specialists.there may also be issues around patient distress and medicolegal concerns in any decision to defer investigations; thus, decisions on complex cases should also be made by a multidisciplinary team. for patients whose referral to tertiary care centers for gi motility study have been deferred or canceled, systems need to be in place to keep records of this so that either alternative arrangements (eg, clinic follow-up, radiological imaging) can be made, or proactively prioritize rebooking when deemed safe to resume normal activities. 19 statement 6: all elective non-urgent gastrointestinal motility laboratory procedures should be postponed.most gi motility disorders follow a benign and chronic course, and gi motility procedures are generally considered as elective procedures and deferment is strongly recommended until further notice during covid-19 outbreak. 19 sars-cov-2 is presumed to spread mainly via respiratory droplets from coughing, sneezing, talking, and being in close contact with symptomatic covid-19 patients. 20 transmission can also occur from asymptomatic carriers and from infected individuals with virus shedding during the preincubation period before symptoms develop. 21 furthermore, gi motility disorders are often manifested by non-specific symptoms that may be confused with gi manifestations of covid-19. 22 the 4 american gi organizations recommended that all elective nonurgent endoscopic procedures be rescheduled to stop covid-19 spread, and preserve ppe and availability of healthcare workers. 1 this should be adhered to similarly for gml investigations, given the risks of transmission mentioned above.statement 7: low-risk patients can be considered for urgent or time-sensitive gastrointestinal motility laboratory investigations if there are no alternatives.most gi motility disorders also have a relatively benign prognosis. data on the rationale of which gml investigations are to be performed urgently are lacking. in conditions where there is a significant impact in delays of diagnosis such as pseudoachalasia 23 or achalasia, 24 alternative methods of evaluation have to be considered first (eg, timed barium esophagogram for achalasia) 25 before deciding on the necessity of gml investigations. also, in the presence of alarm symptoms, radiologic investigations, or endoscopy should have been performed first to exclude malignancy or other time-sensitive diagnoses. clinching a diagnosis in a condition such as achalasia is time-sensitive as there are implications to management, as some patients can present with severe malnutrition from dysphagia and pulmonary complications from aspiration of retained esophageal content; thus treatment cannot be delayed for long periods. another relatively common example of a time-sensitive diagnosis are patients with overt obscure gi bleeding. in such situations, video capsule endoscopy is suggested to be performed as soon as possible, optimally within 14 days. 26, 27 otherwise, the diagnostic yield and therapeutic intervention rate decreases with longer waiting times. 28 also, video capsule endoscopy does not involve close contact between healthcare staff and the patients, so transmission of covid-19 is less likely. previous researches have reported that the median duration of viral shedding is 20 days, with the shedding duration extending at times even up to 37 days. 29 additionally, sars-cov-2 rna was detected in fecal samples for a mean of 27.9 days. 30 therefore, gml testing should not be performed for at least 4-6 weeks after clearance from covid-19 infection, with clearance being defined by the center for disease control and prevention as 2 separate respiratory swabs are negative for covid-19 over 24 hours. for patients whose gml investigations have been deferred or canceled, systems need to be in place to keep records so that alternative arrangements (eg, clinic follow-up, radiological imaging) can be made.statement 9: esophageal manometry, ph-impedance monitoring, urea breath test, and hydrogen/methane breath tests are high-risk procedures.endoscopic procedures can lead to aerosolization and permit the subsequent airborne transmission of sars cov-1 coronavirus. while there is little evidence to support the transmissibility of covid-19 during motility testing, these recommendations and statements are based on indirect evidence, expert opinion and consensus within the working group. 1 there was complete agreement amongst all members in the working group that these procedures are deemed as high-risk. although esophageal manometry and ph-impedance monitoring do not involve positive insufflation like in upper gi endoscopy, these tests potentially increase the risk of generating aerosols, especially during the intubation process, which often induces intense gagging, sneezing, and coughing by the patient. an earlier study on the sars cov-1 coronavirus has demonstrated that aerosol generation increases the risk of infection among the healthcare workers by 4.66 times (95% ci, 3.13-6.94) for those who are exposed to such procedures compared to nonexposed. 31 moreover, during the procedures, healthcare providers have to remain physically within a 1-meter distance from patients, and this close exposure may permit transmission. a study during colonoscopy found that microbial spread can be found up to 6 feet away from the patient. 32 breath tests, including hydrogen/methane breath tests and urea breath test, requires repeated long exhalation into multiple breath bags, at various intervals up to a 3-to 4-hour testing period. even though breath samples are collected in sealed breath bags, there is concurrent exhaled air through the nose during the process of expiration. studies showed that an increased expiratory flow rate was associated with smaller emitted particles, which possibly less than 5 µm in diameter. 33 various sizes of droplets can find their way into the eyes, noses, or mouths of people who are within proximity or possibly be inhaled into the lungs of those who are nearby. therefore, we propose that esophageal manometry, ph-impedance monitoring, hydrogen/methane, and urea breath tests have a high-risk potential of transmitting covid-19.statement 10: anorectal physiologic tests and treatment such as biofeedback are potentially high-risk procedures.though plausible, there is little evidence to dictate the risk of fecal transmission of covid-19 during anorectal physiologic tests, (eg, anorectal manometry and balloon expulsion test) and treatment such as biofeedback. the majority (7 out of 11) of the members in the working group believed that these procedures are nevertheless potentially high-risk for transmission of covid-19. viral shedding in feces had been reported in 38-58% of patients with cov-id-19 infection and can even be detected in recovered patients after hospital discharge and whose nasopharyngeal swab has become negative. 17 although these procedures do not involve air suctioning or insufflation, aerosolization of viral particles may still occur during flatulent situations such as during straining or when rapidly increased abdominal pressure is applied. these situations may result in an increased risk of covid-19 transmission through fecal-oral transmission or mucosal contact. sars-cov-2 rna can be found in the tissue samples obtained from upper gi tracts (the esophagus, stomach, and duodenum) down to the rectum of covid-19 patients. 9 wireless motility capsule and colonic transit marker studies involve trans-nasal or trans-anal catheter insertions. they are not aerosol-generating procedures and have minimal patient contact. all members of the working group agree that procedures such as wireless motility capsule and colonic transit marker studies pose a low potential of covid-19 transmission (table 3) . statement 11: when either a high-risk patient or highrisk procedure is involved, standard, droplet, and airborne precautions with full personal protective equipment are highly recommended, and the procedure should be performed in negative-pressure rooms whenever possible.ppe recommendations for healthcare workers and patients as dictated by local hospital protocols should be adhered to whenever possible. recommendations made in this section are based on the perceived risk of the procedure matched with the patient risk profile and expert opinions. ppe and work environment recommendations for the gml personnel during the covid-19 pandemic period, as stratified by the risk of patients and procedures, are summarized in table 4 . both low-risk and high-risk patients need to follow their respective local hospital guidelines and workflows during transfer and when in the waiting areas. in the waiting lobby, to minimize patient and caregiver exposure or potential transmission of co-vid-19, patients and accompanying persons should wear a surgical mask and keep an appropriate distance from each other. the patient should wear a surgical mask until the procedure begins.if either high-risk or low-risk procedures need to be performed in high-risk patients under particular circumstances, we would suggest the gml staff, including the doctors, technician, or nurses, to follow the standardized precautions and wear full ppe, including masks with n95 or equivalent filtering facepiece respirator, hairnet/hood, isolation gowns, double gloves, goggles, or face shields. n95 respirator could achieve a much better facial fit and filtration of airborne particles coming from the open airways of the patients during the whole procedure in the work environment. 34 after washing hands thoroughly with water and an alcohol-based sanitizer, we recommend all the gml staff to wear 2 layers of gloves for all the procedures and change the outer gloves whenever contaminated by the patients' saliva or secretions.procedures that are high-risk for covid-19 transmission should be performed with caution, even in relatively low-risk patients. gml staff should also follow standard precautions and wear adequate ppe, including a mask with n95 or equivalent filtering facepiece respirator, isolation gowns, hairnet/hood, double gloves, and goggles, or face shields. to minimize covid-19 transmission risk, we recommend all high-risk motility procedures or procedures involving high-risk patients to be performed in aiirs with dedicated medical equipment during the covid-19 pandemic period whenever possible or filtered with a high-efficiency particulate air (hepa) filter. the procedure room should be equipped with a double basin sink for washing and a safe disposal area. aiirs are single-patient rooms with negative pressure relative to the surrounding areas and at least 6 air changes per hour. all room doors should be kept closed during the whole gi motility procedure with minimized staff entry and exit. the number of personnel inside the examination room should be limited to only those necessary for essential care and procedure support. once the motility procedures have finished, all gml staff should not enter the vacated room until sufficient time has elapsed so that enough air changes have occurred to remove potentially infectious aerosols or droplets. then, the room after use should undergo thorough cleaning and surface disinfection before the next use. environmental surveillance should also be conducted regularly to assess the effectiveness of cleaning and disinfection. 35 statement 12: for low-risk patients undergoing lowrisk procedures, standard precautions are highly recommended, or as determined by their respective institutions.for low-risk patients who are undergoing a low-risk motility procedure, which is clinically indicated after carefully evaluating the risks and benefits and where deferment is not possible, it is still imperative for gml staff to take the necessary precautions, to avoid potential viral transmission in the gml. this has to be balanced with the local availability of medical resources and protective equipment, as well as adherence to hospital protocol. we recommend the gml personnel to wear a surgical mask, isolation gown, and gloves for personal protection while preserving the valuable and limited medical resources. for low-risk procedures performed in low-risk patients, a well-ventilated standard gml or endoscopy room would be adequate.a recent study showed that sars-cov-2 virus particles could be found on surfaces where they may remain viable and detectable for up to 72 hours. 6 the possibility of fecal-oral transmission of the sars-cov-2 virus also exists, 17, 36 as the virus has been found to remain stable in feces and urine for at least 1 to 2 days. 13 for high-risk patients who require motility testing, the procedure should be arranged at the end of the session. the gml should have a detailed post-procedure disinfection plan.for gastro-motility procedures performed on high-risk patients in negative pressure room, a waiting time of 30 minutes is recommended for an isolation room with 10 to 12 air changes per hour (ach); in rooms with 6 ach, 1 hour may be required before anyone including the physician, staff, or new patient enters the room, so that sufficient air changes have taken place to remove potentially infectious particles. 37 however, not every gml will have access to a negative-pressure rooms, and hence alternative measures such as diluting the air with cleaner air from the outdoors should be considered and the room kept empty for at least 1 hour because small particles remain airborne for some time. 13 at the end of each procedure, the cleaning process of the procedure room should begin with a thorough surface cleaning to remove all soil and biofilm, as reported in the american society for gastrointestinal endoscopy guideline. 38 then, thorough disinfection of all noncritical surfaces frequently touched by hands (eg, bed rails and bedside tables), procedure room furniture and floor should be performed with standard techniques by staff using appropriate ppe. 13, 35 data on the viricidal efficacy of chemical agents against sars-cov-2 are not available; therefore, recommendations of the major endoscopic societies are based on studies done for other coronaviruses. 13, 38 for surface and noncritical patient-care equipment disinfection, 1:100 dilution of household bleach (sodium hypochlorite) or alcohol-based solutions are reported to be effective. 13, 39, 40 statement 14: all non-disposable and non-dedicated gastrointestinal motility laboratory equipment should be disinfected and reprocessed between cases.the disinfection and reprocessing of all non-disposable, nondedicated medical equipment used in a procedure involving confirmed or suspected covid-19 patient should follow the standard practice, as per the manufacturer's instructions and local facilities available. there is currently no report that current disinfection tech-niques are insufficient. 37, 38, 41 the majority of equipment used during gi endoscopy or motility testing are semi-critical devices that require cleaning and disinfection with agents that have viricidal, bactericidal, mycobactericidal, and fungicidal activity. 4, 41 a previous study conducted after the sars outbreak reported that sars-cov-1 was readily inactivated by all disinfectants tested (4 hand rubs, 3 surface disinfectants, and a glutaraldehyde-based medical instrument disinfectant), 42 suggesting that current disinfectants and reprocessing protocols are adequate. 43 the reprocessing work should preferably be done by experienced staff with documented competency (trainees and novices should not be included). 35 however, some points need special consideration:• if possible, all gml procedures involving known or suspected covid-19 patients should use a set of dedicated medical equipment. • no disposable devices used for a patient with covid- 19 should be reused. • there should be minimal possible furniture and equipment in the procedure room. • after the procedure, the equipment should be cleaned separately from other materials. • the detachment of manometry catheters from the device should be done with caution, as it could release fluid or air or both. • there should be a separate/isolated recovery room for highrisk or infected cases. reprocessing staff should be donning ppe that includes gloves, gowns, face shields, and a surgical mask. 44 while there is no data to support a requirement for the use of n95 respirators or its equivalent in the reprocessing room, their use should be considered, especially in confirmed covid-19 cases. 45 contaminated waste and disposables, such as breath bags, should be disposed of using the specific local regulations related to high-risk waste. 4,45 a separate record for collection, treatment, and disposal of covid-19 waste should be maintained and reported to concerned authorities. there should be dedicated vehicles to collect covid-19 waste from different areas of the hospital, and these vehicles should be sanitized after every trip. covid-19 waste should be disposed of immediately upon receipt at facilities. regular sanitization of workers involved in handling and collection of co-vid-19 waste should be done, and they should be provided with adequate personal protective equipment including 3-layer surgical masks, splash-proof aprons/gowns, gloves, gumboots, and safety goggles. 46 any worker showing symptoms of covid-19 illness should not be allowed to work at the facility.statement 15: gastrointestinal motility laboratory staff should actively follow-up and advise patients to contact the gastrointestinal motility laboratory if they develop covid-19 within 14 days of undergoing gastrointestinal motility laboratory procedures.the patients who were not suspected/confirmed covid-19 cases when they visited the gml should be followed up. they should be contacted preferably by phone at 7 and 14 days to ask about the development of covid-19 symptoms or any new diagnosis. 4, 13, 44, 45 if any patient is suspected of having covid-19 symptoms on follow-up, she/he should be guided to seek medical opinion urgently. also, contact tracing of possible staff who have been exposed should be done according to hospital infection prevention and control policies. telehealth for follow-up may be helpful if the expertise and infrastructure is available. 4, 45 statement 16: stepwise resumption of non-urgent elective gastrointestinal motility laboratory investigations based on international and local covid-19 pandemic situation.resumption of partial or full elective gml services are likely to be done in time-bound approach depending on the following conditions: (1) the number and epidemiological trend of local transmission, (2) the availability of medical equipment and infectious control gears including appropriate ppe, and (3) the volume of postponed gml cases. 37 to date, unfortunately there is no sign of abatement of covid-19 worldwide, so it remains an almost impossible task to predict the most appropriate time to resume regular gml services.the major international gi societies have recommended performing the emergent or urgent and suspended the elective gi endoscopic procedures because of a shortage of health care resources and the risk of contracting covid-19. many gml activities, similar to gi endoscopy, are aerosol-generating and high-risk procedures for the contraction of sars-cov-2 infection among the health care workers can be triaged. the indications of emergent or urgent gi motility tests are limited. despite limited evidence, the anma-gml-covid-19 position statement provided evidence-based consensus guidance on gml activities during this pandemic. the shortage of ppe and testing kits may change man-agement decisions in many areas. the position statements may need to be updated due to rapid changes in the covid-19 pandemic and the availability of new evidence.n osocomial infections affect nearly 10% of hospitalized patients and represent a major problem in health care facilities, resulting in prolonged hospital stays, substantial morbidity and mortality, and excessive costs. 1 in the united states, health care-associated infections contribute to the deaths of nearly 90,000 hospital patients each year and increase annual medical expenses by approximately $4.5 billion. 2 in addition, multidrug-resistant pathogens are commonly involved in such infections and render effective treatment challenging. the hands of health care workers (hcws) are the primary mode of transmission of multidrug-resistant pathogens and infections to patients. 3 proper hand hygiene is the single most important, simplest, and least expensive means of preventing health careassociated infections and the spread of antimicrobial resistance. nevertheless, in most health care institutions, adherence to recommended hand-washing practices remains unacceptably low, rarely exceeding 40% of situations in which hand hygiene is indicated. 4 why do hcws consistently fail to perform this simple and inexpensive procedure, thereby compromising patient safety and the quality health care-associated infections constitute one of the greatest challenges of modern medicine. despite compelling evidence that proper hand washing can reduce the transmission of pathogens to patients and the spread of antimicrobial resistance, the adherence of health care workers to recommended hand-hygiene practices has remained unacceptably low. one of the key elements in improving hand-hygiene practice is the use of an alcoholbased hand rub instead of washing with soap and water. an alcohol-based hand rub requires less time, is microbiologically more effective, and is less irritating to skin than traditional hand washing with soap and water. therefore, alcohol-based hand rubs should replace hand washing as the standard for hand hygiene in health care settings in all situations in which the hands are not visibly soiled. it is also important to change gloves between each patient contact and to use hand-hygiene procedures after glove removal. reducing health care-associated infections requires that health care workers take responsibility for ensuring that hand hygiene becomes an everyday part of patient care.of medical care? the reasons for poor hand-hygiene practices include lack of scientific knowledge, unawareness of risks, misconceptions (eg, glove use obviates the need for hand hygiene), unavailability of hand-hygiene facilities (sinks or alcohol dispensers), lack of role models among colleagues or superiors, understaffing or patient overcrowding, and lack of institutional priority. this article reviews basic principles of hand hygiene in health care settings, reasons for nonadherence to handhygiene practices, and possible targets for improving adherence to recommended practices, with special emphasis on the advantages of the more efficient, simple, and feasible alcohol-based hand rubs over the traditional handwashing procedure with soap and water.the hungarian obstetrician ignaz philipp semmelweis (1818-1865) was one of mankind's great benefactors. in 1847, semmelweis was head of the women's hospital in vienna, austria. he noted that puerperal fever was more common on a maternity ward where physicians and medical students provided care to women in labor (ward a) than it was on the ward where midwives assisted at deliveries (ward b). peripartum mortality on ward a was as high as 18%, compared to only 3% on ward b. 5 at that time, miasma (bad air), dirty bed linen, low social status, and climatic influences were considered possible reasons for the higher mortality on ward a. in contrast, semmelweis postulated that physicians and students were contaminating their hands while performing autopsies on nonrefrigerated bodies and subsequently introducing a fatal etiologic agent ("cadaverous particles") into the birth canal during vaginal examination. washing their hands with soap and water before examining women in labor did not prevent the epidemic of puerperal fever, and the hands retained a disagreeable odor from the autopsy rooms.on may 15, 1847 , semmelweis ordered that all students and physicians scrub their hands with a 4% chlorinated lime solution after dissecting cadavers and before examining patients. at that time, microorganisms were unknown to be the cause of infection, and semmelweis may have chosen chlorinated lime because of its deodorizing characteristic. after introduction of the new hand-hygiene practice, the maternal mortality rate dramatically decreased to less than 3% and remained low for years. nevertheless, semmelweis' recommendations were strongly opposed by his coworkers. rightfully, although undiplomatically, he denounced his unenlightened colleagues as "killers," and his appointment in vienna ended prematurely. he returned to pest, hungary, where he instituted his antiseptic handhygiene method in 2 other hospitals, reducing their mortality rates from more than 10% to less than 1%. although most physicians at that time ignored his theory, semmelweis opened a new era in medical science by introducing hand antisepsis in surgery and obstetrics.later studies confirmed semmelweis' findings about the important role of hcws' hands in the transmission of nosocomial pathogens. interestingly, although semmelweis is frequently called a pioneer of hand washing, he actually replaced hand washing with hand disinfection. chlorinated lime has recently been shown to be one of the most active currently existing disinfectants, reducing bacterial counts on the skin by 6.1 log 10 colony-forming units (cfu). because chlorinated lime is harmful to the skin, alcohol was later used as a hand antiseptic. semmelweis' intervention represents the first evidence that disinfection of heavily contaminated hands between patient contacts can reduce nosocomial transmission of contagious diseases more efficiently than hand washing with plain soap and water. however, many subsequently published guidelines continued to recommend washing with soap and water as the standard hand-hygiene practice for decades. 6 ignorance of scientific evidence supporting the use of an alcoholbased hand rub is difficult to explain. hand washing may represent an old cultural heritage of human civilization that in the past served not only for the removal of dirt but also to deliver people symbolically from physical and moral evils. 5 more than 150 years after semmelweis' epidemiological observations and despite advances in microbiology and infection control, implementation of proper hand hygiene remains a challenge in clinical practice today. recently, completely revised guidelines for hand hygiene in health care settings were published in the united states by an international group from the centers for disease control and prevention. 7 according to these new hand-hygiene guidelines, the use of an alcohol-based hand rub is the preferred method of hand hygiene in the health care setting. hands should be washed with soap and water primarily when they are visibly soiled or contaminated with blood, other body fluids, or proteinaceous material. this usually represents less than 10% of all routine patient contacts. in general, the hands should be either rubbed with alcohol (the standard procedure for clean hands) or washed with soap (if visibly soiled), but both procedures should not be used at the same time.normal human skin harbors bacteria, usually between 10 2 and 10 6 cfu/cm 2 . during daily activity, hcws progressively accumulate microorganisms on their hands from direct patient contact or contact with contaminated environmental surfaces and devices. 8 traditionally, microorganisms residing on the hands are divided into resident and transient flora.resident flora colonizes deeper skin layers and is more resistant to mechanical removal than transient flora. this group consists mainly of coagulase-negative staphylococci and corynebacteria, with a population density between 10 2 and 10 3 cfu/cm 2 . these bacteria multiply in hair follicles and remain relatively stable over time. resident flora generally has lower pathogenic potential than transient flora and is considered important for colonization resistance, preventing colonization with other, potentially more pathogenic, microorganisms.transient flora colonizes the superficial skin layers for short periods and is usually acquired by contact with a patient or contaminated environment. these microorganisms are easily removed by mechanical means such as hand washing. transient flora (eg, staphylococcus aureus, gram-negative bacilli, or candida species) is responsible for most health care-associated infections and the spread of antimicrobial resistance.two fundamentally different hand-hygiene concepts exist. 9 hand washing refers to the application of a plain (nonantimicrobial) or antiseptic (antimicrobial) soap, mechanical friction generated by rubbing the hands together for 1 minute (covering all surfaces of the hands and fingers), rinsing with water, and drying thoroughly with a disposable towel (which is then used to turn off the faucet). the cleaning activity is attributed to detergent properties, which for personal use. mass reproduce only with permission from mayo clinic proceedings. result in mechanical removal of dirt (soil and organic substances) and loosely adherent flora (most transient flora and a small portion of the resident flora) from the hands. plain soaps have minimal or no antimicrobial activity, reducing bacterial counts from hands by 0.6 to 1.1 log 10 cfu in 15 seconds, 1.8 to 2.8 log 10 cfu in 30 seconds, and 2.7 to 3.0 log 10 cfu in 1 minute. 5 prolonged hand washing does not considerably further reduce bacterial counts. some investigators use other terms for hand hygiene, such as hand antisepsis, disinfection, degerming, decontamination, or sanitizing. in general, "hand antisepsis" indicates hand hygiene with an antiseptic agent, either washing the hands with an antimicrobial soap or using an alcohol-based hand rub.the alcohol hand-rub procedure involves the use of alcohol rather than water. in contrast to hand washing, the objective of this procedure is a more effective and rapid reduction of skin flora by killing, not mechanically removing, microorganisms (all transient flora and most resident flora). therefore, the alcohol hand-rub procedure should not be confused with hand washing. vigorous friction, rinsing with water, and drying with a towel are unnecessary. instead, the technique consists of rubbing alcohol onto both hands until it completely evaporates, usually requiring 15 to 30 seconds. because alcohol kills microorganisms only where it comes into contact with the skin, the use of sufficient amounts of alcohol (3-5 ml) and spreading it onto all surfaces (rather than mechanical friction) is crucial. most dispensers deliver 1.5 to 2.0 ml of alcohol per application; therefore, 2 applications are usually necessary to completely cover both hands. 10 the antimicrobial activity of alcohols is based on protein denaturation. they have excellent and rapid (within seconds) germicidal activity against vegetative bacteria, fungi, and many viruses. for hand rubs, ethanol, isopropanol, and/or n-propanol are used (listed in order of increasing antibacterial activity at equal concentrations). alcohol concentrations of 60% to 95% (vol/vol) kill 3.4 to 5.8 log 10 cfu in 30 seconds, with higher concentrations having better antibacterial activity. 5 however, concentrations of greater than 95% are less potent because water is essential for protein denaturation. the presence of organic material diminishes the antibacterial activity of alcohols by 0.2 to 0.7 log 10 cfu. alcohol solutions are also highly effective against mycobacteria (the bacteria most resistant to the disinfection process) and multidrug-resistant pathogens but have poor or no activity against bacterial spores and protozoal oocysts. supplementation with 1% hydrogen peroxide may render alcohol sporocidal.in general, alcohol rubs are approximately 100 times more effective against viruses than any form of hand washing. 5 ethanol has better virucidal activity than other alcohols. transmission of viruses is of concern in a broad range of health care institutions, including pediatric wards, bone marrow transplantation units, and long-term care facilities. the recent epidemic of severe acute respiratory syndrome (sars) emphasized the importance of good hand hygiene once again; alcohol effectively kills all coronaviruses. the virucidal activity of alcohol against enveloped viruses (such as influenza virus or human immunodeficiency virus) is good, except for rabies virus. certain nonenveloped viruses (such as enteroviruses, rotaviruses, or norovirus [formerly called norwalk-like or small-structured virus]) may require higher alcohol concentrations (70%-80%).alcohol solutions lack persistent activity on resident skin flora. the resident flora regrows within hours after exposure to alcohol, presumably from bacteria residing in hair follicles. the addition of disinfectants (chlorhexidine, quaternary ammonium compounds, triclosan, or octenidine) may delay the regrowth of bacteria. this effect is usually desirable only in surgical hand antisepsis, in which long-term antimicrobial effectiveness under gloved hands may be beneficial. to date, no clinical studies have addressed this issue. 5proper hand hygiene can prevent health care-associated infections and the spread of antimicrobial resistance. antimicrobial resistance prevalence rates are increasing in many countries around the world. in the united states, during the 5-year period from 1997 through 2001 the proportion of methicillin-resistant s aureus (mrsa) among isolates of s aureus causing nosocomial infection continuously increased nationwide from 22.4% to 38.7%. 11 this growth has been paralleled by an increase in other multidrug-resistant organisms such as vancomycin-resistant enterococci, vancomycin-intermediately resistant s aureus, and vancomycin-resistant s aureus. 12 the reasons for these worrisome findings are complex and not entirely clear, but inconsistent isolation practices, misuse of antimicrobial agents, failure to conduct active surveillance cultures, and poor adherence to hand-hygiene practice may have key roles. 13, 14 for example, in some northern european countries, such as finland and the netherlands, where a strict mrsa containment "search-and-destroy" strategy and the routine use of alcohol-based hand rubs are standard practice, the prevalence of mrsa remains below 1%. in contrast, most southern european countries, which have had inconsistent isolation precautions and hand-washing recommendations for several decades, are struggling with high prevalence rates of mrsa (>30%) and health careassociated infections. 15 the goal of hand hygiene is a sufficient reduction of microbial counts on the skin to prevent cross-transmission of pathogens among patients. it is easier to keep the hands clean than to make them clean. the critical density of microorganisms on the hands needed for the spread of pathogens remains unknown. it may depend on the type and duration of contact, the type of microorganism, and the patient's resident flora (ie, their colonization resistance). as observed by semmelweis in 1847, washing with plain soap is not always sufficient to prevent hand-borne transmission of pathogens. although in most instances hand washing is probably sufficient to prevent transmission of microorganisms, in some cases the use of soap and water fails to remove or, paradoxically, even increases the bacterial counts on the skin over baseline counts from clean hands, presumably because of heavy contamination or recontamination by the soap, faucet, or sink. 16, 17 in fact, none of the hand-washing techniques, durations of washing, or types of soaps (antimicrobial or nonantimicrobial) have demonstrated antimicrobial activity equal to or better than that of alcohol-based hand rubs. 5 multiple in vitro and in vivo experiments have indicated considerably better antimicrobial killing with alcohol hand disinfectants than with hand washing, and the use of alcohol-based hand rubs has been associated with a decrease in nosocomial infection rates. 3, 5, [18] [19] [20] table 1 summarizes patient-care situations in which hand hygiene is indicated. 7 according to recently revised handhygiene guidelines, the use of an alcohol-based hand rub is the preferred method of hand hygiene. in general, hands should be either rubbed with alcohol (the standard procedure for clean hands) or washed with soap (if visibly soiled); both procedures should not be used at the same time. the use of alcohol immediately before or after hand washing with soap and water is not recommended because it may cause dermatitis. to avoid confusion, alcohol handrub dispensers should not be placed adjacent to sinks but rather placed close to patients (eg, at bedside). alcoholimpregnated wipes are not as effective as alcohol hand rubs and are not recommended for routine hand hygiene. for hand hygiene outside health care facilities, such as before and after working hours, before eating, or after using a restroom, the use of soap and water is the recommended method.it is important to recognize that examination gloves do not provide complete protection against acquisition of microorganisms. microorganisms from patients have been recovered from the hands of up to 30% of hcws who wore gloves. 21, 22 therefore, hand hygiene is always needed after glove use and removal. gloves should be used only when contact with blood, body fluids, or other potentially infectious materials, mucous membranes, and nonintact skin are anticipated. each pair of gloves should be used for the care of only 1 patient. they should be removed immediately after caring for the patient (before touching any surface) and should be changed between care of contaminated and clean body sites on the same patient. failure to remove gloves after patient contact may result in the spread of nosocomial pathogens among patients or in contamination of surfaces. gloves should not be washed or reused. powderless gloves are preferred because alcohol may interact with residual powder and produce a gritty feeling on the hands.in addition to its superior antimicrobial efficacy, the alcohol hand-rub procedure has other advantages compared with hand washing (table 2) .at least 1 to 2 minutes are required for hand washing compared with 15 to 30 seconds for the alcohol hand-rub technique. 4 in the intensive care unit, where as many as 40 opportunities for hand hygiene per hour of care occur, time constraint becomes the most important limiting factor. multiple studies have shown that understaffing and increased workload are risk factors for health careassociated epidemics. 23, 24 in a mathematical model with 3 opportunities for hand hygiene per hcw per hour, 100% adherence would result in 1.3 hours of hand washing per shift (or 17% of total nursing time). 25 switching to alcohol hand disinfection would decrease the time necessary for hand hygiene to 0.3 hours (or 4% of total nursing time). in addition, hcws can use the alcohol rub while walking to the next patient, saving additional time and human resources. importantly, hcws simply cannot afford to use almost one fifth of their time for hand washing.washed hands can become recontaminated from faucets or by splashes from traps or sinks. pseudomonas aeruginosa is commonly found in tap water. in addition, plain soaps may become contaminated during use, and waterborne bacteria from the plumbing system may be present in the tap water. in contrast, alcohol hand rubs eliminate the risk of hand contamination or microbial dispersal into the environment because alcohol kills rather than removes microorganisms. contamination of alcohol-based solutions with vegetative bacterial forms has not been reported. alcohol dispensers can be reused as long as they are not visibly soiled.limited accessibility of hand-hygiene facilities has been shown to be an important risk factor for poor adherence to recommendations. 26 in a recent study, adherence to handhygiene recommendations decreased with the number of beds in a patient room, from 70% for rooms with 1 bed to 59% for 2 beds, 55% for 3 beds, 48% for 4 beds, and 33% for 5 beds, suggesting that the distance to the closest handhygiene facility is crucial. 27 sinks cannot be installed at locations most convenient for hcws. in contrast, alcohol dispensers can be placed on or between beds, at the entrance to patient rooms, and at nursing desks and can even be carried in the pockets of hcws. 28 the easier accessibility of alcohol dispensers obviates the need to repeatedly return to the sink, wash hands, dry them, and return to the patient's bedside to resume care. easy, immediate access to alcohol dispensers is the key element in improving adherence to hand hygiene. a sufficient number of alcohol dispensers (2-3 per patient bed) should be placed at bedside, especially in areas with high workload, such as the intensive care unit.intact skin on hcws' hands helps to protect both them and their patients from acquiring or transmitting nosocomial pathogens. health care workers with dermatitis are more likely to harbor s aureus and other pathogenic bacteria than those with healthy skin. skin drying and irritation can be avoided by adding emollients to alcohol formulations, such as glycerol (1%-4%), silicone oils, refattening agents, or rehydrating agents. moreover, alcohol hand rubs cause substantially less skin irritation and dryness than washing with soap. hand washing removes lipids from the skin, whereas alcohol compounds only redistribute them. however, either strategy can result in dryness of the skin if skin-care products are not applied regularly. therefore, hcws should be advised to use hand lotions or creams frequently to minimize the occurrence of irritant contact dermatitis. allergies to alcohol are extremely rare, but reactions can be caused by emollients and other compounds added to the alcohol. importantly, to avoid skin irritation and prevent dilution of the alcohol to concentrations with insufficient antimicrobial activity, alcohol should not be applied to wet skin or to hands with soap residue. some commercially available alcohol formulations may change the color of fingernails. other factors that influence the acceptance of alcohol products by hcws include the odor, color, and consistency of the product.the flash points of common commercially available hand-rub products are 21°c to 34°c, depending on the type and concentration of alcohol. 5 therefore, alcohols should be stored away from high temperatures and flames, and containers should be designed to minimize evaporation. in europe, where alcohol-based hand rubs have been used extensively for decades, the incidence of fires associated with such products is extremely low. 9 in the united states, 1 flash fire, purportedly caused by a spark of static electricity generated by removal of an isolation gown while the person's hands were still wet with alcohol, has been reported. 29 to assess the frequency of fires associated with alcohol-based hand-rub dispensers, a web-based survey of health care facilities in the united states was performed.of 840 facilities that completed the questionnaire, 798 reported using alcohol-based hand rubs. none of the responding facilities reported a dispenser-related fire. 30 on the basis of these data, the risk of fire is substantially lower than the risk of mrsa acquisition and subsequent infection.the increasing use of alcohol for hand hygiene raises concern about the risk for emergence of resistant microorganisms. despite extensive use, there is no evidence that such resistance has emerged in vitro or in vivo, suggesting that the mechanism of action (protein denaturation) or the rapid killing effect may not allow the development of resistance. in addition, the rapid evaporation of alcohol prevents extended exposure of microorganisms to subinhibitory concentrations of alcohol, possibly reducing the risk of emergence of resistance.most of the experience accumulated to date is with low-viscosity rinses, but gel formulations have recently been proposed to reduce the drying effect and irritation of alcohols, potentially enhancing adherence to hand hygiene. an in vitro study indicated that gel formulations had lower antimicrobial activity (0.7-1.1 log 10 cfu) than rinses with the same alcohol content (p<.01). 31 however, further clinical studies are needed to evaluate the relative efficacy of alcohol rinses and gels in reducing the transmission of nosocomial pathogens. some gels may leave a sticky layer on the hands from the nonabsorbable gelling (thickening) system, necessitating frequent washing of the hands after repeated applications of a gel formulation. to date, no studies of the acceptance by hcws of gels compared with rinses, a critical determinant for good adherence to hand hygiene, have been undertaken.the skin underneath rings is heavily colonized with bacteria, but whether wearing rings results in greater transmission of pathogens is unknown. in a recent study by trick et al, 32 ring wearing increased the frequency of hand contamination. however, contamination was considerably less frequent after the use of an alcohol-based hand rub than after washing with plain soap and water. health care workers wearing artificial fingernails have been epidemiologically implicated in several outbreaks of infection caused by gram-negative bacilli (especially p aeruginosa) and yeasts. 33 therefore, hcws should not wear artificial fingernails when involved in direct patient care. whether the length of natural fingernails is a factor in the spread of pathogens is unknown.switching from hand washing to an alcohol hand-rub procedure requires a system and behavioral change in health care institutions. once hcws become familiar with the alcohol hand rub, most abandon the hand-washing procedure. 19, 28 strategies to improve hand-hygiene adherence must be multifaceted and include the education and motivation of hcws, the use of performance indicators, and hospital management support. writing new hand-hygiene guidelines alone is not enough. simple training sessions for hcws should be held on each ward to introduce the advantages of alcohol hand rubs over hand washing. in addition, patients can be educated about the importance of hand hygiene and be encouraged to ask hcws to comply with hand-hygiene guidelines. the efficiency of the hand-rub technique can be evaluated with an alcohol product supplemented with fluorescent dye and an ultraviolet light. 9 another way to estimate the quality of hand hygiene is to evaluate the consumption of soap and alcohol. if hcws strictly follow the centers for disease control and prevention hand-hygiene recommendations, the ratio between soap and alcohol consumption should be close to 1:10. in order to improve patient safety and reduce costs, good hand hygiene should become one of the highest priorities in health care institutions.the hands of hcws are the most common mode of transmission of pathogens to patients. proper hand hygiene can prevent health care-associated infections and the spread of antimicrobial resistance. factors that contribute to poor adherence to hand hygiene include poor access to handwashing facilities (sinks), the time required to perform standard hand washing, irritant contact dermatitis associated with frequent exposure to soap and water, high workloads, knowledge deficits among hcws, and the failure of administrative leaders to make hand hygiene an institutional priority.scientific evidence and ease of use support the use of alcohol-based hand rubs for hand hygiene during patient care. the alcohol hand-rub technique is microbiologically more effective, more accessible, and less likely to cause skin problems and saves time and human resources. as a consequence, alcohol hand rubs are associated with substantially better adherence to hand hygiene than hand washing. the use of alcohol-based hand rubs should replace hand washing as the standard for hand hygiene in health care settings in all situations in which the hands are not visibly soiled.public health, unlike medicine, is not about doctors treating individual patients. public health is about population health. it is a collective social effort to promote health and prevent diseases -both communicable and noncommunicable -and disability that involves population surveillance, regulation of determinants of health (such as food safety and sanitation), and the provision of key health services with an emphasis on prevention. because private actors lack sufficient incentive and ability to undertake population-wide measures, public health is a vital resource for which government is the crucial provider, enabled by its police powers and its ability to regulate, tax, and spend. the exercise of government powers for the health of its population raises ethical issues, such as public welfare, individual autonomy and freedom, privacy and confidentiality, just distribution of benefits and burdens, transparency, and public accountability. these ethical concerns sometimes conflict, pitting values against one another. how they should be balanced will vary on a case-by-case basis. this article discusses justifications for government action in public health, the tension between individual freedom and public health, issues of distributive justice in public health, and ethical guidelines for public health policymaking.given that the government is best placed to undertake the work of public health, what are justifications for public health policies?public health has utilitarian and consequentialist aspects. in a utilitarian sense, its goal is to maximize public welfare through the protection and promotion of population health. from a consequentialist point of view, public health policies are justified and judged largely by their outcomes, achieved by means of acceptable procedures. public health measures seek to minimize harm from communicable and noncommunicable diseases, from exposure to health-endangering substances and environments (e.g., cigarette smoke and poor sanitation), and from high-risk behaviors (e.g., substance abuse and unprotected sex). welfare is promoted through policies aimed at encouraging and facilitating behavior conducive to health (e.g., hand washing, smoking cessation, education about the dangers of drugs, and unprotected sex), and establishing more healthful environments (e.g., smoke-free public spaces, mosquito extermination, and adequate nutrients).in the course of protecting and promoting public health, government authorities have the responsibility to ensure that public health policies themselves do no harm, or at least that their harms are outweighed by their benefits. public health policies are not entirely utilitarian, however, in that individuals are not considered expendable for the greater good. the rights of individuals are important considerations in the formulation and implementation of public health measures, as discussed later.the protection of vulnerable groups is another ethical motive for public health action. vaccination and nutrition supplements, for example, protect children from disease and malnutrition, and smoking bans in bars and restaurants safeguard the health of workers who may not otherwise have the leverage to demand a smoke-free environment. publicly funded health services can in principle help address the health needs of those who cannot afford private medical care or insurance. such measures also may contribute to reducing health inequalities, by bringing the health of vulnerable groups more in line with the general population. reduction of inequalities can itself be considered an ethical justification, as people with equal status (e.g., citizenship) should not suffer from those types of health inequalities that are due to morally arbitrary reasons (e.g., birth into a poor family and other bad luck).poor health has collateral effects. on an individual basis, illness, disability, and their associated expenses can lead to absenteeism and decreased productivity that diminish income, inability to pursue education, reductions in essential consumption such as food and shelter, bankruptcy, and poverty. high infant and child mortality may lead to the compensatory decision to have more children, which decreases resources available for investment in health and education for each child. high adult mortality leaves orphans with bleak prospects. on a societal level, employers and the health system also suffer economic losses from lower worker productivity and greater healthcare burdens. poor population health can even be economically and politically destabilizing. a particularly grim example is the human immunodeficiency virus (hiv)/acquired immune deficiency syndrome (aids) crisis in africa, which lowered life expectancy by decades in some countries, killing adult men and women in their prime productive years. this is economically devastating for individual families and can potentially have larger implications. if deaths cause an overall decrease in economic output, the tax base funding health, education, police, and the military would also shrink, thus diminishing the perceived legitimacy of government. lower life expectancy discourages long-term investment in education; it also means fewer and less experienced civil servants, reducing government administrative capacity. low income and low government capacity create incentive for crime, violence, and radicalism, which in turn may trigger more state repression. foreign investment may be deterred by lack of productive workers and instability. weak states are also more vulnerable to armed conflicts and terrorism, increasing regional and international security risks. public health problems can stand as obstacles to economic, political, and human development. what can be achieved with a population debilitated and dying en masse?good population health, however, can be part of a virtuous cycle of development. higher life expectancy provides higher returns to education and human capital investment; lower infant and child mortality helps lower fertility, which results in greater health and educational resources available per child. a healthier, more educated work force is more economically productive, and more capable to generate the tax revenue for crucial infrastructure and services that would further development and attract investments. the connection between public health and development is less pronounced in developed countries that have long attained a high standard of population health; in impoverished countries, however, public health is a key component of the fight against poverty. generally speaking, the justification for government public health action is ample; it is the justifications for specific public health measures that tend to be more contentious.public health policies are population oriented. because individual health -for example, whether one is vaccinated, infected, a smoker -affects the health of others, public health measures regulate individual behavior in order to achieve population health goals. such policies apply broadly and are not tailored to specific individual circumstances. they typically mandate certain behaviors (e.g., vaccination) and prohibit others (e.g., congregating with others while infected with quarantinable diseases), and sometimes take individual choice largely out of the picture (e.g., water fluoridation). all raise questions about how individual autonomy and freedom should be balanced against public health interests.public health ethicists often invoke the 'harm principle,' which respects individuals' sovereignty over their bodies and actions as long as their actions do not harm others. ethicists generally agree that the greater the intrusion on individual autonomy and freedom, the greater the public health benefit must be to justify the policy. the public health situation that most starkly pits individual freedom against population health is infectious disease control. the liberty of individuals and their right to associate with others are curbed by protocols to separate infected patients from the population to prevent exposing others (isolation), and to separate or restrict the activities of people who are not diagnosed as infected but who may have been exposed to infection or who may be ill without symptoms (quarantine).disease control in the age of globalization has global health implications. the conflict is no longer between individual freedom and domestic population health, but between individual freedom and global population health, as demonstrated by the rapid spread of hiv, severe acute respiratory syndrome (sars), and pandemic flu via air travel. the economic toll of outbreaks is also potentially significant; losses from the 2003 sars outbreak have been estimated to run in the billions. domestic efforts are an integral part of global outbreak prevention. given the high health and economic stakes in disease containment, the isolation of infected individuals to prevent spread of disease is fairly uncontroversial. quarantine, which applies to those who are not evidently ill, is a more disputed practice, sparking debates on its necessity and effectiveness: only a small number of quarantined individuals are likely to be actually sick, although rights and freedom are infringed for all individuals placed under quarantine. a 2006 study by day et al. suggests that quarantine is likely to be more useful and justifiable when isolation is ineffective, or if disease can be transmitted asymptomatically, when the consequences of exposure to others are severe, fatal, and/or irreversible, or if there is an intermediate asymptomatic period that is not too short or too long.isolation and quarantine can be voluntarily observed or coercively imposed. to the extent feasible, public health measures should secure the voluntary compliance or participation of affected individuals, allowing individuals the autonomy of informed consent. the public health, legal, and ethical reasons for observing isolation or quarantine -and potential consequences for violating it -should be clearly communicated to affected individuals, such that they have the relevant information to assess individual and societal benefits, costs and risks, and to make the decision to comply. should an individual refuse to comply, authorities should have a system in place to impose isolation or quarantine to protect public health. there may be circumstances in which the urgency and gravity of a public health crisis may make a complete informed consent procedure less practicable. for example, an outbreak in progress of a virulent, highly fatal disease like ebola may require swifter separation of the infected and the exposed from the general population.one person's infection has clear and direct negative health impact on others, but public health policies also concern activities like smoking, obesity, and the wearing of motorcycle helmets that are arguably 'lifestyle choices,' with more indirect (or minimal) negative externalities. smoking is an individual activity that may cause lung cancer, emphysema, and other diseases for the smoker, but there is also substantial evidence for its harm to others through secondhand smoke. illness from smoking and secondhand smoke can result in losses from lower economic productivity, and greater burdens on the health system. how should public health authorities weigh a smoker's right to smoke versus other people's right to a smoke-free environment? do smokers really have full autonomous choice over smoking, given that nicotine is an addictive substance? should smokers be refused tax-funded health services for smoking-related illness? to what degree should smoking be discouraged (e.g., through sin tax) or prohibited to protect especially vulnerable groups like restaurant workers, who are exposed to secondhand smoke, and the poor, among whom smoking is more common and difficult to stop? different people have different answers for those questions, reflected in the large variation in smoking regulations among the 50 us states and among countries worldwide. such variation is also seen in laws governing the wearing of seat belts and vehicle helmets, the consequences of which are confined overwhelmingly to the individual making that choice. the fewer the negative public health externalities associated with particular behaviors, the more paternalistic the government regulation of these behaviors. policies are paternalistic when they seek to protect or benefit individuals against their expressed preferences -for example, by legally requiring people to wear motorcycle helmets when they otherwise would not.paternalism comes in 'hard' and 'soft' versions. hard paternalism interferes with choices of individuals who, according to childress et al., are 'competent, adequately informed, and free of controlling influences' and is therefore hard to justify. soft paternalism, however, deals with behaviors of individuals who are considered not competent, not adequately informed, or not free from external control to make that choice. for example, smokers may decide to smoke because they were insufficiently aware of the health consequences, and they may continue to smoke because they have become addicted to nicotine. obesity may be exacerbated by food marketing and the pricing and availability of healthy versus unhealthy foods, among other factors. such situations provide more valid grounds for government intervention, which may take the form of education, incentives (e.g., taxes or subsidies to influence price and therefore consumption), marketing restrictions, and even outright bans, if the benefits of strong regulation are deemed to outweigh the infringement of individual freedom. a 'libertarian' version of paternalism has been proposed by thaler and sunstein that would structure the choice environment such that people could more easily choose to act in their own best interest (e.g., placing healthy foods at eye level in the store), as a way to preserve greater individual freedom.the privacy and confidentiality of individuals are also important factors to consider in public health policymaking. certain conditions and diagnoses -such as hiv/aids or mental illness -may carry social stigma, or impede one's ability to gain employment or acquire health insurance if publicized. the right to privacy and confidentiality must be balanced against the need to collect and disseminate information to achieve valid public health goals, such as infectious disease contact tracing, providing patients with treatment, and screening to prevent transmission of diseases through blood or organ donation, or from mother to child.in the context of limited resources -which is always and everywhere -the question is how should resources be allocated? the distribution of benefits and burdens is another ethical consideration in public health policy. resource allocation and policy application should be fair. extermination of mosquitoes, for example, should not be implemented in some communities while excluding others; minority groups -such as homosexuals -should not be singled out for disease screening. targeting programs and interventions could be justified if supported by empirical evidence, but the costs of targeting should be weighed against the benefits. targeted intervention may be a more efficient way to reach particularly affected groups and may help reduce health inequalities, but it may also come with negative effects. stigma may become attached to groups singled out for disease programs, and the health of the nontargeted groups and individuals may be compromised if they do not receive the relevant health education and do not receive screening because they are not considered at sufficient risk. where possible, a universal, voluntary screening policy should be implemented.the use of sin taxes to discourage consumption of unhealthful products like cigarettes is another instance of a targeted public health policy. the sin tax affects smokers, and redistributes that revenue to the rest of the population. this unequal burden aims to discourage cigarette consumption, which benefits the health of smokers and those subject to their secondhand smoke. however, cigarette taxes may also disproportionately affect lower income and minority individuals, who are more likely to be smokers (at least in the us), which makes the tax regressive in practice. just how regressive may depend on how the revenues would be spent (e.g., funding other tobacco control efforts? or folded into general revenues?). again, public health authorities must balance the benefits against the costs.the distribution of benefits and the allocation of scarce resources are important issues in designing publicly funded healthcare packages. what kind of services should state-funded healthcare packages include? how much emphasis should prevention receive relative to treatment? should resources go toward improving average health, which can be done without special attention to people with special health needs, or should resources be devoted to reducing health inequalities, which implies greater resources to the least healthy to bring them closer to the general population? what should be done about people who have exorbitantly expensive health conditions with little prospect of big improvement?the consequentialist orientation of public health and limits in resources make the balancing of costs and benefits a major concern in public health policymaking. costs are weighed against benefits using methods such as cost-benefit, cost-effectiveness, and cost-utility analyses. cost-benefit analysis translates all benefits into monetary units that account for direct (e.g., medical) and indirect (e.g., productivity) effects; cost-effectiveness analysis shows the cost of each unit of gain in health, as indicated by measures such as years of life gained or deaths averted. cost-utility analysis presents costs associated with a subjective measurement unit that combines preferences for length of life with preferences for quality of life. these kinds of analyses are used in the hopes of maximizing health benefits while minimizing cost. the national institute for health and clinical excellence in the uk, for example, draws on cost-effectiveness analyses to help direct coverage of medicines and treatments under the national health service.the use of such welfare economic assessments in public health policymaking is not without controversy. for instance, the us, despite extremely high healthcare costs, has so far rejected using such measures in health policy. although welfare economic methods offer a way to maximize health value for money in an evidence-based fashion, they have other implications that can be politically and morally difficult to accept. these methods account only for aggregate welfare, without considering the distribution of benefits and burdens. they tolerate significant health inequalities. inequalities may even be exacerbated for the disabled, old, and very sick, the health benefits for whom cost-utility analysis assigns less weight due to their reduced capacity to benefit from health resources. this goes against people's intuition, found in research, to prioritize resources for the sicker and the more disabled even though they are less able to benefit.aggregation problems can result when weighing a small benefit for many against a large -perhaps vital -benefit for a few, yielding counterintuitive assignments of priority to minor procedures such as tooth-capping ahead of a life-saving surgery for ectopic pregnancy, which hadorn reported from the oregon medicaid experiment in which policymakers attempted to determine a medicaid (state-funded healthcare for the poor) health package using cost-utility analysis. welfare economic methods also treat all health conditions as directly comparable, but blindness and loss of limb, for instance, are arguably not comparable to cardiovascular disease or high blood pressure, which further suggests that those methods alone may not be sufficient to direct resource allocation. efforts to include weights (e.g. age or distribution) and other modifications have not satisfactorily solved these problems.resource allocation issues go beyond healthcare. because poverty and social class are strong predictors of health, some ethicists also argue that public health has a role in poverty reduction and improvement of social conditions -such as housing, education, sanitation, and female empowerment -in order to address the structural causes of ill health and to increase people's ability to protect health for themselves and others (e.g., more educated and empowered women are better able to secure nutrition for and prevent diseases in their children).public health-related distributive justice can take on a global dimension. poor countries often have more acute resource allocation problems in that they have little resources to begin with, and what resources they have they must devote significant portions to servicing foreign debts. because poor countries must often reduce social spending in health and sectors with impact on health in order to pay debts or to comply with loan conditions, wealthy creditor countries and international financial institutions such as the world bank and the international monetary fund have been urged on moral grounds to forgive loans and reverse structural adjustment policies that hinder vital public spending, in addition to providing more assistance.broad questions of how resources should be allocated involve conceptions of what justice and equity entail, and what obligations a state has in ensuring the health of its populationswhether it should aim for a basic minimum standard or something higher, within the constraints set by resource availability and the needs of legitimate state duties besides health. on a global level, there are additional questions about the existence and extent of duties to redistribute resources between rich and poor countries. different moral perspectives (e.g., humanitarianism, human rights, communitarianism, and realism) will have different answers for those questions.for specific public health measures, conflicts in ethical concerns will vary on a case-by-case basis, but scholars have presented guidelines to help assess ethicality. one example of such guidelines is the 5 'justificatory conditions' formulated by 10 ethicists in 2002. the satisfaction of these conditions would justify the pursuit of a given public health measure over competing ethical values. these five conditions are effectiveness, proportionality, necessity, least infringement, and public justification. the effectiveness condition requires the public health measure to have a good chance of protecting public health; proportionality demands that the probable health benefits exceed adverse effects. the necessity condition directs policymakers to show 'good faith belief' and plausible reasons for using their proposed approach over a less coercive alternative, that is, to show that a given degree of coercion is indeed necessary. out of all effective, proportional, and necessary options, the option that least infringes other ethical values should be chosen. and policymakers should publicly offer justification for their public health measure as well as explanation and justification for infringement, in a transparent process that truthfully and fully discloses the risks, scientific uncertainty, and moral values to relevant parties and those who will be affected by the policy, whose input should also be solicited.these five criteria are representative of basic elements of public health ethical guidelines, which also tend to advocate respect for individual privacy and confidentiality. a transparent, participatory public process to justify policy proposals and to deliberate the weighing of benefits, costs, and risks is appropriate for developing and evaluating both narrower public health interventions and more general public resource allocation. allowing people to take part in the public health policymaking process can build and maintain trust in public health authorities; it also strengthens agency and autonomy, and gives fuller meaning to informed consent.epidemiologic data on respiratory viral infections are available in many nations, and many factors have been studied in predicting outcome and guiding national policy on management of these infections. respiratory viral infections cause significant morbidity and misery, affecting millions of children annually worldwide.although most infections are short-lived and managed by the general practitioner, some children are seriously affected and require hospitalization [1], [2], [3], [4], [5], [6], [7], [8], [9], [10], [11]. these viruses account for a large workload in many pediatric departments and are responsible for upper respiratory infections, croup, bronchiolitis, and pneumonia.in a study of nearly 100,000 pediatric admissions, the commonest childhood hospital admissions were associated with respiratory viral infections [2]. chiu and colleagues [8] also described that influenza infections were the commonest. assessing disease burden of respiratory disorders in hong kong children with hospital discharge data and linked laboratory data, nelson and colleagues [3] found that a primary diagnosis of a respiratory disorder was common (upper respiratory 30.1%, tonsillitis/pharyngitis 10.5%, croup/laryngitis 2.3%, acute otitis media 2.7%, bronchitis/chest infection 2.6%, bronchiolitis 10.2%, pneumonia 20.9%, influenza 4%, asthma and allergic rhinitis 16.5%). in a recent study, viral and atypical bacterial pathogens in children hospitalized with acute respiratory infections were identified by using a broad-capture, rapid, and sensitive method (multiplex polymerase chain reaction [pcr] assay) to detect 20 different respiratory pathogens from respiratory specimens of 475 children hospitalized over a 12-month period for acute respiratory tract infections, including influenza a subtypes h1, h3, and h5; influenza b; parainfluenza types 1, 2, 3, and 4; rsv groups a and b; adenoviruses; human rhinoviruses; enteroviruses; human metapneumoviruses; human coronaviruses oc43, 229e, and sars-cov; chlamydophila pneumoniae; legionella pneumophila; and mycoplasma pneumoniae [12]. the overall positive rate (47%) was about 2 times higher than previous reports based on conventional methods. influenza a, parainfluenza, and rsv accounted for 51%, and noncultivable viruses accounted for 30% of positive cases. influenza a peaked in march and june. influenza b was detected in january, february, and april. parainfluenza was prevalent throughout the year except from april to june. most rsv infections were found between february and september. adenovirus had multiple peaks, whereas rhinovirus and coronavirus oc43 were detected mainly in winter and early spring. rsv infection was associated with bronchiolitis, and parainfluenza was associated with croup; otherwise the clinical manifestations were largely nonspecific. in general, children infected with influenza a, adenovirus, and mixed viruses had higher temperatures. in view of the increasing concern about unexpected outbreaks of severe viral infections, a rapid multiplex pcr assay is a valuable tool to enhance the management of hospitalized patients, and for the surveillance for viral infections circulating in the community.among hospital admissions, a small percentage of children would require pediatric intensive care unit (picu) support [13], [14], [15], [16]. hon and colleagues [17] reported the clinical pattern and outcome of all children with a laboratory-proven diagnosis of respiratory virus infection admitted to the picu of a teaching hospital. three respiratory virus species, rsv (n = 17), influenza (n = 13), and parainfluenza (n = 12), accounted for 86% of cases. picu admissions due to influenza a were more common than influenza b, whereas parainfluenza type 3 was the commonest subtype of parainfluenza infection. comparing these 3 common viruses, the mean age of children admitted with rsv was lower than with influenza or parainfluenza. preexisting conditions such as prematurity and chronic lung disease were only present in children with rsv infection. these respiratory viruses caused both upper (croup) and lower respiratory tract diseases (bronchiolitis, pneumonia). extrapulmonary presentations were less prevalent and included encephalitis, seizures, cardiac arrest, coexisting diabetes ketoacidosis, and acute lymphoblastic leukemia. one patient with rsv and another with influenza a died during their picu stay. nearly half of these patients required ventilatory support or received systemic corticosteroids, and 88% received initial broad-spectrum antibiotic coverage. approximately 1 in 5 of them had nebulized adrenaline, airway endoscopies, or bacterial coinfections. adenovirus was isolated in 4 patients, and 2 (both with adenovirus type 3) died during the picu stay. similar findings in picu were reported [14], [15]. in particular, influenza infection causes significant morbidity and mortality in young children [15]. immunizations are recommended for all children aged 6 months to 18 years. although severe forms of influenza are rare in children, the disease may be life-threatening and most occur in children with underlying disease [16]. during the 2003 influenza season there was an increased number of children with influenza a infection admitted to an australian picu, and an increased number of deaths compared with previous years [16]. the cost of influenza-related hospitalizations in children is high [13]. in a united states study, high-risk patients had higher mean total costs than low-risk patients, and cardiac, metabolic, and neurologic/neuromuscular diseases and age of 18 to 21 years were independently associated with the highest hospitalization costs [13].the influenza viruses are rna viruses of the family orthomyxoviridae. influenzavirus a, influenzavirus b, and influenzavirus c are the genera that affect humans [18]. influenzavirus a has one species, influenza a virus. the type a viruses are the most virulent human pathogens among the 3 influenza types and cause the most severe disease [19]. the influenza a virus has different serotypes based on the antibody response to these viruses [20]. influenzavirus b also has only one species. the virus almost exclusively infects humans [20], and is less common than influenza a. this virus mutates at a lower rate than type a and consequently is less genetically diverse, with only one influenza b serotype [20], [21]. this reduced rate of antigenic change, combined with its limited host range, ensures that pandemics of influenza b do not occur [18], [22]. influenzavirus c has only one species. influenza c virus causes mild disease in children [23], [24]. indeed, seroepidemiological studies have revealed that influenza c virus is widely distributed globally. nevertheless, because the isolation of this virus is difficult, there have been few reports on its clinical features [23]. severe illness and local epidemics from influenza c have been reported [19], [23], [25]. hay and colleagues [20] summarized the evolution of influenza viruses, which results in recurrent annual epidemics of disease that are caused by progressive antigenic drift of influenza a and b viruses due to the mutability of the rna genome, and infrequent but severe pandemics caused by the emergence of novel influenza a subtypes to which the population has little immunity. the latter characteristic is a consequence of the wide antigenic diversity and peculiar host range of influenza a viruses, and the ability of their segmented rna genomes to undergo frequent genetic reassortment (recombination) during mixed infections. contrasting features of the evolution of recently circulating influenza ah1n1, ah3n2, and b viruses include the rapid drift of ah3n2 viruses as a single lineage, the slow replacement of successive antigenic variants of ah1n1 viruses, and the cocirculation over some 25 years of antigenically and genetically distinct lineages of influenza b viruses. constant monitoring of changes in the circulating viruses is important for maintaining the efficacy of influenza vaccines in combating disease.the diagnosis of influenza based on clinical impression is problematic. in a prospective study, children 13 years old or younger with respiratory infections were examined [26]. at each visit, a nasal swab specimen was obtained for the detection of influenza, and the physician recorded his or her opinion on whether the child had influenza. among 2288 infections, the overall sensitivity of the clinical diagnosis of influenza was 38% and the positive predictive value was 32%.the transmission of influenza can be mathematically modeled to help predicting how the virus will spread in a population [27], [28]. people who contract influenza are most infectious between the second and third days after infection, and infectivity lasts for around 10 days [27]. children are much more infectious than adults, and shed virus from just before they develop symptoms until 2 weeks after infection [27], [29]. for influenza control it is very important to investigate viral shedding and resistant viruses [29]. according to mitamura and colleagues [29], viral loads are decreased after the start of antiviral agents, but resistant viruses are detected in some patients. influenza can be spread by direct transmission when an infected person sneezes mucus into the eyes, nose, or mouth of another person; through people inhaling the aerosols produced by infected people with coughing, sneezing, and spitting; and through hand-to-mouth transmission from contaminated surfaces or direct personal contact [30], [31]. the relative importance of airborne, droplet, and contact transmission of influenza a virus and the efficiency of control measures depends on the inactivation of viruses in different environmental media. weber and colleagues [31] systematically reviewed information on the environmental inactivation of influenza a viruses and modes of transmission. the airborne route is a potentially important transmission pathway for influenza in indoor environments. the importance of droplet transmission has to be reassessed. contact transmission can be limited by fast inactivation of influenza virus on hands, and is more dependent on behavioral parameters than airborne transmission. however, the potentially large inocula deposited in the environment through sneezing and the protective effect of nasal mucus on virus survival could make contact transmission a key transmission mode. in the airborne route, it has been demonstrated that the inhalation of just one inhalable droplet (0.5–5 μm in diameter) might be enough to cause an infection [31]. although a single sneeze releases up to 40,000 droplets [32], most of these droplets are large and will quickly settle out of the air [31]. the influenza virus can also be transmitted by contaminated surfaces. successful control of a viral disease requires knowledge of the different vectors that could promote its transmission among hosts. thomas and colleagues [33] assessed the survival of human influenza viruses on banknotes, given that billions of these notes are exchanged daily worldwide. banknotes were experimentally contaminated with representative influenza virus subtypes at various concentrations, and survival was tested after different time periods. influenza a viruses tested by cell culture survived up to 3 days when they were inoculated at high concentrations. the same inoculum in the presence of respiratory mucus showed a striking increase in survival time (up to 17 days). b/hong kong/335/2001 virus was still infectious after 1 day when it was mixed with respiratory mucus. when nasopharyngeal secretions of naturally infected children were used, influenza virus survived for at least 48 h in one-third of the cases. the investigators concluded that unexpected stability of influenza virus in this nonbiological environment suggests that unusual environmental contamination should be considered in the setting of pandemic preparedness [33]. bean and colleagues investigated the transmission of influenza viruses via hands and environmental surfaces; the survival of laboratory-grown influenza a and influenza b viruses on various surfaces was studied. both influenza a and b viruses survived for 24 to 48 hours on hard, nonporous surfaces such as stainless steel and plastic, but survived for less than 8 to 12 hours on cloth, paper, and tissues. measurable quantities of influenza a virus were transferred from stainless steel surfaces to hands for 24 hours and from tissues to hands for up to 15 minutes. virus survived on hands for up to 5 minutes after transfer from the environmental surfaces. their observations suggest that the transmission of virus from donors who are shedding large amounts could occur for 2 to 8 hours via stainless steel surfaces and for a few minutes via paper tissues. the investigators concluded that the transmission of influenza virus via fomites may be possible under conditions of heavy environmental contamination [34]. however, if the virus is present in mucus, the virus can survive for longer periods [31].new influenza viruses are constantly evolving by mutation or by reassortment [20]. definitive means of prophylaxis is by vaccination. in particular, high-risk patients may develop life-threatening primary viral pneumonia or complications such as bacterial pneumonia [35]. vaccination against influenza with an influenza vaccine is recommended for all children 6 months to 18 years old. due to the high mutation rate of the virus, a particular influenza vaccine usually confers protection for no more than a few years. the world health organization annually predicts which viral strains are most likely to be circulating in the next year, allowing pharmaceutical companies to develop vaccines that will provide the best immunity against these strains [35]. the vaccine is reformulated each season for a few specific flu strains. hence, it is possible to be vaccinated and still get influenza.in an influenza pandemic, the benefit of vaccines and antiviral medications are often constrained by limitations on supplies and effectiveness. nonpharmaceutical public health interventions are vital in curtailing disease spread. good personal health and hygiene habits, such as hand washing, avoiding spitting, and covering the nose and mouth when sneezing or coughing, are reasonably effective in reducing influenza transmission [36]. in particular, hand washing with soap and water or with alcohol-based hand rubs is effective in inactivating influenza viruses [37]. these simple personal hygiene precautions are recommended as the main way of reducing infections during pandemics [36], [37]. surface sanitizing may also help prevent influenza and respiratory viral infections [38]. alcohol is an effective sanitizer against influenza viruses. quaternary ammonium compounds can also be used with alcohol so that the sanitizing effect lasts for longer [39]. a wide variety of active chemical agents (biocides) are found in these sanitizing products, many of which have been used for hundreds of years, including alcohols, phenols, iodine, and chlorine [39]. in hospitals, quaternary ammonium compounds and bleach are used to sanitize rooms that have been occupied by or equipment used for patients with influenza symptoms [39].it is uncertain if reducing public gatherings, by for example closing schools and workplaces, will reduce transmission because people with influenza may just be moved from one area to another; such measures would also be difficult to enforce and are often unpopular [36]. when small numbers of people are infected, isolating the sick might reduce the risk of transmission [36]. influenza infects many animal species, and transfer of viral strains between species can occur. birds are thought to be the principal animal reservoirs of influenza viruses [40]. phylogenetic analysis showed that nucleoprotein genes have evolved into 5 host-specific lineages, including (i) equine/prague/56 (eqpr56), (ii) recent equine strains, (iii) classic swine (h1n1 swine, eg, a/swine/iowa/15/30) and human strains, (iv) gull h13 viruses, and (v) avian strains (including north american, australian, and old world subgroups). the presence of avian and human nucleoproteins in some swine isolates demonstrates the susceptibility of swine to different viral strains, and supports the hypothesis that swine may serve as intermediates for the introduction of avian influenza virus genes into the human virus gene pool [40]. some strains are highly virulent to poultry, and may cause more severe symptoms and significant mortality [41], [42]. an avian-adapted, highly pathogenic strain of h5n1 (called hpai a[h5n1], for “highly pathogenic avian influenza virus of type a of subtype h5n1”) causes h5n1 flu (or “avian influenza”), which is endemic in many bird populations, especially in southeast asia. this asian lineage strain of hpai a (h5n1) is spreading globally. at present, there is no evidence suggesting efficient human-to-human transmission of hpai a (h5n1). nevertheless, h5n1 may mutate or reassort into a strain capable of efficient human-to-human transmission. the exact changes that are required for this to happen are not well understood, and there is a need to find better predictors of both seasonal and potentially pandemic influenza [43].outbreaks in pigs are common and do not cause severe mortality [44]. in 2009 an outbreak of influenza a virus subtype h1n1 occurred in mexico. the virus is being commonly referred to as “swine flu,” but there is no evidence of transmission from pigs to people; instead the virus is spreading from person to person. this strain is a reassortment of several strains of h1n1 that are usually found separately, in humans, birds, and pigs [45].parainfluenza viruses belong to the rna paramyxovirus family, and are a common cause of respiratory infections in children [46], [47], [48]. these viruses are the second most common cause of lower respiratory tract infection in younger children [48]. human parainfluenza viruses (hpivs) are second to rsv as a common cause of lower respiratory tract disease in young children. similar to rsv, hpivs can cause repeated upper respiratory tract infections throughout life. hpivs can also cause serious lower respiratory tract disease with recurrent infection (eg, pneumonia, bronchitis, and bronchiolitis) [48]. each of the 4 hpivs has different clinical and epidemiologic features. the most distinctive clinical feature of hpiv-1 and hpiv-2 is croup (ie, laryngotracheobronchitis); hpiv-1 is the leading cause of croup in children, whereas hpiv-2 is less frequently detected. both hpiv-1 and hpiv-2 can cause other upper and lower respiratory tract illnesses. hpiv-3 is more often associated with bronchiolitis and pneumonia. hpiv-4 is infrequently detected, possibly because it is less likely to cause severe disease. the incubation period for hpivs is generally from 1 to 7 days [49]. the virion is unstable in the environment (surviving a few hours on environmental surfaces), and is readily inactivated with soap and water. hpivs spread from respiratory secretions through close contact with infected persons, or contact with contaminated surfaces or objects. infection can occur when infectious material contacts mucous membranes of the eyes, mouth, or nose, and possibly through the inhalation of droplets generated by a sneeze or cough. hpivs can remain infectious in aerosols for over an hour. hpivs are ubiquitous and infect most people during childhood. the highest rates of serious hpiv illnesses occur among young children. serologic surveys have shown that 90% to 100% of children aged 5 years and older have antibodies to hpiv-3, and about 75% have antibodies to hpiv-1 and -2. the different hpiv serotypes differ in their clinical features and seasonality. hpiv-1 causes biennial outbreaks of croup in the fall (presently in the united states during odd-numbered years). hpiv-2 causes annual or biennial fall outbreaks. hpiv-3 peak activity occurs during the spring and early summer months each year, but the virus can be isolated throughout the year. infection with hpivs can be confirmed either by isolation and identification of the virus in cell culture or by direct detection of the virus in respiratory secretions (usually collected within 1 week of onset of symptoms) using immunofluorescence, enzyme immunoassay, or pcr assay, or by demonstration of a significant increase in specific igg antibodies between appropriately collected paired serum specimens or specific igm antibodies in a single serum specimen. in particular, the multiplex reverse transcription-pcr (rt-pcr) assay can be used as a rapid and sensitive diagnostic method for the viruses [50]. accumulating knowledge on the molecular structure and mechanisms of replication of hpivs has accelerated research on prevention and treatment. several strategies for vaccine development, such as the use of live attenuated, inactivated, recombinant, and subunit vaccines, have been investigated, and it may become possible to prevent hpiv infections in the near future. nevertheless, no vaccine is currently available to protect against infection caused by any of the hpivs [51]. passively acquired maternal antibodies may play a role in protection from hpiv types 1 and 2 in the first few months of life, highlighting the importance of breastfeeding. strict attention to infection-control practices should decrease or prevent spread of infection. frequent hand washing and not sharing items such as cups, glasses, and utensils with an infected person should decrease the spread of virus to others. excluding children with colds or other respiratory illnesses (without fever) who are well enough to attend child care or school settings will probably not decrease the spread of hpivs, because the viruses are often spread in the early stages of illness. in a hospital setting, spread of hpivs can and should be prevented by strict attention to contact precautions, such as hand washing and wearing of protective gowns and gloves.rhinoviruses (rvs) are nonenveloped single-strand rna viruses that belong to the picornaviridae family. the virus is most frequently associated with common cold. rhinovirus plays a significant role in the pathogenesis of otitis media and asthma exacerbations [52], [53]. current evidence indicates that viral, and not bacterial, infections are the most important respiratory illnesses that increase the severity of asthma [52]. the most significant risk factor for the development of preschool childhood wheezing is the occurrence of symptomatic rhinovirus illnesses during infancy, which are clinically and prognostically informative based on their seasonal nature [54]. rvs have proven to be the virus most often found in association with increased asthma severity [52]. with the use of sensitive rt-pcr methods, respiratory viruses are found in approximately 80% of wheezing episodes in children and in approximately one-half of such episodes in adults [53]. in one study, rv rna was detectable in more than 40% of asthmatic children 6 weeks after an acute exacerbation [55]. asthma exacerbations were more severe in patients with persistence of rv rna, suggesting that the severity of acute asthma might be linked to prolonged and possibly more severe rv infections. most cases of rv infection are mild and self-limited despite its high incidence and prevalence. nasopharyngitis, croup, and pneumonia are occasionally caused by rv. rvs can be transmitted by aerosol or direct contact. the primary site of inoculation is the nasal mucosa. the conjunctiva may be involved to a lesser extent. rv attaches to respiratory epithelium and spreads locally. rv does not efficiently replicate at body temperature. the optimal temperature for rv replication is 33 to 35°c. this fact may explain why rv replicates well in the nasal passages and upper tracheobronchial tree, but less well in the lower respiratory tract. the incubation period is approximately 2 to 4 days [49]. rv is shed in large amounts, with as many as 1 million infectious virions present per milliliter of nasal washings, but viremia is uncommon. viral shedding can occur a few days before cold symptoms are recognized by the patient, peaks on days 2 to 7 of the illness, and may last as long as 3 to 4 weeks. a local inflammatory response to the virus in the respiratory tract can lead to nasal discharge, nasal congestion, sneezing, and throat irritation.rv possesses various transmission modes and can infect a huge population at any given time. aerosol transmission is the most common transmission mode for respiratory tract infections. transmission occurs when small airborne particles are inhaled or large droplets are directly touched. direct hand contact with infected secretions or indirect contact with fomites is also important. patients then infect themselves by touching their noses or conjunctivae. highly contagious behavior includes nose blowing, sneezing, and physically transferring infected secretions onto environmental surfaces or paper tissue. contrary to popular belief, behaviors such as kissing, talking, coughing, or even drooling do not contribute highly to the spread of disease. infection rates approximate 50% within the household and range from 0% to 50% within schools, which indicates that transmission requires long-term contact with infected individuals. brief exposures to others in places such as movie theaters, shopping malls, friends' houses, or doctors' offices incur low risk of transmission.pleconaril is an orally bioavailable antiviral drug being developed for the treatment of infections caused by picornaviruses [56]. this drug acts by binding to a hydrophobic pocket in vp1, and stabilizes the protein capsid to such an extent that the virus cannot release its rna genome into the target cell. when tested in volunteers, during the clinical trials this drug caused a significant decrease in mucus secretions and illness-associated symptoms [57]. however, the food and drug administration has not approved this drug for treatment of common cold, and the gastrointestinal side effects are not insignificant.coronavirus is a genus of animal virus belonging to the family coronaviridae, and the virus is enveloped with a positive-sense single-stranded rna genome and a helical symmetry [58]. human coronaviruses are difficult to grow in the laboratory. coronaviruses primarily infect the upper respiratory and gastrointestinal tract of mammals and birds. the most publicized human coronavirus, sars-cov, which causes severe acute respiratory syndrome (sars), has a unique pathogenesis because it causes both upper and lower respiratory tract infections and can also cause gastroenteritis. coronaviruses are believed to cause a significant percentage of all common colds in human adults, primarily in the winter and early spring seasons [49].in 2003, following the outbreak of sars that had begun in the previous year in asia, and secondary cases elsewhere in the world, the world health organization issued a press release stating that a novel coronavirus identified by several laboratories was the causative agent for sars [59]. the virus was officially named the sars coronavirus (sars-cov). the genome of sars-cov is 29,727 nucleotides in length and has 11 open reading frames, and its genome organization is similar to that of other coronaviruses. phylogenetic analyses and sequence comparisons show that sars-cov is not closely related to any of the previously characterized coronaviruses [60] the sars epidemic resulted in more than 8000 infections, about 10% of which resulted in death [61]. following the high-profile publicity of sars outbreaks, there has been a renewed interest in coronaviruses. for many years, scientists knew only about the existence of 2 human coronaviruses (hcov-229e and hcov-oc43). the discovery of sars-cov added another human coronavirus to the list. by the end of 2004, 3 independent research laboratories reported the discovery of a fourth human coronavirus, named nl63, nl, or the new haven coronavirus by the different research groups [62]. screening of clinical specimens from individuals suffering from respiratory illness identified additional hcov-nl63–infected individuals, indicating that the virus was widely spread within the human population [62].adenovirus infections most commonly cause illness of the respiratory system as well as various other illnesses, such as gastroenteritis, conjunctivitis, and cystitis. symptoms caused by adenovirus infection range from the common cold syndrome to pneumonia, croup, and bronchitis [49], [63]. patients with compromised immune systems are especially susceptible to severe complications of adenovirus infection. adenoviruses are transmitted by direct contact, fecal-oral transmission, and occasionally waterborne transmission. some types are capable of establishing persistent asymptomatic infections in tonsils, adenoids, and intestines of infected hosts, and shedding can occur for months or years. adenovirus infections can occur throughout the year but outbreaks of adenovirus-associated respiratory disease are more common in the late winter, spring, and early summer. antigen detection, pcr assay, virus isolation, and serology can be used to identify adenovirus infections. because adenovirus can be excreted for prolonged periods, the presence of virus does not necessarily mean it is associated with disease. most infections are mild and require either no therapy or only symptomatic treatment. because there is no virus-specific therapy, serious adenovirus illness can be managed only by treating symptoms and complications of the infection. deaths are rare but have been reported [17]. strict attention to good infection control practices is effective for stopping nosocomial outbreaks of adenovirus-associated disease, such as epidemic keratoconjunctivitis. maintaining adequate levels of chlorination is necessary for preventing swimming pool associated outbreaks of adenovirus conjunctivitis.human metapneumovirus (hmpv) was first isolated in 2001 in the netherlands by using the rna arbitrarily primed pcr (rap-pcr) technique for identification of unknown viruses growing in cultured cells [64], [65]. serologic studies showed that by the age of 5 years, virtually all children in the netherlands have been exposed to human metapneumovirus, and that the virus has been circulating in humans for at least 50 years [64]. hmpv is a negative single-stranded rna virus of the family paramyxoviridae, and is closely related to the avian metapneumovirus (ampv) subgroup c. hmpv may be the second most common cause (after the rsv) of lower respiratory infection in young children, although infection with hmpv tends to occur in slightly older children and to produce disease that is less severe [63], [66], [67], [68]. coinfection with both viruses can occur, and is generally associated with worse disease [69]. hmpv has been shown to have worldwide circulation, with nearly universal infection by age 5 years. similar to influenza and rsv, activity is greatest during the winter in temperate climates [63], [66], [67]. most of the available data on the clinical manifestations of hmpv infection are from studies of children in whom the virus causes upper respiratory tract infections, bronchiolitis, and pneumonia [63], [66], [67]. reinfections with hmpv occur throughout adult life, and hmpv infection has been documented in 1% to 9% of adults each year using rt-pcr and serology for diagnosis. illness is generally mild in young adults, with serologic evidence of asymptomatic infection in many cases [65]. human metapneumovirus accounts for approximately 10% of respiratory tract infections that are not related to previously known causative agents [70]. the virus seems to be distributed worldwide and to have a seasonal distribution, with its incidence comparable to that of the influenza viruses during winter [63], [64], [67], [71]. serologic studies have shown that by the age of 5 years virtually all children have been exposed to the virus, and reinfections are common. human metapneumovirus usually causes mild respiratory tract infection, although small children and immunocompromised individuals are at risk of severe disease and hospitalization [64]. the identification of hmpv has predominantly relied on rt-pcr technology to amplify directly from rna extracted from respiratory specimens. treatment is symptomatic. no effective treatment or vaccine for hmpv is currently available, but ribavirin has shown effectiveness in an animal model [70], [72].the symptoms of common cold or upper respiratory tract infection resemble symptoms of influenza disease except that they are usually milder. symptoms of influenza can start abruptly 1 to 2 days after infection [73]. usually the first symptoms are chills or a chilly sensation, and fever with body temperatures ranging from 38 to 39°c [74], [75]. suzuki and colleagues [74] studied the natural course of fever during influenza virus infection in children, and found that fever was most prominent in a/h3n2 and young children. secondary fever was observed frequently at 72 to 132 hours in all types. the duration of fever was associated negatively with the age of the child and positively with the maximal temperature [74]. symptoms of influenza may also include aches, especially joints and throat, extreme coldness, fatigue, headache, irritated watering eyes, and reddened eyes, face, mouth, throat, and nose [73]. it is difficult to distinguish between the common cold and influenza in the early stages of these infections [73], [75], but flu can be identified by a high fever with a sudden onset and extreme fatigue [75]. in the subtropics, influenza is an important cause of hospitalization among children, with rates exceeding those reported for temperate regions [8] and influenza-related hospitalizations among children in hong kong [7]. the influenza viruses are significant human respiratory pathogens that cause both seasonal, endemic infections and periodic, unpredictable pandemics. the worst pandemic on record, in 1918, killed approximately 50 million people worldwide. it is striking that the spectrum of pathologic changes described in the 1918 influenza pandemic is not significantly different from the histopathology observed in other less lethal pandemics or even in deaths occurring during seasonal influenza outbreaks [19]. coronaviruses, parainfluenza, and rsv are important viruses that can cause the clinical syndrome of common colds. other viruses such as adenoviruses and influenza viruses can cause common colds, but are more likely to cause acute nasopharyngitis and more severe respiratory infections.several studies demonstrate the incidence of the common cold to be highest in preschool and elementary school-aged children. an average of 3 to 8 colds per year is observed in this age group, with an even higher incidence in children who attend daycare centers. because of the numerous viral agents involved and the many serotypes of several viruses (especially rv), it is not unusual for younger children to have new colds each month during the winter season. adults and adolescents typically have 2 to 4 colds per year. a seasonal increase in incidence during the winter months is observed worldwide. the most common manifestation of rv, the common cold, is mild and self-limited. common colds, by definition, do not have objective evidence of pharyngeal irritation, and rv is an uncommon cause of acute nasopharyngitis. however, severe respiratory disease, including bronchiolitis, asthma exacerbations, and pneumonia can occur in infants and young children [76]. indeed, rv may be associated with more severe lower respiratory tract infection in children than previously reported, particularly in the noninfluenza, rsv season [76]. because antibodies to viral serotypes develop over time, the highest incidence is found in infants and young children. in addition, young children are more likely to have the frequent, close, personal contact necessary to transmit rhinovirus.children with common cold are usually afebrile, although temperatures of 38 to 39°c may occur in younger children. profuse nasal discharge can be clear and watery or mucopurulent. purulent secretions are common after the first few days of illness, and do not imply bacterial sinusitis unless symptoms and signs of an upper respiratory infection persist for more than 10 days without appreciable improvement [77]. despite sore throat, the pharynx has a normal appearance, without any erythema, exudate, or ulceration. infection occurs rapidly, with the virus adhering to surface receptors within 15 minutes of entering the respiratory tract. rvs preferentially grow at 32°c as opposed to the body temperature of 37°c, and hence infect mainly the upper respiratory tract.influenza can cause pneumonia, which can be fatal particularly for the young and the elderly. although it is often confused with other influenza-like viral infections such as the common cold, influenza is generally a more severe disease [73]. influenza is typically transmitted through airborne aerosols created by coughing or sneezing. infections also occur through contact with infected body fluids or with contaminated surfaces. influenza viruses can be inactivated by sunlight, disinfectants, and detergents [78].vaccinations against influenza are available [79], [80]. the most common human vaccine is the trivalent influenza vaccine (tiv) that contains purified and inactivated material from 3 viral strains. this vaccine typically includes material from 2 influenza a virus subtypes and 1 influenza b virus strain. the tiv carries no risk of transmitting the disease, and it has very low reactivity. a vaccine formulated for 1 year may be ineffective in the following year, because the influenza virus evolves rapidly and new strains quickly replace the older ones. most people will recover completely in about 1 to 2 weeks, but some will develop life-threatening complications. young children, people with chronic medical conditions, and pregnant women are at risk for complications from influenza [81], [82]. guillain-barré syndrome can be a rare side effect of influenza vaccines, with an incidence of about 1 case per million vaccinations [83]. adverse event reporting rates have been reasonably constant over time, and no new safety concerns emerged after review of 15 years of postlicensure surveillance data [83].patients with flu are advised to get plenty of rest, drink plenty of liquids, avoid using alcohol and tobacco and, if necessary, take medications such as paracetamol (acetaminophen) to relieve the fever and muscle aches associated with the flu. children and teenagers with flu symptoms (particularly fever) should avoid taking aspirin during an influenza infection (especially influenza type b), because of the risk of reye syndrome [84]. antibiotics have no effect on the infection; unless prescribed for secondary infections such as bacterial pneumonia. the 2 classes of antiviral drugs used against influenza are neuraminidase inhibitors and m2 protein inhibitors (adamantane derivatives) [85]. neuraminidase inhibitors are currently preferred for flu virus infections because they are less toxic and more effective [35]. antiviral drugs such as oseltamivir (trade name tamiflu) and zanamivir (trade name relenza) are neuraminidase inhibitors that are designed to halt the spread of the virus in the body [86]. these drugs are often effective against both influenza a and b [87]. the cochrane collaboration reviewed these drugs and concluded that they reduce symptoms and complications [88]. all the aforementioned antiviral drugs shorten the course of influenza disease by approximately 1 day and relieve symptoms to some extent [89]. different strains of influenza viruses have differing degrees of resistance against these antivirals, and it is impossible to predict what degree of resistance a future pandemic strain might have [90]. the increase in influenza vaccinations among young children, together with the routine therapeutic use of neuraminidase inhibitors, has led to a decrease in the influenza-associated mortality rate [91]. to determine the interventions most likely to curtail an influenza pandemic, carrat and colleagues [27] and grassly and colleagues [28] mathematically modeled the transmission of influenza to predict how the virus will spread in a population. these results support the stockpiling of antiviral drugs and accelerated vaccine development. nevertheless, neuraminidase inhibitors should not be used in routine seasonal influenza control. in a serious epidemic or pandemic, neuraminidase inhibitors should be used with other public health measures. [88].the most common syndrome that often affects infants and children younger than 6 years is laryngotracheobronchitis [92]. the condition is commonly known as croup due to the characteristic croupy cough associated with infection and inflammatory of the subglottic region [92]. croup is characterized by a barking cough, varying degrees of inspiratory stridor, and hoarseness as a result of laryngeal or tracheal obstruction [93]. the condition may be mild, moderate, or severe, and even fatal. croup is most often caused by parainfluenza virus, with types 1 and 2 responsible for the majority of cases [92], [93]. however, other viral infections can also cause it [17]. croup is most common in the fall and winter but can occur year-round, with a slight predilection for males [92]. the respiratory distress is caused by an inflammatory response to the infection rather than by the infection itself. respiratory distress usually occurs in young children as their airways are smaller and differently shaped to those of adults, making them more susceptible. the treatment of croup depends on the severity of symptoms. it is important to maintain a calm atmosphere for the parents and child. most children can be managed effectively at home. antipyretics should be given if the child is febrile. adequate hydration should be maintained. corticosteroids are the mainstay of therapy [93]. corticosteroids have potent vasoconstrictive and anti-inflammatory properties, and can reduce airway inflammation, vascular permeability, and mucosal edema [93]. good evidence now exists to support the use of corticosteroid in the management of severe, moderate, or even mild croup [94]. dexamethasone is often used due to its prolonged physiologic effects. the severe form requires emergency medical treatment in the intensive care unit. nebulized epinephrine should be considered for children with moderate to severe croup, and should be used with caution in children who have tachycardia or ventricular outlet obstruction. racemic epinephrine works by stimulation of the α-adrenergic receptors in the airway with resultant mucosal vasoconstriction and decreased subglottic edema, and by stimulation of the β-adrenergic receptors with resultant relaxation of the bronchial smooth muscle. randomized studies comparing racemic epinephrine with either placebo or no treatment have shown significant improvements in croup scores in the treated patients over controls [95]. the simultaneous use of corticosteroid helps to reduce the rebound phenomenon associated with the use of epinephrine and obviates the need for hospitalization [93]. children who have moderate or severe croup with blood oxygen saturation of less than 92% should receive oxygen. antibiotics have no value. children with moderate to severe croup are hospitalized for observation. intubation is rarely needed [17].bronchitis is a common disease in the adult population but is less frequently described in children. bronchitis is usually due to common viral infections, but can occasionally be complicated by secondary bacterial infections. jartti and colleagues [96] detected metapneumovirus by pcr in 10 (8%) of 132 consecutive children admitted to turku hospital, finland, for acute expiratory wheezing (median age 7 months, range 4–25 months). the mean duration of hospital stay was 2.5 days (standard deviation 1.6) and mean duration of respiratory symptoms was 19 days. the white blood cell count, c-reactive protein, and rantes (regulated on activation, normal t-expressed and secreted cytokine) concentrations in nasal secretion remained low, whereas interleukin-8 concentrations in nasal secretion were high. human metapneumovirus is a clinically important causative agent of acute wheezing in young children [96]. smuts and colleagues [97] evaluated the role of the novel respiratory viruses, such as human metapneumovirus (hmpv), human coronavirus nl63 (hcov nl63), and human bocavirus (hbov) in wheezing illness in children. consecutive children presenting with acute wheezing to a pediatric hospital from may 2004 to november 2005 were prospectively studied. a nasal swab was taken for rt-pcr and pcr for hmpv, hcov nl63, and hbov; when positive, the genes were sequenced. shell vial culture for rsv, influenza a and b viruses, adenovirus, and parainfluenza viruses 1, 2, and 3 was performed on every fifth sample. two hundred and forty-two nasal swabs were collected from 238 children (median age 12.4 months). a novel respiratory virus was found in 44 of 242 (18.2%). hmpv, hbov, and hcov nl63 was found in 20 (8.3%), 18 (7.4%), and 6 (2.4%) of samples, respectively. fifteen of 59 (25%) samples were positive for other respiratory viruses. viral coinfections occurred in 6 of 242 (2.5%). viruses are an important cause of wheezing in preschool children; hmpv, hcov nl63, and hbov are less common than the usual respiratory pathogens [97].the term usually refers to acute viral bronchiolitis of infancy. in temperate climates, bronchiolitis is most frequently seen during winter and early spring. in tropical countries, the disease occurs more frequently during the rainy season [98]. bronchiolitis is most commonly caused by rsv (or human pneumovirus) [1], [4]. other common respiratory viruses that may also cause the same clinical entity include metapneumovirus, influenza, parainfluenza, coronavirus, adenovirus, and rhinovirus [66]. coryza, mild cough, fever, lethargy, and decreased appetite are common at the onset of illness; this then progresses to noisy, raspy breathing and wheezy cough. physical examination is characterized by prolonged expiratory phase, wheezing, tachypnea, dyspnea, intercostal retractions, hyperresonance on chest percussion, and tachycardia [98]. the diagnosis is usually made by clinical examination in ambulatory settings. chest radiography is not routinely indicated, but may sometimes be useful to exclude pneumonia. testing for specific viral cause such as rsv by nasopharyngeal aspirate can be performed, but the testing usually has little effect on management. identification of rsv-positive patients can be helpful for disease surveillance, patient cohorts in hospital wards to prevent cross-infection, and reducing the need for other unnecessary diagnostic procedures.respiratory complications are common in infants with severe rsv bronchiolitis, which include apnea and hypoxemia [98]. children with rsv bronchiolitis in early life are at increased risk of developing asthma later in childhood, although the association is lost by 13 years of age [99], [100].there is no effective specific treatment for bronchiolitis. therapy is primarily supportive. frequent small feeds are encouraged to maintain hydration as evidenced by good urine output, and sometimes oxygen may be required to maintain blood oxygen levels. suction of the nasopharynx to remove excessive secretions is often performed to maintain a clear airway. in severe cases, nasogastric tube feeding or intravenous fluids are required. in extreme cases, mechanical ventilation might be necessary. kellner and colleagues [101], [102] performed a meta-analysis of bronchodilator therapy in infants with bronchiolitis, and reported that bronchodilators produced a modest short-term improvement in clinical scores. the rate and duration of hospitalization, however, were not affected by bronchodilator therapy. the investigators concluded that routine use of bronchodilators in those who wheeze for the first time is not justified, given the modest short-term clinical improvement along with the high cost of the medication. in theory, epinephrine has an added advantage over β2-adrenergic selective bronchodilators because its α-adrenergic component may diminish catarrhal secretions and mucosal edema of the airway. a meta-analysis of 14 randomized, controlled trials that included inhaled or systemic epinephrine as one of the bronchodilators showed that epinephrine may be favorable to salbutamol and placebo among outpatients with bronchiolitis [103]. however, there is insufficient evidence to support its use for the treatment of bronchiolitis among inpatients. because some children will respond to bronchodilators, if bronchodilators are to be tried, careful clinical evaluation of the response to the first few doses must be made in order for a decision to be made about continuance or discontinuance of the medication. a recent multicenter, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial that included 800 infants with bronchiolitis seen in the emergency department suggests that combined therapy with dexamethasone and epinephrine may significantly reduce the rate of hospital admission [104]. the use of ribavirin in treating rsv infection is controversial. ribavirin is used sometimes for infants with preexisting lung, heart, or immune disease [105], [106], [107], [108]. the american academy of pediatrics has recommended that decisions about ribavirin administration should be made based on the particular clinical circumstances and physicians' experience [109]. antibiotics are usually not indicated in uncomplicated bronchiolitis [110], [111]. nevertheless, thorburn and colleagues [112] found that up to 40% of children with severe rsv bronchiolitis requiring admission to the picu were infected with bacteria in their lower airways and were at increased risk for bacterial pneumonia. in general, prevention of bronchiolitis relies on measures to reduce the spread of the viruses that cause respiratory infections, such as hand washing and avoiding exposure to those symptomatic with respiratory infections.premature infants, and others with certain major cardiac and respiratory disorders, may benefit from passive immunization with palivizumab (a monoclonal antibody against rsv). palivizumab is administered intramuscularly at a dosage of 15 mg/kg monthly, beginning just before the onset of the rsv season for a total of 5 months, as recommended by the american academy of pediatrics for prophylaxis in high-risk children [109], [113]. the use of palivizumab in asian cities with no winter or definite seasonality is controversial.risk factors for bronchiolitis deaths in the united states have been described, and multiple cause-of-death and linked birth/infant death data for 1996 through 1998 were used to examine bronchiolitis-related infant deaths [114]. risk factors were assessed by comparing infants who died with bronchiolitis and surviving infants. during 1996 through 1998 there were 229 bronchiolitis-related infant deaths, resulting in an average annual infant mortality rate of 2.0 per 100,000 live births. the majority (55%) of infant deaths occurred among infants younger than 3 months. the bronchiolitis mortality rate was highest among infants weighing less than 1500 g at birth (very low birth weight; vlbw) as compared with infants weighing 1500 to 2499 g (low birth weight; lbw) and 2500 g or heavier at birth (29.8, 6.4, and 1.3 per 100 000 live births, respectively). vlbw and lbw infants remained at an increased risk of dying of bronchiolitis after controlling for other risk factors. other risk factors included increasing birth order, low 5-minute apgar score, young maternal age, unmarried mother, and tobacco use during pregnancy. the investigators concluded that vlbw and lbw infants are at increased risk of dying of bronchiolitis [114].leader and colleagues [115] provide current estimates of the incidence, associated risk factors, and costs of severe rsv infections among infants in the united states, defined as emergency department visits, hospitalization, and death. between 1997 and 2000, there were 718,008 emergency department visits by infants with lower respiratory infection diagnoses during the rsv season (22.8/1000), and 29% were admitted. costs of emergency department visits were approximately us$202 million. rsv bronchiolitis was the leading cause of infant hospitalization annually. total hospital charges for rsv-coded primary diagnoses during the 4 years were more than $2.6 billion. an estimated 390 rsv-associated postneonatal deaths occurred in 1999. low birth weight and prematurity significantly increased rsv-associated mortality rates. the investigators concluded that rsv is a major cause of infant morbidity and mortality. severe rsv is highest among infants of black mothers and medicaid-insured infants. prematurity and low birth weight significantly increase rsv mortality rates.admission criteria for bronchiolitis can be derived based on the severity of the disease [116]. a clinical score is useful in the evaluation and grading of bronchiolitis severity [117]. clinical deterioration requiring picu admission is an uncommon occurrence in previously healthy infants admitted to a general pediatric inpatient unit with rsv infection. extreme tachypnea and hypoxemia are both associated with subsequent deterioration; however, only a small proportion of patients who clinically deteriorate present in this way. the clinical usefulness of these parameters, therefore, is limited [118]. adequate oxygen saturations should be maintained to avoid hypoxia [119]. chest physiotherapy using vibration and percussion techniques does not reduce length of hospital stay, oxygen requirements, or improve the severity clinical score in infants with acute bronchiolitis [120], [121]. the course of rsv disease is variable. in an east denmark study, the clinical course was milder than reported elsewhere, possibly as a result of the low prevalence of bronchopulmonary dysplasia in denmark [5]. however, rsv constitutes a considerable burden to the danish pediatric health care system, and the investigators suggest that prophylaxis against rsv is desirable [5].severe forms of respiratory viral infections are rare in children but may lead to life-threatening conditions, such as severe pneumonia necessitating picu admission and occasionally resulting in death [17], [122]. community-acquired pneumonia (cap) is a significant cause of childhood morbidity and mortality worldwide. viral etiology is most common in young children [68], [122], [123], [124], [125], [126], [127], [128], [129]. in cap, viral coinfection (especially rsv, human bocavirus, rhinovirus, human metapneumovirus, and parainfluenza viruses) ranges between 28.2% and 68.8%. children with viral coinfection more frequently require hospital admission than those with single viral infection. suffice to say, viral coinfections are frequent in children younger than 3 years with cap, and can be a poor prognostic factor [130]. although a possible microbial cause is identified in less than half of the patients, clinical findings and results of blood cultures, chest radiographs, and white blood cell and differential counts usually do not distinguish patients with a defined cause from those without a known cause for pneumonia [124], [128], [129], [131], [132]. children with typical bacterial or mixed bacterial/viral infections have the greatest inflammation and disease severity. michelow and colleagues [133] evaluated consecutive immunocompetent children hospitalized with radiographically confirmed lower respiratory infections from january 1999 through march 2000. one hundred and fifty-four hospitalized children with lower respiratory infections were enrolled. median age was 33 months (range: 2 months to 17 years). a pathogen was identified in 79% of children. typical respiratory bacteria were identified in 60% (of which 73% were streptococcus pneumoniae), viruses in 45%, mycoplasma pneumoniae in 14%, chlamydia pneumoniae in 9%, and mixed bacterial/viral infections in 23%. multivariate logistic-regression analyses revealed that high temperature (≥38.4°c) within 72 hours after admission and the presence of pleural effusion were significantly associated with bacterial pneumonia [133].oxygen therapy is life-saving and should be given when oxygen saturation is less than 92% [127]. antimicrobials are often used to cover for possible coinfections with bacteria [124], [128], [134], [135]. mechanical ventilation is often required for respiratory failure [17], [125]. death is uncommon [17], [125], [136].hand hygiene through washing with soap and water or alcohol-based hand rub is highly effective in reducing influenza a virus on human hands [37]. appropriate hand hygiene may be an important public health initiative to reduce pandemic and influenza transmission. influenza immunization can be given to children as young as 6 months. there is no vaccine available for parainfluenza, adenovirus, rhinovirus, or metapneumovirus. rsv prophylaxis is available but expensive.one of the clinical problems facing pediatric intensivists is the differentiation between viral and bacterial infections when an acutely ill child, with or without respiratory manifestations, is admitted. an empirical course of antibiotics is often used in the initial management to avoid missing any treatable bacterial coinfections [17]. a low threshold for negative-pressure reverse isolation should be considered whenever possible so that other critically ill patients are not put at risk. rapid diagnosis of respiratory viral infections in children is important, as prompt diagnosis results in significantly reduced hospital stays, antibiotic use, and laboratory use [137].upper airway obstruction in croup is usually caused by the parainfluenza virus. however, influenza may be more common than parainfluenza in causing croup in the picu [17]. in lower respiratory disease such as bronchiolitis and pneumonia, radiographic abnormalities are often present, rendering differentiation from bacterial infections and coinfections difficult [10]. sometimes parenchymal involvement as evidenced by abnormal radiography is more common with rsv than influenza infection [17]. as it is often difficult to delineate viral from bacterial infection in the acute setting, initial broad-spectrum antibiotics are used in the majority of patients to cover for pneumonia and sepsis [138], [139]. antibiotics can be discontinued when viral studies are positive and the patients have stabilized.in one study, the mortality potentially attributable to the 4 respiratory viruses (rsv, influenza, parainfluenza, and adenovirus) was low during the picu stay [17]. adenovirus was notorious in its preponderance in causing severe diseases like encephalitis, bronchiolitis obliterans, and myocarditis. in the series of hon and colleagues [17], 2 of the 4 patients with adenovirus died during their picu stay. three of the patients had the serotype 3, which is known to be able to cause severe respiratory infection [140]. bacterial coinfections were often present and included various gram-positive and gram-negative bacteria cultured in the tracheal aspirate, urine, or blood [17]. the most common organism was streptococcus pneumoniae.extrapulmonary manifestations of viral infection are an important cause of morbidity, and range from seizures to cardiac arrest [141], [142], [143].age is an important demographic factor. among the 3 respiratory viruses, rsv infections in particular can cause significant morbidity and mortality in young children. chronic lung disease and prematurity have been found to be associated with infection with the rsv virus [144], [145], [146], [147].monthly intramuscular injection of palivizumab has been advocated in patients vulnerable to rsv infections [5], [148], [149]. universal influenza vaccination of children older than 6 months may help prevent infection by influenza, and is now recommended in the united states [11], [15].respiratory viral infections leading to picu admissions may lead to significant morbidity and mortality [17]. presentation can be pulmonary and extrapulmonary. prompt diagnosis will ensure that the appropriate treatment (such as corticosteroid for croup) can be instituted as soon as possible. vaccination of the high-risk groups may help to prevent infection and icu admission.the causes of severe childhood respiratory virus infections are heterogeneous, and the infections may at time be life-threatening. many of these respiratory viral infections share similar symptomatology, and occasionally cause outbreaks and severe respiratory disease. the misleading abbreviation “sars” was coined in 2003 [150]. the diagnosis of severe acute respiratory syndrome was based on a clinical definition in that patients who had fever, respiratory symptoms (not necessarily severe), and with an epidemiologic link were considered to have sars. patients clinically diagnosed to have sars may or may not have sars-cov [150], [151]. overdiagnosis may lead to stigmatization and inconvenience in the workplace or at school. in contrast, underdiagnosing the condition may lead to the disease being unrecognized and the potential for the pathogen to spread in the community. imprecise definition therefore carries serious public health consequences. in fact, the clinical features of many patients with sars were neither “severe” nor “respiratory” in nature [150]. many new surveillance guidelines and confusing abbreviations appeared. a new abbreviation “ili” was introduced to mean influenza-like illness. the definitions for many of these abbreviations are nearly identical, if not the same as the clinical definition of sars (ie, contact + fever + respiratory symptomatology ± other symptoms); this can cause unnecessary confusion. indeed, the only difference between ili, influenza, avian flu, swine flu, and sars is the virus. applying the initial clinical definition of sars to avian or swine influenza, these patients all had sars, because their symptoms and epidemiologic links were just like sars [150], [152]. however, the term sars is no longer used unless sars-cov is isolated from the patient, regardless of whether “severe respiratory” symptoms and epidemiologic links are present. outbreaks of severe acute respiratory infections with epidemiologic links will occur from time to time. although sars-cov is out and may never come back, the sars concept of index surveillance, and epidemiologic and prognostication studies for severe respiratory viral infections is here to stay. sars is very much alive among us [150], [152].covid-19: lessons from the italian reproductive medical experience by the time you're reading this, much will have transpired. that's the story with the exponential spread of an infection across the globe: it all happens so fast.on december 31, 2019, the health commission of hubei province, people's republic of china, announced a cluster of unexplained cases of pneumonia. the virus was isolated, its genome was sequenced, and it was identified as the 2019 novel coronavirus (2019-ncov). on february 11, 2020, the international committee on taxonomy of viruses defined the virus as ''acute severe respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2'' (sars-cov-2) with the associated respiratory disease covid-19 (co-rona vi-rus d-isease 2019). the covid-19 pandemic brought unique challenges to the global healthcare community, with rapid escalation of the number of affected individuals and associated mortality over a handful of weeks. clinical and public health guidance has tried to minimize the potential health impact using the best available scientific advice and evidence to inform decision making to help contain the virus, delay its spread, and mitigate its effect on those infected with it. countries have adopted their own timing of risk-reduction strategies reflecting their differential risk assessments, with italy having the largest number of affected cases outside of china. the impact and reorganization of clinical services that have been required by italy will likely be faced by those around the globe in the weeks ahead given the anticipated trajectory of covid-19.the covid-19 epidemic in italy started on january 30, when two tourists tested positive. an outbreak was subsequently detected in a few patients in lombardy on february 21, which quickly became 60 patients the next day. as of march 17, 2020, there were 31,506 positive cases from the 148,657 swabs tested, with 2,941 people who have fully recovered since testing positive and 2,503 who died. among the measures to contain the infection, as early as february, 11 municipalities had been quarantined. nobody could enter and leave those territories. following the expansion of the areas with confirmed infection, the area of limitation of human activities was extended to various northern regions including lombardy, emilia, and veneto, and from march 9, the entire country with 60 million citizens was placed in lockdown.the societal and economic impact of these changes at this time is too large to assess. all schools are closed requiring childcare to be provided at home, social and professional meetings are cancelled, public spaces closed, the mobility of people is restricted to only attend work or for health reasons, and many businesses are closed, including all restaurants and entertainment venues. these measures are combined with existing recommendations from the world health organisation for people to wash their hands frequently; avoid touching their eyes, nose, and mouth; by covering the mouth and nose with a tissue when sneezing or coughing and disposing of the tissue immediately and washing hands; keeping an interpersonal distance of at least one meter; avoiding gatherings; and using a surgical mask in the presence of people suspected of being sick. the primary aim of these measures is to flatten the growth curve of new cases, thereby reducing the number of people who will simultaneously require intensive care as well as the overall mortality. as of march 11, 2020, 1,028 of the approximately 5,200 intensive care beds within italy were already occupied with covid-19 patients (1) . parallel to these governmental directives, the ministry of health implemented extensive reorganization of national healthcare services to facilitate the treatment of the large numbers of patients who will need intensive support therapy.professional bodies including the american college of obstetrics and gynecology (acog) (2) and the british royal college of obstetricians & gynaecologists (rcog) (3) have provided specific guidance for pregnant women based on very limited data and experience with prior coronaviruses including sars-cov and mers-cov: compared with the general population, pregnant women may be at higher risk of severe illness, morbidity, or mortality, and adverse perinatal outcomes including preterm birth (4, 5) . there is little historical information available for women considering pregnancy or embarking on assisted conception. given the modelling of the pandemic, including the time to peak and subsequent tail, considerable delays in conception to substantially mitigate risk may be required, which will inevitably impact overall success rates.reproductive medicine units in italy that continue to offer clinical treatments necessitate specific changes to their organization. these include strict adherence to the generic health precautions with clearly visible signs within the clinics at the entrance and throughout the clinics, including private spaces, to remind patients of these general measures. exposure by scheduled in-person meetings may be reduced by cancelling attendance, and all staff are to consider personal risk when commuting. all non-essential visits by external businesses or academic collaborators are to be avoided and replaced by telecommunications and online platforms. patient informational events may be held via webinars. outpatient consultations can be moved to a telemedicine model where feasible, with strict adherence to scheduled appointments for ultrasounds and lab tests to reduce waiting room exposure, coupled with a request to patients to attend alone and to wait outside in their own vehicle until the scheduled appointment to reduce overall risk of transmission. working agendas are altered to reduce the sharing of common spaces by staff, including the creation of shift teams to reduce the risk that the whole clinic staff is affected and required to self-isolate. managerial, administrative, and it staff are similarly to be moved to a rotational schedule to reduce the risk of all being infected simultaneously. access to common areas of the clinic is strictly limited, with deliveries made outside at specific entrances. all staff must be trained in the processes and protocols for dealing with covid-19 cases and the use of general precautions and certified particulate filtering face masks to reduce transmission. should the team members themselves present with respiratory symptoms, the italian authorities have mandated that, if accompanied by a fever, they are required to abstain from work.for patients, it is very useful to develop a written multi-lingual summary of the scientific evidence of pregnancy with the coronavirus, including frequently asked questions which align with international guidance and are under daily review that is available both online and within the clinics. patients are screened by telephone prior to attendance and instructed not to come to the clinic and to postpone their treatment if they are suspected to have an acute respiratory infection with at least one of the following symptoms: fever, cough, dyspnea; or they were, in the previous 14 days, in a country with community transmission of the virus according to the cdc; or in close contact with a confirmed case of covid-19; or have been in a hospital where covid-19 patients were hospitalized. websites must be updated with the most recent available information and links. when entering the clinic, patients are again interviewed regarding the presence of respiratory symptoms or at-risk behavior.should medical staff suspect that a patient has covid-19, a strict protocol is invoked. the healthcare staff isolate the patient in a designated insulated room and wear the following protective health equipment: a waterproof gown, viral particulate-filtering face mask, eye protection, and double gloves; the patient is also provided with a face mask. decisions are made based on the stage of medically assisted reproduction therapy. if the patient is positive during ovarian stimulation, the optimal solution is to cancel the cycle. if the patient has already had oocyte retrieval, then cryostorage of oocytes or embryos will be undertaken with avoidance of embryo transfer until the patient is proven disease-free due to the risks of further disease deterioration, particularly during pregnancy. on completion of the consultation and the explanation that treatment will be deferred, the patient is transported outside the clinic using a predetermined route to minimize the possible exposure of health personnel, other patients, and visitors. all rooms and areas are then carefully sanitized using an alcohol-based disinfectant containing r 75% alcohol or 5% chlorine. after use, the disposable protective devices are carefully removed, folded in on themselves with hand sanitization with alcohol gel at each stage of removal before final disposal in an appropriate container for infected waste. the patient is then directed to the appropriate regional or national center.for patients receiving ovarian stimulation, mitigation of the risk of ovarian hyperstimulation syndrome is grave, as covid-19 infection in a woman experiencing the hypovolemic and electrolyte imbalance typically associated with the syndrome may lead to an amplified risk of lung and kidney complications. consequently the use of mild stimulation, gnrh antagonist control of the luteinizing hormone (lh) surge, gnrh agonist triggering, and single embryo transfer or freeze-all, are the first choice in this period for women entering in vitro fertilization.the italian authorities have mandated that even in the absence of evidence of transmission of the virus within reproductive cells, all donors should be interviewed regarding the presence of respiratory symptoms and for recent travel to high-risk areas. for donors who have returned from an area at risk, a 2-week suspension is required, and in the case of respiratory symptoms, a 2-week suspension from the end of symptoms is necessitated, as compared to the 28-day period recommended by the joint united kingdom blood transfusion and tissue transplantation services professional advisory committee (jpac). for homologous fertility treatments, there are no specific regulatory restrictions except for patients with symptoms in progress suggestive for covid-19 with separate closed cryostorage systems. when importing gametes from abroad, an additional declaration is required from the sending center indicating that the risks of sars-cov-2 infection for the specific donor have been assessed. the declaration is necessary only for new donations and not for material cryopreserved prior to the sars-cov-2 outbreak. patients are advised not to pursue fertility tourism due to the strict travel bans in place.we have described how italy was consumed by the covid-19 pandemic and how we adapted our reproductive medical system to its challenges. it's a moving target, and our processes will continue to adjust. other countries will face this threat, and we hope that others can learn from our experience. on march 15, 2020, the european society of human reproduction and embryology (eshre) published a statement recommending a precautionary approach that all fertility patients considering or planning treatment, even if they do not meet the diagnostic criteria for covid-19 infection, should avoid becoming pregnant at this time. for those patients already having treatment, it is suggested to consider deferring pregnancy with oocyte or embryo freezing for later embryo transfer.on march 17, 2020, the american society for reproductive medicine (asrm) issued guidance for patient and clinical management during the coronavirus (covid-19) pandemic. key recommendations were to: 1) suspend initiation of new treatment cycles, including ovulation induction, intrauterine inseminations (iuis), in vitro fertilization (ivf) including retrievals and frozen embryo transfers, as well as non-urgent gamete cryopreservation; 2) strongly consider cancellation of all embryo transfers whether fresh or frozen; 3) continue to care for patients who are currently ''in-cycle'' or who require urgent stimulation and cryopreservation; 4) suspend elective surgeries and non-urgent diagnostic procedures; and 5) minimize in-person interactions and increase utilization of telehealth. recognizing that the situation is highly fluid, this guidance would be revisited periodically as the pandemic evolves.covid-19 is an unprecedented challenge to our healthcare systems. italy was the first in line after china to experience the explosion in infections from this pandemic. as we write this, the united states is close behind with an infection incidence mirroring that of italy and with a time shift of approximately a week and a half. the federal government has declared a national emergency and many states and cities are implementing measures like cancellations of entertainment and sporting events, and closures of schools, bars, and restaurants, but there is as yet no fully coordinated response. we fear the worst is yet to come. and in parts of the world, for example, mexico with its population approximately twice that of the united kingdom, at the time of this writing no substantial measures are underway. it is likely that we are only at the beginning of this pandemic.we must learn from our experiences. what italy is doing in reproductive medicine may not be enough, but taking action is the first step and communicating it to the world community is the second. educating ourselves with the experiences of our colleagues around the world is critical. at fertility and sterility, we've created a virtual real-time conversation in our dialog where doctors and scientists can share what they're learning about covid-19 and reproductive medicine. please contribute your thoughts and observations at https://www.fertstertdialog.com/rooms/871covid-19mindfulness may not be a term usually associated with personal protective equipment (ppe), but it is a useful concept for the discussion of putting together, layer by layer, the protective barriers that allow the safe provision of care for patients with highly hazardous communicable diseases. each piece of the full ppe ensemble will have limitations that must be understood by the wearer. close and careful attention to behaviors in the patient care environment becomes good ppe etiquette. donning, or putting on ppe, carefully and fully before attending to a patient's needs is fundamental but not intuitive. doffing, or removing ppe, is a high-risk procedure that can be performed safely with practice, coaching, and observation. mitigating risk depends on awareness to all areas of potential contamination and a mindful approach to delivering safe patient care.the recommendations concerning ppe for healthcare workers (hcws) have evolved in fits and starts, frequently prompted by outbreaks, such as severe acute respiratory syndrome (sars), and emerging pathogens, such as hiv. it is inconceivable to many current healthcare workers that disposable glove use was neither mandatory nor recommended until the 1970s [1] . the recommendations for isolation, ppe use, and hand hygiene have continued to change as recently as the ebola virus disease (evd) outbreak of 2014-2016. from the time it was recognized that germs could cause disease, ways to avoid those germs have been sought. barrier methods, including early gloves made of sheep intestines, were the beginning of personal protective devices aimed to provide a boundary isolating the healthcare provider from some aspect of the patient thought to be infected, such as a wound [2] . isolating patients is another means of separating hcws from potentially infectious patients. as the understanding of pathogens and transmissibility has evolved, so has the use of isolation and barriers for protection.the categories for isolation correspond to the type or portion of a patient that requires some barrier method, for instance, gloves for wound care in the 1970s become gloves for all blood and bodily fluids by the 1980s (table 14.1) .patients themselves are not the only source of risk for healthcare workers. as early as the 1500s, it was recognized that surfaces and materials that had contact with patients or their body fluids could also serve to spread disease from patient to patient and from patient to staff [3] . a fomite is any article or surface that can harbor pathogens. the length of time a pathogen can remain viable on such surfaces is highly variable, from minutes to hours and days. all surfaces within the patient care environment, including bed linens, walls, and floors, can be potential sources for contamination.the method by which a person is inoculated inadvertently by a pathogen can be either through direct or indirect contact. direct inoculation occurs when infective blood or body substance comes in contact with another person's mucous membranes or broken skin. indirect inoculation occurs when contact is first made with a contaminated intermediary and then into the eyes, nose, mouth, or non-intact skin [1] . the goal of all ppe is to prevent direct inoculation. adherence to ppe etiquette and a doffing protocol serves to minimize the potential for indirect inoculation.protective equipment, from the early gloves to n95 masks and new impervious surface gowns, has become a routine part of working inside western healthcare facilities. it is easy to assume that what is common is also simple and that assumption has been extended to ppe use. it is common in the hospital setting to assume healthcare workers are proficient in all aspects of ppe. the use of ppe by healthcare workers came under scrutiny during the west african outbreak of evd in [2014] [2015] [2016] . concerns were raised about the readiness to treat patients with highly hazardous communicable diseases within us hospitals [4] . while caring for patients in isolation is something that us healthcare workers do every day, that familiarity does not assure competency.multiple studies conducted before and since the ebola outbreak confirm that contamination to the wearer can occur even with careful use of ppe [5, 6] . while healthcare workers may believe that adding more layers and items to their ppe ensemble increases their safety, this has not been demonstrated to be true [7] . in caring for patients with highly hazardous communicable diseases, risks are mitigated with information about disease transmission, the choice of the right ppe ensemble, training and practice, and the use of trained observers. the margin for error is small inside biocontainment units. it must be recognized by all team [8] .in examining the makeup of a ppe ensemble, the advantages and the liabilities of each piece will be examined. ppe etiquette, or good form, will be evaluated, from the donning of ppe through its use at the bedside to the importance of a safe and observed doffing procedure.the cdc has issued guidelines for the ppe to be worn by healthcare workers in the care and treatment of ebola patients, guidelines that were updated frequently during the outbreak [9] . those guidelines, and the choices of ppe made by the hospitals that cared successfully for patients with ebola, reflect the need for total body coverage, including respiratory protection. while ebola virus disease is not generally considered an airborne disease, the care of these patients may keep healthcare workers in close proximity to patients for extended periods of time and require them to perform tasks and procedures that generate aerosols; thus, respiratory protection is warranted.the choice of a ppe ensemble is dependent upon other previous decisions, many of which are made far from the bedside. ultimately, the ppe that is worn by staff is made up of items that can be sourced reliably and affordably, complies with all safety regulations, and in which the staff have competency in using through regular training and education. deciding on one uniform type of ppe is also dependent on facility design and work flow. below is list of questions to consider that may affect the choice of ppe and the protocols for its use. these questions can help guide the formation of a ppe matrix ensuring that all staff are protected commensurate with their level of risk. all personnel who come in direct contact with the patient; patient belongings; patient waste, including packaged waste; as well as the patient's direct environment must use appropriate ppe and be trained in its use [10] .• will all staff wear the same ppe? • where will staff don their ppe? • what will staff wear under their ppe, including footwear? • can staff don and doff independently or will they need assistance? • is there a chair, stepstool, or grab bar available where donning and doffing occur? • how long will each professional likely remain in the room delivering care? • will the staff sanitize their ppe in some manner before or during doffing? • where will staff doff? • is there a mirror for staff to check their ppe? • can staff be observed while doffing? • will you use a trained observer?-what will a trained observer wear? -what ppe will ancillary personnel, such as environmental services, wear? • if ppe is reusable, who cleans it and what is worn while it is being cleaned?putting together the best ppe ensemble depends on availability, price, ease of use, and the amount and type of protection required. in the usa, most of the gowns and suits worn for isolation purposes are disposable, contrary to the reusable suits worn in most of europe [11] . it is imperative that infection prevention personnel, supervisors, and purchasing agents all understand what items are being used in the biocontainment unit or with the care of any patient with a highly hazardous communicable disease and what level of protection they provide. international standards exist for the fabrics gowns are made from, as shown in table 14 it is important for those planning, purchasing, and writing protocols for the use of ppe suits and gowns to recognize that only level 4 material has been tested using fluids with lower specific gravity than water, which is true of most bodily fluids [12] . materials in levels 1-3 have not been tested with fluids of similar specific gravity to bile, blood, or liquid stool and may have no resistance to these.choosing ppe that provides the highest level of protection against synthetic blood and simulated blood-borne pathogens exclusively allows staff to train in and use one ensemble that provides protection against various pathogens regardless of their transmission route. while it may be argued that this is "over-isolating," this approach mitigates concerns when dealing with new pathogens, unknown pathogens, or as information emerges about the existence and persistence of pathogens in varying body fluids [8] .risks to ppe exist in varying forms. defects in manufacturing and assembly can leave seams and zippers open to penetration. both the person donning and the trained observer should inspect ppe as it is being put on. suit materials can be torn or cut by sharp edges within the environment, and breaches in suit integrity can occur with use while staff bend, stoop, and reach. special populations of patients can also pose hazards to ppe integrity by grabbing, pulling, or holding onto staff. whether intentional or unintentional, the potential for a contaminating breach must be mitigated by the care team to the extent it is possible and foreseeable. patients, who are delirious or agitated, frightened, or simply active as in the case of toddlers, pose higher risks to staff and to the integrity of a ppe ensemble. if a breach occurs, blood and viral penetration resistance protocols must be in place first to guide the staff member in the safest extrication from danger and then to assess, treat, and monitor the employee as needed.gown and suit choice should consider ease of donning and doffing, as well as how it functions during use. gowns are generally easier and safer for staff to don, may be more familiar to hcw, and usually can be put on without assistance. some other considerations for gowns involve a fit that does not allow the front of the gown to touch the floor when performing patient care tasks, that covers the entire back of the wearer, and that remains securely positioned during use. suit style ppe can offer additional coverage of underclothing, does not have a risk of falling off shoulders in use, and does not drape the floor with bending or stooping, but is more difficult to don and, because of sizing limitations, may fit better in certain areas of the body than others. employees should know which size of suit fits them safely, reducing redundant fabric without compromising the wearer's ability to bend, crouch, or sit. seams and zippers, if any, should be covered. donning and doffing suit style ppe is a skill that should be practiced and considered a part of staff competency.both gown and suit style ppe compliant with the level 4 astm/amsi standards are fluid impervious under pressure, which is beneficial for many of the intimate contact tasks that may be required while caring for patients. an unintended consequence of that fluid repellence is an increased risk of liquid and body fluid running off to the lower legs, shoes, and floor. boot and shoe covers should be worn [13] . if gowns are used, shoe covers should extend to an area higher on the leg than the lowest portion of the gown. suits with built-in "booties" should be worn with shoe covers that can be changed in the case of gross contamination (figs. 14.1 and 14.2).gloves and glove etiquette is another area where familiarity with a product does not necessarily infer safe use. staff may need to practice methods of glove removal that discourage contamination, whether a glove-in-glove or other method is utilized. fluorescing solutions and uv flashlights make this an easy exercise and one that is key to good technique. studies have demonstrated an increased safety to staff with double gloving, but most of these determinations were made when the threat to the staff was from substances such as bone cements and glues [2] . double gloving by itself does not prevent contamination of the wearer from either poor technique or from unrecognized loss of glove integrity [14] . balancing the need for increased protection with required tactile sensation is not easy. staff will need practice performing required skills while in extra layers of gloves. because the cuffs of gowns and suits are not required to be fluid impervious, it is important that gloves extend over that portion completely and may require the use of an extended cuff glove [11] .some institutions have chosen to use longer and heartier sterile gloves as their outer layer, while others have opted for extended cuff length exam gloves designed for chemotherapy use to offer a similar level of protection. triple gloving is another option, which provides an additional glove which can be exchanged during patient care activities.the use of alcohol-based hand rubs (abhrs) on gloved hands allows for sanitizing without exposing skin while in a patient care area. the application of alcoholbased hand rubs has not been shown to have a negative effect on the gloves themselves [15] , at least during limited use. sanitizing the outer layer of gloves after touching the patient or a patient care device or surface is an important step in reducing further contamination of the care space. when outer gloves have been in contact with known areas of contamination or with patient body fluids, they should be sanitized and then changed [2] .another strategy for glove safety is to employ gloves that are different in color layer to layer. this allows a visual queue when the outer glove has been compromised. gloves should be inspected when they are donned and again before they are doffed to ensure that they have remained intact. breaches in glove integrity, if they to provide a continuous impervious surface along the hand, wrist, and forearm, some facilities tape their gloves to their suits or gowns. decisions to tape gloves should be considered in the larger context of the donning and doffing procedure to ensure that staff understand both the rational and the timing of applying and removing tape. the benefit of a smooth, continuous wipeable surface in one of the highrisk zones for contamination must be weighed against the risk for damage to the suit or gown, the potential of micro-spray created during tape removal, and adding complexity to the donning and doffing procedure.droplet-and aerosol-generating procedures and situations can be abrupt and unpredictable. they include coughing without appropriate mouth coverage; sneezing; spitting; suctioning; pouring liquid waste into toilet; emptying bedpans, catheter bags, or urinals; and being near patients when they are urinating or defecating, or when staff assist with activities such as tooth brushing. a powered air-purifying respirator provides the greatest and most complete protection from these potential events, especially for caregivers within the critical 3-foot zone around the patient [16] . for facilities and staff who do not have access to or have not been trained in the use of these respirators, an n95 face mask and shield or a n95 face mask and goggles may need to be used. while likely less protective than the enclosed head piece of a powered air-purifying respirator (papr), for short periods of time in biocontainment units, or when patients are no longer exhibiting symptoms, a combination of face shield or goggles and a mask may be used. eye protection serves to avoid the two mechanisms for worker exposure -direct splash into the eyes and self-inoculation with contaminated hands. goggles, like eyeglasses, may move on the face during wear, tempting the wearer to reach up and adjust them with contaminated hands. face shields have the advantage of being able to be worn with eyeglasses. top-down full face shields lend more protection as users lean forward while delivering care than the smaller shields that are attached to surgical type masks, which can expose eyes to sprays and droplets when the wearers head is down.masks fall into two larger categories, isolation type single use and the n95 respirator [17] . an n95 or its equivalent in protection, or a papr, is required for all airborne pathogens as well as high-consequence pathogens when the care of the patient requires staff members to be within 3 feet of the patient's mouth and nose and when that patient is coughing and sneezing or has copious oral or nasal secretions. again, because aerosol-generating incidents, such as a sneeze, can occur without warning, when staff are required to be in very proximity to any patient suffering from highconsequence pathogens, appropriate eye, nose, and mouth coverage should be maintained. an isolation type surgical mask may be worn in conjunction with a face shield to prevent the direct inoculation of staff mucous membranes only when there is not a risk of airborne transmission.mask removal must occur with clean hands, and staff should be encouraged not to touch their faces, eyes, nose, or mouth until they have thoroughly washed. once a mask has been used, it should be discarded.as is true with other types of personal protective equipment, paprs require training and practice to be used effectively and efficiently. with highly hazardous communicable diseases, ease of use is a lesser factor than the protection that a piece of equipment provides. surgical masks are the easiest for wearers to put on and take off correctly. n95 masks require training and fitting and annual competency [18] . paprs require training and practice, and many facilities using paprs have staff retrain on a more frequent basis.generally, the papr motor and fan are attached to or contiguous with head covering that contains a large face shield. airflow is directed past the face to maintain a continuous positive pressure inside the face portion of the hood. motors, and the battery pack powering them, can either be worn on a belt at the waist or can be integral to the helmet structure beneath a disposable hood. care must be taken to assure that a battery pack does not lose power while in use.paprs may offer improvement in comfort and cooling compared to n95 masks and face shields or goggles. when workers wear ppe longer and more comfortably, they can stay at the bedside longer, reducing the number of required doffings per day. this can substantially reduce overall risk as each doffing episode confers risk of contamination to staff and the work environment [14] (table 14. 3).additions to the ppe ensemble may be aprons, gowns, shoe covers, and hair/head covers. hats and hair covers may be integral to the hood or head piece or may be applied separately. generally, these hair covers must also be impervious if they serve as the outermost layer. care should be taken to ensure that they do not slip or move while being worn and do not compromise visibility.aprons and gowns can help create a smooth wipeable surface on the front highrisk area of the wearer, mitigating the risk along seam and zipper lines. aprons afford covering to the chest and torso, while surgical or plastic gowns add protection to the arms. each addition to the ppe ensemble must also be considered with relation to where the item will fit in the donning and doffing procedures. staff should consider whether these items can be safely cleaned while in use, with sanitizing wipes, or whether they can be removed and replaced safely while within the patient care environment. the addition of a gown or apron is now recommended by the cdc as the outermost layer of a ppe ensemble as it avoids the folds and seams of underlying fabrics and can provide a wipeable surface and allows for additional protection in what are considered the high-touch areas of the anterior chest, torso, and arms [12] .shoe covers are utilized over existing foot and lower leg coverage to allow the outer layer to be removed if soiled. soiling of the shoe and lower leg areas can occur from splashes of body fluids that fall from the impervious layers of the ppe above them as well as from spills and splashes that reach the floor. protocols for staff are needed to ensure that they can remove and replace contaminated foot coverings if the duty of a trained observer in a biocontainment unit is like that of a safety officer, watching but not participating in patient care, donning and doffing, unless needed in an emergency. in such a case, another trained individual should be ready and able to step in to the role of trained observer. the role is not designed as punitive or for score keeping but for identifying potential breaches that could compromise safety. it is not possible for staff in full ppe to know when a portion of their ensemble has come in contact with the patient or part of the environment. even with practice, bedside caregivers may occasionally omit hand hygiene or a step in the doffing process. all members of the care team should be aware of the actions of those around them and be watchful for omissions that could compromise safety.by itself, no ppe ensemble protects staff if it is not used and maintained properly. ppe etiquette involves every step a staff member takes while providing safe patient care, from avoiding touching their own ppe and hand hygiene while gloved, to proper cleaning of papr motors, helmets, and belts. gloved hands can be sanitized with alcohol-based hand rubs (abhrs) but should not be washed while in the patient care environment to avoid splashing. beds and bed linens, doors, tables and chairs, and all items within easy reach of the patient, such as tv remotes and call lights should be considered contaminated even without visible soiling. once a staff member has touched those high-risk areas, they should perform hand hygiene or change outer gloves. cleaning those areas of high risk repeatedly becomes part of the work day for clinicians at the bedside of the patient with a highly hazardous communicable disease.performing tasks that are normally routine for staff can pose hazards when performed in ppe, so they should be practiced and drilled. staff proprioception is altered in their ppe, and developing a new sense of where the edges of their ppeencapsulated body are in space is vital. through practice, staff can become accustomed to the hoses, battery packs, helmets, hoods, and boot covers that alter this proprioception.mindfulness of where and what has been touched during the performance of clinical duties can be augmented by using a trained observer but is ultimately a change in the fundamental way staff deliver care. clinicians must become keen observers of what surfaces and objects a patient may have contacted, from call lights and bedside tables to door handles, bed rails, and bathroom fixtures. every action inside the patient care area must be taken with safety in mind, avoiding those hazards that can be difficult to see while in a papr or face shield, to feel while double gloved, or to hear due to the background hum of the papr motor.as employees prepare to leave the patient care area, they should examine their ppe for breaches and visible soiling. sanitizing wipes may be used to clean high-risk or likely soiled areas of ppe. a trained observer may be used outside the patient room, or in an anteroom or hallway, to observe the doffing process. if the observing staff is not separated by a physical barrier such as a wall, door, or window, they must be protected from potential splashes that can occur during the removal of ppe or be in ppe themselves.a mirror may be helpful for the staff member to see their entire ensemble. the doffing protocol may be posted so that both the person doffing and their trained partner can ensure that each step is followed, or staff can follow an electronic version that records their compliance.each ppe ensemble will require a unique doffing protocol and many employ the use of abhrs or other sanitizing devices such as uv light sources to reduce the risk of contamination during the doffing process [19] . a step-by-step approach avoids errors that can result in the unapparent transfer of infective materials. where doffing occurs will be best determined by the physical layout of the unit and the space available but should occur a minimum of 6 feet from the patient in an area that has been dedicated to this purpose and is maintained as cleanly as possible.once the entire ppe ensemble has been doffed and the staff member is outside of the direct patient care area, they should be reminded not to touch any part of their bodies until they have thoroughly washed their hands. this final redundancy prevents indirect inoculation of staff from disposing of their used ppe.perhaps one of the greatest challenges when clinical duties require ppe is for hcws to place the safety of themselves and their team first. nothing, including the sudden loss of airway patency, consciousness, or pulse, should drive a clinician into the room of a patient with a highly hazardous communicable disease without proper ppe. being mindful of how long it can take to don ppe and how difficult it can be to move both quickly and safely in the patient environment means that staff members in biocontainment units must be even more vigilant than usual in observing patients for early signs of decline in condition. the ability to anticipate critical needs can prevent staff from reacting dangerously and without the proper ppe. we must consider the patient care area to be our scene, and our first question must remain, is the scene safe? the right ppe, donned in the correct order, worn in a safe manner, is what makes that scene safe for bedside healthcare providers. the safe, observed, step-by-step doffing of ppe is what ensures the safety of the rest of the unit, staff, and facility.while healthcare workers use ppe routinely, we are also responsible for at least some of the nosocomial infections that plague modern healthcare facilities. in biocontainment units, as well as many other areas in the healthcare system, such microbe spread can have deadly consequences. research is needed to determine best practice with respect to ppe, including the type of gloves and glove removal techniques that avoid hand and clothing contamination. development of ppe suits that fit all sizes and meet the needs of the bedside clinician is also necessary. decontamination procedures for reusable suits that are efficacious and cost-effective could reduce the enormous cost associated with the disposable suits now in use.in addition, behavioral research could lend credence to the frequency, timing, and scope of ppe training and protocols for doffing that are proven to reduce staff contamination. new technologies in sanitation, including the use of ultraviolet light, may reduce in-room fomites. the future is likely to be filled with larger and more frequent outbreaks of highly hazardous communicable diseases. when we can be assured that hcws are using the right ppe with good ppe etiquette and following protocols that have been validated through robust research, the healthcare setting will be safer for everyone.india and the rest of the world are going through a difficult, decisive and stressful phase of 42 existence due to novel severe acute respiratory syndrome-sars cov2 (covid-19) 43 pandemic. [1] [2] [3] in these unprecedented circumstances where covid-19 pandemic has 44 indiscriminately engulfed the world and as social distancing and limitation are essential tools to 45 contain its spread; the outpatient healthcare model needs rebooting to prevent it from spreading returning orthopaedic opd's functioning to the pre-covid era: 80 4 in order to gradually return orthopaedic practice to relative normalcy due to covid 19, 99 first and foremost, the patient should decide that he/she has an orthopaedic problem significantly 100 affecting lifestyle and locomotor function, and is not being relieved by rest. if one is not sure 101 that the orthopaedic problem can be tackled at home or not, there are two options, one is to visit 102 the hospital and the other better way is to contact the concerned telemedicine portal of the 103 particular hospital for consultation. this will reaffirm his decision to visit the hospital in these 104 times.after the decision to visit the hospital has been made, the next step is to register; and the best 194 here they have to filter patients into three categories. the basic details and an orthopaedic prototype teleconsultation has been depicted in fig. 4&5 in covid era, more and more patients will be treated by old-established conservative methods; • take hygienic bath before and after hospital visit• wash clothes in bleaching powder solution after returning from hospital• containment zones and covid positive patient should attend hospital only in case of emergency and after the quarantine restriction of that area are lifted and that too at designated covid points of the hospital location of whose is made available by telephonic helpline and website• patient with symptoms as in table 1 should go to flu clinic /fever clinic first.records identified through searching pubmed (13) should however be avoided for emergency care when alternative in-person care is available, and telemedicine consultation should be limited to first aid, lifesaving measure, counseling and advice on referral. map of london, 1854. water-distribution systems, which john snow investigated comparing cholera cases among consumers of water of two suppliers depending on the site of their water intake from the thames river. courtesy university of california at los angeles (ucla) school of public health. available at: http://www.ph.ucla.edu/epi/snow/snowcricketarticle.html background the 18 th à19 th centuries brought industrialization and large-scale population migration into cities of europe including london. one result of this demographic shift was overcrowding in poor housing, served by inadequate or nonexistent public water supplies and waste-disposal systems. in london, the introduction of sewers and flushing toilets directly draining into the thames led it to becoming an open stinking sewer, due to high tides and strong winds pushing seawater upstream. these conditions resulted in repeated outbreaks of water-borne diseases such as cholera, dysentery, tuberculosis, typhoid fever, influenza, yellow fever, and malaria, and other infectious diseases, as well as the loss of the fishing industry.cholera is an acute diarrhea caused by infection with the bacterium, vibrato cholera. it is endemic in over 50 countries and also the cause of large epidemics. since 1817, cholera spread rapidly throughout the world largely due to inadvertent transport of bilge water in ships mainly from the bay of bengal. the indian subcontinent has been a long-term focus of cholera and the source of six worldwide epidemics between 1817 and 1923. the seventh cholera pandemic, which began in 1961, affects on an average 3à5 million people annually, with 120,000 deaths with large scale epidemics in haiti, yemen and in central africa in the second decade of the 21 st century.between 1848 and 1854, a series of cholera outbreaks occurred in london with large-scale loss of life. one epidemic of cholera occurred in the area of broad street, golden square, in soho, a poor district of central london with unhygienic industries and housing.john snow was born in 1813 in york, england, the first of nine children. his father was a laborer and later a farmer. john saw unsanitary conditions in his hometown with a river contaminated by town sewage. as a medical apprentice from age 14, he experienced a cholera epidemic in a coal-mining village. snow vowed to resist drink, gambling and marriage, and became a vegetarian. at age 23 he began medical studies and graduated from the university of london in 1844. john snow, a physician now considered a founding father of modern epidemiology was the personal anesthetist to queen victoria and founding member of the london epidemiological society. in 1848, snow was developing his anesthesia practice in the cholera afflicted district when he undertook an independent investigation of the epidemic.by 1849, about 53,000 cholera deaths were registered for england and wales. snow was skeptical of the predominant miasma theory, and theorized that the cause of cholera was due to contaminated water as the main form of transmission. in 1854, a cholera epidemic broke out, affecting resident families of tailors and clerks from the shops of nearby regent street. the epidemic caused violent diarrhea and very high mortality, with some 600 deaths in one week during september 1854.the prevailing miasma theory was that cholera was caused by airborne transmission of poisonous vapors from foul smells due to poor sanitation. at the same time, the competing germ theory that inspired snow was still an unproven minority opinion in medical circles. eventually, the foul smells, popularly known at the time as "the great stink" from the thames river flowing past the houses of parliament were so severe that the mps decided to take action. finally, in 1864 with the plan of sir joseph bazalgette, two enormous sewers were laid along the thames, diverting the sewage downstream with development of sewage farms to manage the effluent. the system is still in use, but becoming too small to cope with the demands being placed on it as a result of increasing population and land development.the report of the committee on scientific inquiries in relation to the cholera epidemic of 1854 concluded that: "either in air or water it seems probable that the infection can grow. often it is not easy to say which of these media may have been the chief scene of poisonous fermentation; for the impurity of one commonly implies the impurity of both; and in considerable parts of the metropolis (where the cholera has severely raged) there is rivalry of foulness between the two."when the next cholera epidemic struck london from august to september, 1854, primarily in the soho area adjacent to broad street, snow investigated it and traced some 600 cholera deaths occurring in a 10-day period. he was struck by the observation that the cases either lived close to or were using the broad street pump for drinking water. he also determined that brewery workers and poorhouse residents in the area, both of whom relied on local wells, escaped the epidemic. snow concluded that access to uncontaminated water prevented them from cholera infection, while users of the broad street pump became infected. he persuaded the doubtful civic authorities to remove the handle from the broad street pump, and the already subsiding epidemic disappeared within a few days.as noted in snow's report on cholera:"the most terrible outbreak of cholera . . . took place (in london) in broad street, golden square, and the adjoining streets, a few weeks ago . . . there were upwards of five hundred fatal attacks of cholera in ten days. the mortality . . . probably equals any that was ever caused in this country, even by the plague; and it was much more sudden, . . . the mortality would undoubtedly have been much greater had it not been for the flight of the population . . . in less than six days . . . the most afflicted streets were deserted by more than three-quarters of their inhabitants." "there were a few cases of cholera in the neighborhood of broad street, golden square, in the latter part of august; and the so-called outbreak which commenced in the night of 31 august and the 1st september, was, in all similar instances only a violent increase of the malady. i suspected some contamination of the water of the much-frequented pump in broad street . . . but on examining the water. i found so little impurity in it of an organic nature . . . i requested . . . to take a list, at the general registrar's office, of the deaths of cholera, registered during the week ending 2nd september . . . eighty-nine deaths from cholera were registered during the week, in the three subdistricts." "i found that nearly all the deaths had taken place within a short distance of the pump . . . with regard to the deaths . . . there were sixty-one instances in which i was informed that the deceased persons used to drink the water from broad street, either constantly or occasionally. . .""the workhouse in poland street is more than three-quarters surrounded by houses in which deaths from cholera occurred, yet out of five hundred and thirty five inmates, only five died of cholera . . . the workhouse has a pumpwell on the premises, in addition to the supply from the grand junction waterworks, and the inmates never sent to the broad street for water. if the mortality in the workhouse has been equal to that in the streets immediately surrounding it . . . upward of one hundred persons would have died." "there is a brewery in broad street, near the pump, and . . . no brewer's men were registered as having died of cholera, . . . above seventy workmen employed in the brewery, none of them had suffered from cholera . . . at the time the disease prevailed. the men . . . do not drink water at all . . .. there is a deep well in the brewery, in addition to the new river water." "the result of the inquiry then was that there has been no particular outbreak or increase of cholera, in this part of london, except among the persons who were in the habit of drinking water of the above-mentioned pump-well. i had an interview with the board of guardians of st. james parish, . . . the handle of the pump was removed the following day."the cholera epidemic, which was already declining, fell off and disappeared once the pump usage stopped. as a result of this episode, benjamin disraeli, together with other members of parliament, adopted the plan of the thames authority and passed legislation forcing the overhaul of london's water and sewage systems, which after completion, contributed to the nonreturn of cholera.in the next london cholera epidemic of september to october 1854, the highest rates of cholera occurred in areas of the city where two companies with overlapping water mains supplied homes. one of these-the lambeth company-moved its water intake to a less polluted part upstream of the thames river, while the southwark and vauxhall company left its intake in a part of the thames heavily polluted with sewage.again, suspecting water transmission, snow's investigation identified cases of mortality from cholera by place of residence and by the two water companies that supplied the homes. during the first four weeks the impure water of southwark and vauxhall accounted for fatalities 14 times as great as those of the lambeth water supply. snow calculated the cholera rates for a 7-week period in homes supplied by each of the two in possibly the most famous presentation table in epidemiology (table 5 .1). homes supplied by the southwark and vauxhall water company were affected by high cholera death rates, whereas adjacent homes supplied by the lambeth company had rates lower than throughout the rest of london. this provided overwhelming epidemiologic support for his hypothesis that the source of the cholera epidemic was the contaminated water from the thames river, distributed to homes in a large area of south london.snow's pioneering epidemiologic investigation proved the mode of transmission of a waterborne disease that ravaged many parts of the world in the 19 th century and still occurs in the 21 st century. the v. cholera organism was originally grown in 1854 but was reported in local italian medical literature and not recognized internationally. international recognition for the definitive identification and growth of the organism during his investigation of an epidemic of cholera in egypt was given to the eminent german bacteriologist, robert koch in 1883. filipo pucini was ultimately recognized for the discovery in 1984 when the organism was formally named vibrio cholerae pucini 1854. robert koch was the discoverer of anthrax in 1880, and tuberculosis in 1882, and leader in defining criteria for causation of infectious diseases; he was awarded a nobel prize in medicine in 1905 (see chapter 7) .the broad street pump episode demonstrated that cholera was water-borne and thus the means to prevent it had already been identified almost 30 years before. snow also established the basic methodology of modern public health for infectious disease investigation and contributed to establishing the validity of the germ theory, which was still highly controversial at this time.with the understanding of the causal relation between microorganisms and diseases at the end of the 19 th century, the process for reducing largescale morbidity and mortality via disinfection was initiated. the first use of chlorine as a disinfectant for water facilities was in 1897 in england. the first use of this method for municipal water facilities in the united states was in jersey city, new jersey, and chicago, illinois, in 1915. other cities followed and the use of chlorination as standard treatment for water disinfection rapidly grew. during the 20 th century, death rates from waterborne diseases decreased significantly, and although other additional factors contributed to the general improvements in health (such as sanitation, improved quality of life, and nutrition), the improvement of water quality was, without doubt, a major reason. the decline in typhoid fever in the united states between 1900 and 1945 as a result of improved water supply systems and use of chlorination is seen in figure 5 .1.the disinfection of drinking water through both filtration and chlorination processes has been one of the major achievements of public health. clean water was responsible for nearly half the total mortality reduction in major cities, three-quarters of the infant mortality reduction, and nearly two-thirds of child mortality reduction.in 2014, an estimated 3à5 million cases of cholera occurred globally with more than 100,000 deaths, mainly in developing countries without safe drinking water treatment and sanitation.epidemics of cholera also occur in natural disaster situations, particularly in those areas where sanitation systems break down. a current example of such events is seen in haiti, where an earthquake in 2010 killed over 200,000 people and displaced over one million persons. this was followed by a massive cholera outbreak 10 months later, with over 665,000 cases and 8,183 deaths. intensive efforts of the haitian ministry of health together with the centers for disease control (cdc), world health organization (who), and other international organizations, with massive vaccinations against cholera, prevented thousands of deaths from cholera, but transmission of the disease continued in the following years.making matters worse, while haiti was already struggling with effects of the cholera outbreak since 2010, a major hurricane (hurricane matthew) struck in october, 2016. the who shipped a million cholera vaccines to haiti, attempting to minimize the risk of further increases of cases. the un reports that since the cholera outbreak of 2010 some 780,000 persons have been infected with cholera and 9,145 have died of the disease. moreover, since the hurricane in 2016, almost 800 new cases arise each week. the cholera epidemic in haiti since 2010 has been attributed to importation of the vibrio bacterium by un peacekeeper forces from nepal, still a cholera-endemic country. the sewage contamination in un peacekeeper camps with poor sanitation spread to nearby camps for displaced homeless haitians following the earthquake.cholera can be imported via travelers from areas still endemic with cholera exposure to street, or other contaminated foods. cholera and other waterborne diseases remain major global public health problems in the 21 st century, particularly in areas of poverty. both the who and the united nations have recently acknowledged that the haitian epidemic resulted from entry of the organism into poor hygienic camps by un troops that were sent in to maintain order. epidemiologists identified that the cholera strain found in haiti was the same as one that originated in nepal, where the disease is still endemic. improving haiti's water and sanitation infrastructure is critical to achieving large health gains and reducing the opportunity for cholera to spread with responsibility attributed to united nation peacekeeper soldiers from nepal.during the 1970s, in the medical and public health professions public health community there was a widespread idea that infectious diseases were gradually going to disappear under the combined influence of hygiene, antibiotics, and vaccines. this false sense of security was shattered with the advent of aids in the 1980s, and the subsequent return of diseases previously thought to be under control, such as tuberculosis, malaria, dengue, and plague. the complacency was replaced by a high degree of concern as new infectious diseases continued to arrive, such as hiv in the 1980s, bovine spongiform encephalopathy (bse) in the 1990s, severe acute respiratory syndrome (sars) in 2003, ebola in 2015 and zika virus in 2016 is now seen as a global public health crisis with few new antibiotics in the pipeline of development, testing, licensure and production. growing resistance of many organisms to currently available antibiotics and health care associated infections, as well as spread of diseases from tropical areas to temperate zone countries in north america, europe and other regions such as west nile fever, chikungunya, and zika. a further concern was the return of old diseases thought to be controlled such as the sexually transmitted diseases, as well as diphtheria and pertussis.in the early 21 st century, the spread of infectious diseases as weapons of terror and even war, including anthrax, came to grip the public and created a whole new spectrum of terrorism. in 2004, another concern came to the fore, with the lack of an influenza vaccine to protect vulnerable people in the population, due to difficulties with production and regulation. in particular, this placed caregivers at high risk of infecting patients or bringing the disease home from the hospital setting.today, waterborne disease is given less recognition, as standards of water and sewage treatment are assumed to be part of modern living. however, waterborne enteric disease continues to be among the major killers in many parts of the world, especially among children. waterborne disease may be so common that it escapes detection in many countries, especially those where hepatitis (especially a and e) is endemic and where incidence of gastroenteritis from shigella, escherichia coli, rotavirus, and many other enteric infectious agents remains high. another example is helicobacter pylori, the cause of chronic peptic ulcer disease and the recognized cause for gastric cancer. helicobacter, which affects nearly half of the world's population and is related to poverty and poor hygiene is also waterborne.in western industrialized countries, waterborne disease outbreaks have become relatively uncommon due to high levels of water management. water contamination and enteric disease can also occur from organisms for which routine testing is not currently practiced. for example, testing for rotaviruses (which cause enteric disease) and organisms such as campylobacter and giardia is not routinely done, but water is tested if there is a suspicion of contamination.in 1999, the cdc reported on achievements of public health during the 20 th century in the united states addressing the problem of waterborne disease as follows:by 1900, however, the incidence of many of these diseases had begun to decline because of public health improvements, implementation of which continued into the 20 th century. local, state, and federal efforts to improve sanitation and hygiene reinforced the concept of collective "public health" action (e.g., to prevent infection by providing clean drinking water). by 1900, 40 of the 45 states had established health departments. the first county health departments were established in 1908. from the 1930s through the 1950s, state and local health departments made substantial progress in disease prevention activities, including sewage disposal, water treatment, food safety, organized solid waste disposal, and public education about hygienic practices (e.g., foodhandling and handwashing). chlorination and other treatments of drinking water began in the early 1900s and became widespread public health practices, further decreasing the incidence of waterborne diseases.in 2003, bacterial contamination of the municipal water system in walkerton, ontario, canada resulted in a public health disaster with 7 deaths and 2,300 persons ill. a public inquiry revealed that improper practices and systemic fraudulence by the public utility operators, privatization of municipal water testing, absence of mandatory criteria governing quality of testing, and the lack of provisions for notification of results to multiple authorities all contributed to the crisis. warnings of significant concerns two years before the outbreak were ineffective as budgetary cuts destroyed the checks and balances needed to ensure municipal water safety.safe water also includes ensuring chemical safety through measures such as prevention of lead poisoning from deterioration in distribution systems, such as occurred in flint, michigan, in the united states, in 2015. safe water supply requires exacting physical treatment as well as disinfection, especially of all surface water sources. effective water management can reduce the burden of gastroenteric disease even in a relatively well-developed country.water treatment is one of the fundamentals of preserving public health not only at the sources. residual chlorine throughout the distribution system prevents secondary contamination from faults in the pipes and leakage of sewage into the system. many steps are essential for assurance of safe water supplies, including well-organized sanitary and laboratory monitoring by the public health authorities and not only the supplier. yet waterborne diseases can occur and spread due to error, negligence or as in the case of haiti unintended consequences of well meant interventions.cholera, typhoid fever, dysentery, and hepatitis a and e, and many other bacterial, viral, and parasitic diseases are waterborne diseases, i.e., caused by pathogens transmitted via water supplies. an immensely important public health challenge at the beginning of the 20 th century was therefore the improvement and safety of drinking water quality, aiming to significantly reduce illness and death caused by contaminated drinking water.in 1991, v. cholera o1 apparently arrived in a cargo ship from china whose sewage was spread into the harbor of lima, peru. it contaminated shellfish, popular among the local population, and therewith created a local epidemic that continued to spread in central and south america between 1991 and 1994. the pan american health organization (paho) reported a total of over one million cases and almost 10,000 deaths (case-fatality rate: 0.9%) from countries in the western hemisphere in this period. in southern asia, an epidemic caused by a newly recognized strain of v. cholera, which began in late 1992, then spread to several areas of central america, brazil, and argentina. in 2011, 58 countries from all continents reported a cumulative total of 589,854 cholera cases, representing an increase of 85 percent from 2010, with the greatest proportion of cases in haiti and the african continent. in 2014, 55 percent of all reported cholera cases were from africa and 15% from the americas, the latter clearly resulting from the haiti outbreak that started in 2010. the case fatality rate for cholera increased by 47 percent from 2013 compared to 2014. in 2014, a case fatality rate of 1.17 percent represented 190,549 cases and 2,231 deaths, mainly in afghanistan, democratic republic of congo (drc), ghana, haiti, and nigeria.waterborne disease outbreaks reported in the united states between 1920 and 2002, included at least 1,870 events associated with drinking water, an average of 22.5 per year, with 883,806 illnesses, for an average of 10,648 cases per year. of more recent cases, just over half of the outbreaks had no organisms that were specifically identified but were epidemiologically identified as viral in origin. in addition to the disease outbreaks, these waterborne organisms constitute a special risk of death for persons with compromised immune systems, including cancer patients being treated with chemotherapy, hiv-positive persons, and patients being treated with immunosuppressants. outbreaks of waterborne giardia and cryptosporidium in the united states raised concerns, because these organisms are not efficiently eliminated by standard water treatment.the principal ethical issue is implementation of existing technology of public health globally to save human lives now being lost to waterborne and other diarrheal diseases. diarrheal disease caused by contaminated water, food, or transmission from person to person can be caused by many bacteria, viruses, and parasites. together, these are the second leading cause of death in children under 5 years of age, killing some 760,000 children every year. the most serious complication of severe diarrheal disease in young children results from dehydration due to the loss of fluids and salts necessary for survival. dehydration is mostly treatable with oral rehydration solutions (ors), one of the great public health innovations of the past half century, now used globally. children most at risk are those that have been previously malnourished or with impaired immunity. prevention includes access to safe drinking water; improved sanitation; handwashing with soap; exclusive breastfeeding for the first six months of life; good personal and food hygiene; health education about how infections spread; and rotavirus vaccination.clearly, the issues related to control of infectious diseases are not gone, nor are they likely to be without major new breakthroughs in vaccine production and new modes of treatment. but control of waterborne enteric diseases continues to depend on well-tested and effective traditional means of infectious disease control. public health organizations require strong emphasis on monitoring of water security, adequate waste disposal systems, disease reporting systems, training of health workers and the public, and strong laboratory capacity and support.other causes of diarrheal disease morbidity are no less important. rotavirus is a major cause of disease and death among children up to age five years, even in high-and medium-income countries. but the burden is mainly on low-income populations especially in low-income countries led by india, nigeria, pakistan, and sub-saharan african countries. oral rotavirus vaccines introduced in the industrialized world in 2006 have had a great impact in the united states, reducing hospitalizations for severe rotavirus by as much as 80 percent. rotavirus globally is estimated by the who to cause annually approximately 111 million episodes of gastroenteritis, 25 million clinic visits, two million hospitalizations, and 352,000à592,000 deaths (median 440,000 deaths) in children up to five years of age.rotavirus causes severe acute gastroenteritis with diarrhea and vomiting, primarily in infants and young children. the oral vaccine has been introduced in 90 countries by the end of 2016, with global child coverage estimated at 25 percent, having been adopted in most high-and many medium-income countries and gradually introduced in low-income countries. adoption of rotavirus vaccine in routine national immunization programs resulted in reduction of over 85 percent of rotavirus hospitalizations in belgium, and similar reductions in hospitalizations for rotavirus-induced diarrheal conditions showed the high effectiveness of the rotavirus vaccines (over 85%). in many countries, the vaccine is only partially reimbursed on a per-prescription basis. a systematic review of ecological studies from eight countries reported a 49à89 percent decline in laboratory-confirmed rotavirus hospital admissions in children less than five years old within two years of vaccine introduction. increasing the use of rotavirus vaccine with proven efficacy and cost effectiveness, along with efforts to improve access to safe water supplies, improved food and sewage management, and personal hygiene will continue to reduce the burden of disease and death in the vulnerable child population where sanitation is still poor. clean sanitary facilities in homes supported by safe public sewage collection and treatment systems are essential for prevention of enteric infections. a world bank data base review of percentage of homes with access to improved sanitary faclities with change between 1990 and 2015 showed high income countries such as the us, canada, uk, netherlands and australia with 99à100% in both years. china increased from 48 to 77 percent, and india from 17 to 40 percent. global coverage increased from 53 to 67 percent.meeting the goal of clean, safe drinking/potable water requires implementing a multibarrier approach that includes: protecting source water from contamination, appropriately treating raw source water, especially surface water, and ensuring safe distribution of treated water to the consumers. while chlorination is a mainstay in protecting water supplies, filtration and coagulation are equally important. filtration, coagulation, and disinfection of water are the optimal combination known to date, where chlorination kills or inactivates bacteria and viruses and filtration completes the action of eliminating pathogens in particles and eliminating parasitic protozoa.wastewater includes water with human waste, food scraps, oils, soaps, and chemicals from homes, from industry, and from storm runoff. untreated wastewater discharged to nature can damage the environment and groundwater, making treatment essential. nature copes well with small amounts, but can be overwhelmed by large amounts of untreated wastewater and sewage. treatment plants reduce pollutants in wastewater to a level nature can handle. government regulation of business, industry, and local authorities is a vital part of modern public health. business and industry are legally accountable, but not well enforced, for ensuring their wastewater runoff is within accepted standards. use of wastewater for irrigation after extensive treatment for irrigation is part of modern water economies and within supervised standards for field and orchard crops and even in vegetables and other ground crops, including for newly emerging pathogens and chemicals.chemical disinfectants in water treatment and sewage usually can result in the formation of chemical byproducts. however, the risks to health from these byproducts are extremely small in comparison to the risks associated with inadequate disinfection. disinfection efficacy should not be compromised in attempting to control such byproducts. the main advantage of chlorine-based water disinfection over other methods (such as ozone and uv radiation) is its longlasting effect; its presence also prevents the regrowth of microorganisms, thereby protecting clean water throughout the distribution system. chlorine as a disinfectant is also easily monitored and controlled as a drinking-water disinfectant, and frequent monitoring is recommended wherever chlorination is practiced.private water supplies, such as wells, used by millions of people even in high-income countries are not government regulated or well protected. contamination by animal excretions and agricultural runoff are of serious concern. these sources of water can be made safe by fencing and hard surrounding platform along with regular use of household chlorine (5.25%) bleach. potential contaminants include microorganisms of human and animal waste products. chemical contaminants from natural and man-made sources can be equally hazardous.cholera continues to spread across many countries with dramatic consequences, overwhelming stretched health systems and diverting resources from other crucial prevention-oriented programs. global priority for increasing safe water supply as part of the mdgs did achieve its targets of increasing access to safe water, but cholera itself has not been a topic of major priority in global health.the un report on mdgs indicates that the global target of halving the proportion of people without access to improved sources of water was met five years ahead of schedule. between 1990 and 2015, 2.6 billion people gained access to improved drinking water sources. worldwide 2.1 billion people have gained access to improved sanitation. despite progress, 2.4 billion are still using unimproved sanitation facilities, including 946 million people still practicing open defecation.however, who reestablished a global task force on cholera control in 2012 to increase the visibility of cholera as an important global public health challenge. this emphasizes disseminating information about cholera prevention and control and conducting advocacy and resource mobilization activities to support cholera prevention and control at national, regional, and global levels with participation by the international community of donors and public health professionals.cholera can appear in disaster situations such as in severe floods, and other natural calamities including earthquakes, tsunamis, and floods, as well as manmade catastrophes including civil wars and refugee situations as well.in the second decade of the 21 st century, major epidemics of cholera are wreaking havoc in man-made and natural disaster settings. in post-hurricane haiti as a result of imported vibrio by un peacekeeper forces and recklessly poor sanitation, contamination of water used by a displaced persons' camp in 2010 resulted in a devastating cholera epidemic persisting for years. this has killed more than 11,000 people and left more than 880,000 infected by june 2017. a deadly cholera epidemic is raging in war torn yemen with over 200,000 cases and 1,500 deaths reported by who. cholera is also rampant in strife-torn east africa with red cross reports of 51,000 cholera cases in somalia and nearly 5,000 in south sudan associated with famine, poor supply of food aid in a vicious tragedy mainly of man-made causes.in 1993 in the united states contamination of water sources with the parasite cryptosporidium caused major waterborne disease outbreaks in milwaukee, wisconsin and elsewhere. the milwaukee outbreak was the largest reported waterborne disease outbreak in us history, with approximately 403,000 ill persons with 4,400 hospitalizations. attack rates were as high as 50 percent in some parts of the city. cryptosporidium is transmitted from person to person and from animals to humans, but can also be transmitted in swimming pools and community waters. cryptosporidium was reportedly present in 65à87 percent of surface water samples tested in the united states. the total cost of illness in this outbreak was calculated at $96.3 million: $31.7 million in medical costs and $64.6 million in productivity losses.giardia lamblia is another parasite that can be transmitted in inadequately filtered surface water and for which chlorination is inadequate to disinfect. in the period 2011à12, in the united states 32 drinking waterassociated outbreaks were reported, with at least 431 cases of illness, 102 hospitalizations, and 14 deaths. legionella was responsible for 66 percent of these outbreaks and 26 percent of illnesses; other bacteria and viruses accounted for 16 percent of outbreaks and 53 percent of illnesses.helicobacter pylori as the major cause of acute and chronic peptic ulcer disease (pud) and gastric cancer is known to be related to hygienic conditions including water safety, and is thought to be prevalent in more than half the world population with a high economic impact on health systems. one of the important measures for its control is water security, especially for lowand medium-income countries (see chapter 22) .prevention of waterborne diseases requires high standards for community, food, and personal hygiene, sanitation including garbage disposal, supply and treatment of safe drinking water, and prohibiting the use of raw or partially treated sewage for irrigation of crops. sanitation, particularly the filtration and chlorination of drinking water, prohibiting the use of raw or partially treated sewage for the irrigation of ground crops. crucial treatment for diarrhea is prompt fluid therapy with sugar electrolytes in large volumes to replace all fluid loss with oral rehydration therapy (ort). using this form of treatment can successfully treat up to 80 percent of cholera cases.tetracycline shortens the duration of the disease, and chemoprophylaxis for contacts following stool samples may help in reducing its spread. a vaccine is also available, which can help to control outbreaks. rehydration is a cornerstone of treatment and can reduce the fatality rate to less than one percent.cholera and its burden on a country serve as indicators of poverty and inadequate social infrastructure and development. it persists as a major public health challenge in developing countries that lack fundamental sanitary infrastructure, with effective public health systems capable of providing clean, safe water. due to unsanitary living conditions, these populations and communities are at high risk of major cholera outbreaks as well as other diarrheal diseases.cholera infection still endemic in more than 50 countries is caused by v. cholera o1 (99% of cases worldwide), which produces a toxin causing severe watery diarrhea that can be rapidly fatal without treatment of dehydration. globally, gastroenteric infections kill some three million children per year and must remain one of the high priority issues in international aid for the coming decades. even industrialized countries with proper sanitation and water supply systems face the risks of waterborne disease outbreaks, since these can occur due to malfunctions and human error in monitoring water supply and safety, as the examples of milwaukee and walkerton, canada, in 2003 showed.the united nations 1966 international covenant on economic, social and cultural rights (icescr) confirmed the right to water in international law, noting that such a right is "indispensable for leading a life in human dignity" and "a prerequisite for the realization of other human rights." this international commitment was reaffirmed in 2002 that: the "human right to water entitles everyone to sufficient, safe, acceptable, physically accessible and affordable water for personal and domestic uses" (see box 5.1). this right is implicit in the rights to health, housing, food, life, and box 5.1 united nations: human rights to water and sanitation sufficient and continuous water supply for personal and domestic uses; the who estimates this should be 50à100 liters per person daily.safe, i.e., free from microorganisms, chemical substances, and radiological hazards that threaten health.acceptable in color, taste, and odor. physically accessible, i.e., within 1,000 meters of the home and collection time not to exceed 30 minutes, and safe for gender privacy.affordable for all and costs should not exceed three percent of household income. dignity enshrined in other international conventions, such as the international bill of human rights and the convention on the rights of the child. the focus is explicitly on the responsibilities of governments for delivering clean water and adequate sanitation services to all.the global initiative of the millennium development goals (mdgs) from 2001 to 2015 was a consensus-combined effort of 140 countries to achieve reduced poverty, improved education and health of women and children, and improved access to sanitation, as well as control of diseases such as malaria, hiv, and tb. the mdgs included a specific goal to increase access to safe water supplies. since 2011, the who global task force on cholera control has also worked to support the design and implementation of global strategies to contribute to capacity development for cholera prevention and control.between 1990 and 2015, progress was made so that 1.9 billion people gained access to piped drinking water and 2.1 billion people gained access to improved sanitation. after the mdgs the un created sustainable development goals (sdgs), which incorporate many of the mdg goals and an agenda for global sustainable development until 2030. among the 17 goals, number six is on "clean water and sanitation," and other goals are likely to seek to contribute to prevention and control of waterborne diseases (e.g., goal 3: good health and well-being).policy initiatives are essential to support the development and implementation of global strategies for policy and capacity development for cholera prevention locally, nationally, and globally. this is meant to promote donor support, technical exchange, coordination, and cooperation on cholera-related activities; to strengthen countries' policies and capacity to prevent and control cholera; to disseminate technical guidelines and operational manuals; and to support development of a research agenda with emphasis on evaluating innovative approaches to cholera prevention and control in affected countries.snow's brilliant, game-changing studies of cholera in 1854 earned him the title "the father of modern epidemiology." his work led directly to steps taken to improve water safety in london, setting new standards for other urban centers across the industrialized world, resulting in cholera, typhoid, and other enteric infectious diseases largely disappearing in many countries and saving of millions of lives over the years. yet cholera, along with many other waterborne diseases, remains a serious challenge to public health with severe health, economic, and social effects globally particularly on the poorest populations, especially those in developing countries or in disaster situations in the 21 st century.the potential to relieve suffering and death from cholera, and other gastroenteric infections from contaminated water (and food) resulting from john snow's work, is still far from being fully achieved. but his contribution has saved millions of lives. improving sanitation and reducing poverty are still closely linked issues in public health today in both industrialized and developing countries. the who has called for recognition of cholera as a neglected tropical disease and promotes its prevention and control globally. but clearly cholera and its many brother waterborne diseases are real and present dangers in a globalized world with millions traveling for business, tourism, and migration. john snow pointed the way, and the modern world needs to apply lessons learned from this case.the who global task force on cholera control, and who work to:1. support the design and implementation of global strategies to contribute to capacity development for cholera prevention and control globally; 2. provide a forum for technical exchange, coordination, and cooperation on cholera-related activities to strengthen countries' capacity to prevent and control cholera; 3. support countries for the implementation of effective cholera control strategies and monitoring of progress; 4. disseminate technical guidelines and operational manuals; 5. support the development of a research agenda with emphasis on evaluating innovative approaches to cholera prevention and control in affected countries; 6. increase the visibility of cholera as an important global public health problem through the dissemination of information about cholera prevention and control, and 7. conduct advocacy and resource mobilization activities to support cholera prevention and control at national, regional, and global levels.the following recommendations represent key lines of action highlighting the millennium development goals and the follow-up sustainable development goals recommended actions for increased access to safe water supplies and preventive care for diarrheal disease which despite progress with mdgs are still one of the leading causes of death under age 5 globally.continued global health efforts of the who and un and other international agencies should expand efforts to improve safe water, improved sanitary home facilities and safe community sewage management in low-and medium-income countries. 2. control and elimination of cholera and other microbiological causes of severe diarrheal disease must be given high priority on the global health agenda with training and improved safety of water sources and distribution systems. 3. research to develop effective vaccines that can be introduced to routine vaccination programs such as has successfully occurred with rotavirus vaccine should be of high priority of public private partnerships working to advance global health. 4. funding assistance to low-income countries and poor regions of middleand high-income countries and donors should include resources for the essential water infrastructure and monitoring systems and training of monitoring and laboratory personnel. 5. education for public health workers, political leaders, and the general public should stress the multiple interventions needed to ensure the quality and quality of safe drinking water, improved home sanitary facilities and community sewage systems, as fundamental to public health especially for preparation in disaster situations.$20 billion (cdc, 2018a) . many of these can be prevented by compliance with recommended disinfecting protocols. disease outbreaks in recent years are more severe due to global travel, large scale food processing, adaptation of microorganisms, and reduced vaccination rates (cdc, 2018b) . natural disasters in recent years have had a more severe impact, particularly when large metropolitan areas are affected. these events may disrupt water, sanitation, healthcare access, and hygiene practices; in addition, those who require sheltering during and after such events are at higher risk for illness due to crowded conditions (watson et al., 2007) .higher health care costs and limited access to health care may cause some individuals to avoid treatment, thus causing the spread of illness; in the us, 4.4% of persons failed to get health care due to cost, and 12% did not have a regular place to obtain health care (cdc, 2018c) . it is estimated that illnesses cost the us economy $273b in lost producitivity (forbes, 2018) . the average school age child in the us misses 4.5 days of school per year, impacting schools where funding is based on school attendance (deb group, 2018) .chronic illnesses, particularly respiratory, have been attributed to exposure to mycotoxins and allergenic proteins resulting from mold growth in built environments (pestka et al., 2008) . effective remediation of infected spaces is difficult and expensive. mold requires the presence of both moisture and an organic food source (many building materials will suffice) to thrive; mold growth in buildings thus typically results from plumbing leaks in buildings, poor humidity control, poor building design, appliance breakdown, and disasters such as floods.many clinical studies have found benefits to the use of hard surface antimicrobials to prevent exposure to pathogens that cause illness. for example, antimicrobials help prevent exposure to escherichia coli in household cleaning sponges (gerba et al., 2017; rossi et al., 2012) and frequent washing helps lower levels of coliform bacteria in kitchen towels (gerba et al., 2014) . children in classrooms where disinfecting wipes were used were over two times less likely to report absenteeism due to illness than children in classrooms where no disinfectant was used (bright et al., 2010) . significantly lower populations of norovirus were found in classrooms where disinfectants and hand sanitizers were used than where they were not (sandora et al., 2008) . the united states centers for disease control recommend the use of disinfectants in health care settings as part of an infection control program (cdc, 2018d) .surfactants and detergents, which lift soils from surfaces, are a recommended part of disinfection and sterilization in healthcare to work in concert with other antimicrobial agents (cdc, 2019a) . in this brief overview of a complex and dynamic field of research, the effect of surfactants as antimicrobials themselves will be explored. first, to set the context for the interfaces to be studied with surfactants, the chemical composition of microbial interfaces is discussed in the next section.bacterial interfacesgram positive bacteria are detected by their ability to respond to a gram stain, generally crystal violet, which detects peptidoglycan, a polymer of sugars and proteins, in the cell wall of these species. a high-level diagram of the interface of a gram positive bacterium is shown in fig. 1 .the key features that distinguish gram-positive bacteria from gram-negative bacteria are: a thick peptidoglycan layer; the presence of teichoic acids (copolymers of glycerol phosphate and carbohydrates) and lipids (together, these form lipoteichoic acids, which serve as chelators and also aid in adherence to the cell wall) (brown et al., 2013; percy et al., 2014) ; the crosslinking by dd-transpeptidase of peptidoglycan chains to form rigid cell walls; and a much smaller volume of periplasm than that in gramnegative bacteria (madigan et al., 2006) . some grampositive bacteria, such as clostridium difficile, form spores. the stabilized spore coat proteins have been studied by permpoonpattana et al. (2013) ; this coat makes it more difficult for antimicrobials to penetrate and kill.many gram-positive species are known to cause illness, including staphylcoccus aureus (skin, eye, and upper respiratory tract infections), c. difficile (intestinal illness), mycobacterium (tuberculosis, leprosy), and listeria (food poisoning) (buchanan and gibbons, 1974) .a simple schematic of a gram-negative bacterial cell wall is shown in fig. 2 . gram-negative bacteria display these characteristics (baron et al., 1996) : a thin peptidoglycan layer is present (this is much thicker in gram-positive bacteria); an outer membrane containing lipopolysaccharides (lps, which consists of lipid a (a phospholipid consisting of two glucosamine units, with phosphonates and acyl chains attached to each; this links the core and antigen components to the inner leaflet), core polysaccharide (comprised of oligosaccharides, linking o antigen with lipid a), and o antigen (strain-specific repetitive polysaccharide on the outermost surface of the cell) in its outer leaflet, and phospholipids in the inner leaflet (raetz and whitfield, 2002) ) and porins (proteins in arrangements like pores to enable transport of particular molecules) (university of hamburg, 2019); between the outer membrane and the cytoplasmic membrane, there is a space filled with periplasm, a concentrated gel-like substance comprised of proteins and ions; the s-layer is directly attached to the outer membrane rather than to the peptidoglycan; flagella (if present) have four supporting rings instead of two; there are no teichoic acids or lipoteichoic acids; lipoproteins are attached to the polysaccharide backbone; and most, with very few exceptions, do not form spores.medically relevant gram-negative species include types that cause sexually transmitted disease (e. g., neisseria gonorrhoeae), meningitis (neisseria meningitidis), respiratory symptoms (moraxella catarrhalis, haemophilus influenza, klebsiella pneumoniae, legionella pneumophila, and pseudomonas aeruginosa), urinary tract infections (e. coli, proteus mirabilis, enterobacter cloacae, and serratia marcescens), and gastrointestinal disease (helicobacter pylori, salmonella enteritidis, and salmonella typhi). some bacteria excrete extracellular polymeric substances after adherence to a surface, in which the bacteria grow and colonize, typically coating a surface. the resulting film is called a biofilm. these polymeric substances typically consist of polysaccharides, dna, proteins, and lipids (aggarwal et al., 2016; hall-stoodley et al., 2004; lópez et al., 2010) . the resulting polymeric matrix protects the microbes from attack, including that of antimicrobials, and can enable survival of bacteria outside a host for extended periods of time (hokkanson, 2018) . penetration of this matrix is key to killing. it can be done through additional chemical attack and/or physical disruption. biofilm contamination can be a key issue with plumbing, food and water handling systems, and medical devices, and can cause health issues such as gingivitis, eye infections from contaminated contact lenses, and middle-ear and urinary tract infections (rogers, 2008) .to prevent biofilm formation on a surface, surface charge can be modified by the adsorption of polymers, or the surface can be made hydrophobic to lessen the affinity for polar and ionic groups in cells and biofilms for the surface (guo, 2013) . small-scale surface roughness, also known as the lotus effect, can also be effective in repelling the adherence of bacteria and the generation of films (jansen and kohnen, 1995) . antimicrobial ingredients may be incorporated therein (contreras-garcia et al., 2011; stobie et al., 2008) .viruses exist in particles that consist of rna or dna genetic material, surrounded by a protein coat, or capsid, that protects the genetic material (clinical gate, 2018). virus particles take on a variety of shape, including helical, icosahedral, or more complex structures. in some cases, the capsid is further surrounded by a lipid membrane, or envelope. those viruses that possess the lipid membrane are referred to as "enveloped" viruses; those that do not are "non-enveloped" viruses. a simple rendering of the structure of a virus is shown in fig. 3 .enveloped viruses include groupings such as herpesviridae (e. g., herpes infections, chickenpox), poxviridae (e.g., smallpox), hepadnaviridae (e. g., hepatitus b), flavivirus (e.g., west nile, zika), togavirus (e.g., rubella, encephalitis), coronavirus (sars, colds, and mers), hepatitis d, orthomyxoviridae (influenza types a-d), paramyxoviridae (measles, mumps, and respiratory infections), rhabdoviridae (e. g. rabies, encephalitis), bunyavirales (hantavirus, crimean-congo hemorrhagic fever), filoviridae (ebola, marburg), and retroviruses (viruses that change viral genomes, used in gene therapy, but also causative of some types of cancer). to remain active, the lipid membrane envelope must remain wet. the envelope can also be readily disrupted by cleaning agents and antimicrobials, thus making them more dependent on direct human contact or bodily fluid contact to spread.nonenveloped groupings include adenoviridae (colds, pneumonia, tonsillitis, gastroenteritis, conjunctivitis, and meningitis), papillomavirus (hpv, which can cause cancer), and picornavirus (polio, coxsackie, and colds). the capsids for these species are more robust than with enveloped viruses. the uk national health service (2018) notes that norovirus, a nonenveloped virus that causes gastrointestinal illness, can survive on, and transmit illness from, hard surfaces for days to weeks.a simple schematic of a fungal cell is shown in fig. 4 . the outermost surface of the cell is comprised of glucans and cellulose; further there is the chitin layer, adjacent to the phospholipid membrane, which is adjacent to the cytoplasm. additional detail is described below.molds are fungal organisms that grow in multicellular filaments (hyphae). mold support structures consist predominantly of the carbohydrate polymers chitin and beta-1,3-glucan (munro, 2013) . a high-level schematic of a mold structure is shown in fig. 5 . the external structure is rigid and difficult to penetrate. in addition, the allergenic proteins and mycotoxins emitted by mold species, particularly stachyborys, can be a problem even after the mold organism has been killed, unless those proteins and toxins are deactivated (yang, 1972) . chlorine bleach kills mold (reynolds et al., 2012) ; additional use of surfactants helps the bleach wet and penetrate through the mold and building materials to be more effective (wisconsin dhs, 2018).yeast fungal organisms, in contrast to the multicellular structures of molds, are single-celled. there are many types of yeast, including some that are used in fermentation and baking processes. for this discussion, the focus will be on two pathogenic yeast species, those of the candida and cryptococcus types. the cell wall of candida albicans, the most commonly isolated yeast, and one attributed to common yeast infections in humans, consists of glucans, chitin (to a lesser extent than the molds discussed earlier), and mannoproteins (glycoproteins containing mannose, attributed to the immune response in host organisms) (chaffin et al., 1998) . cryptococcus yeasts have a shell comprised of polysaccharides that help to transport nutrients from their soil habitat (bose et al., 2003) . the best-known pathogenic species, c. neoformans, can cause serious illness, such as respiratory illness or meningitis in immunocompromised individuals (cdc, 2019b) . now that the chemical compositions of various microbial species have been shown, the next section will document studies of the antimicrobial action of different surfactant types.cationic surfactants are the best known class of antimicrobial surfactants, due to the widespread use of selected quaternary ammonium compounds (quats). in particular, alkyldimethylbenzylammonium chloride (adbac), alkyldimethylethylbenzylammonium chloride (adebac), and didecylammonium chloride (ddac), shown in fig. 6 , have found common use in hard-surface disinfection applications. these distinguish themselves from quaternary compounds used in antistatic or conditioning applications with a shorter alkyl chain length opposed with a benzyl substitution (typically c 10 -c 16 , versus the c 16 -c 18 dialkyl structures found in conditioning products), resulting in higher water solubility.cationic surfactants, particularly when applied at alkaline to neutral ph, show a high affinity for the interfaces of all three microbial classes of interest, due to the negative charge of the microbial interfaces. vieira and carmona-ribeiro (2006) found that charge reversal from negative to positive that occurred for c. albicans exposure to dioctadecyldimethyl ammonium bromide and hexadecyltrimethyl ammonium bromide was correlated with viability. however, a proposed mechanism (mcdonnell, 2007) for the antimicrobial action of • first, adsorb and penetrate cell wall • second, react with cytoplasmic membrane to cause disorder • third, leakage of lower-mw intracellular material • fourth, degradation of proteins and nucleic acids, • fifth, cell lysis and death quats are often referenced by "generations," which are defined as (gerba, 2015) :• 1st benzalkonium, alkyl chains, c 12 -c 18 .• 2nd aromatic rings with hydrogen and chlorine, methyl and ethyl groups. • 3rd dual quaternary ammonium compound(s) (qac); mixture of alkyl dimethyl benzyl ammonium chloride (lower toxicity). • 4th dialkylmethyl aminos with twin chains.• 5th synergistic combinations of dual qac.• 6th polymeric qac.• 7th bis-qac with polymeric qac.succeeding generations demonstrated increased efficacy. ioannou (2007) shows that equilibrium ddac adsorption (3rd generation) on microorganisms is significantly higher than that for adbac (first generation); ddac appears to form multiple layers, or perhaps accumulation in the cells begins to happen at a lower concentration than for adbac. kill rates for adbac were also demonstrated to be significantly faster for ddac than adbac. notably, a plateau was achieved in the kill/time curve, indicating that kill effectively stopped at a certain time point. this time was independent of concentration for ddac in the study, but decreased with increasing concentration of adbac.quats are most effective in the monomer form, where they can readily interact with cell interfaces, thus higher cmc values yield a higher monomer concentration. when formulating with quats, rosen (1989) notes the effect of the alkyl chain length on cmc, where the addition of one methylene group is estimated to decrease the cmc by half. corrin and harkins (1947) indicates that the increase of salinity can impact the cmc of an ionic surfactant; a 1 m nacl solution is estimated to decrease the cmc of cetylpyridinium chloride by 100×, again reducing the monomer concentration. in addition, walker et al. (2004) found that the zeta potential of bacteria can be affected by the presence of salts, potentially lowering the affinity of quats to cell interfaces. should one seek to thicken a quatcontaining formulation with the use of salt, microefficacy of the formula should be evaluated.anionic surfactants have been leveraged as antimicrobials. block (2001) notes that acid/anionic formulas were first leveraged in the 1930s; acidic ph of 2-3, particularly an anionic surfactant with polyvalent cations and alkyl chain length with a good match to the cell wall lipid structure (c 12 -c 16 ) aids in efficacy.with acidic ph values of 2-3, nelson et al. (2017) show that isoelectric points of many proteins are in this range, thus causing a switch in cell charge from negative to positive. this results in an improved affinity for anionic surfactants, particularly those sourced from strong acids that anionic surfactants without acids can also demonstrate antimicrobial activity. tsujimura et al. (2015) and inácio et al. (2011) showed that viruses can be deactivated with linear alkylbenzene sulfonate (las) and sodium lauryl sulfate (sls), respectively; johnston et al. (2000) show disinfection of s. aureus with an sds solution. sls is well known to denature proteins and is a useful part of cell lysing solutions for assays. las is used as a food contact sanitizer (epa, 2018a) and was shown to have antimicrobial efficacy in laundry; however, some las resistant strains were identified (maehara, 2017) . las acid neutralized with sodium carbonate showed inhibition of several microorganisms recovered from jewelry; the las ammonium salt was less effective (isitua, 2016) . sodium dodecyl benzene sulfonate (sdbs) is registered as an antimicrobial active that can be used in organic food processing (usda, 2018).the best known materials in this class are amine oxides and betaines. as amphoteric materials, at acidic ph, they can take on a positive charge, thus yielding stronger affinity for cell membranes provided the cell membrane isoelectric point is not achieved. birnie et al. (2000) notes efficacy against s. aureus and e. coli, with best performance at myristic or palmitic (c14-c16) chain lengths. krasowska et al. (2012) notes that a synergy in antimicrobial performance was found between cocoamidopropyl betaine and alkyl dimethyl amine oxide; however, the minimum inhibitory concentration of the blend was still much higher than that of benzalkonium chloride. subik et al. (1977) found that heterocyclic amine oxides demonstrated antimicrobial activity against bacillus, yeast, and molds; the inhibitory concentration decreased with increasing alkyl chain length, indicating that the longer chain lengths appear to interact more strongly with the cell membrane.glycine-based surfactants, such as dodicin (dodecyl-di (aminoethyl)-glycine) (block, 2001; copello et al., 2008) , show efficacy on bacteria and some viruses; optimal ph depends on the structure, as added aminoethyl functionality demonstrates peak efficacy at higher ph values. in copello's work, dodicin was formulated into an antimicrobial coating that demonstrated efficacy. (1997) reported that c10e6 and c12e6 surfactants showed efficacy against e. coli. the c 10 material adsorbed on the cell wall, whereas the c 12 material entered the membrane bilayer; both pathways interfered with viability. c 14 and c 16 materials had no microbial effect. in maehara's studies noted earlier, polyethoxylated lauryl ether had only a minor antimicrobial effect in laundry applications.surface-active glycolipids, such as sophorolipids and rhamnolipids, are derived biologically and have demonstrated antimicrobial activity (sleiman et al., 2009; magalhães and nitschke, 2013) . kim et al., (2002) found that a sophorolipid caused the release of intercellular enzymes in gram-positive bacteria, indicating membrane damage, and showed inhibition of mold growth, but was not effective against e. coli (gram-negative). efficacy thus varies by the type of microorganism-thus if you seek to target killing a particular type of microbe, a glycolipid may be a good choice (cortes-sanchez et al., 2013) .surfactin, a cyclic polypeptide derived from species of bacillus, has surface-active properties (heerklotz and seelig, 2001) . antibacterial (sabate, 2013) and antiviral (jung et al., 2000) activity have been demonstrated. its ability to lyze many types of cell membranes makes it a potential candidate for cancer treatment; however, to avoid lysis of noncancer cells, targeting cancer cell receptors is needed (wu, 2017) . kabara (1972) found that fatty acids demonstrated efficacy against bacteria and yeast. lauric acid was found to be the most effective of the saturated fatty acids, indicating that optimal hydrophobicity plays a role in microefficacy. monoenoic and dienoic (cis-configuration) acids showed improved efficacy over saturated acids; transconfigurations had no microefficacy. among derivatives of fatty acids, esterification reduces microefficacy, but derivatization to aldehyde, alcohol, or amine forms improves it. desbois and smith (2010) indicates that free fatty acids target cell membranes and disrupt electron transport and oxidative phosphorylation, and may play a role in cell membrane lysis and interference in other cellular metabolic pathways.surfactant raw materials, even those that demonstrate some antimicrobial activity, may require preservation. this is because surfactants may not be effective against contaminating species (for example, they may be effective only against gram-negative bacteria, or not against molds). susceptible raw materials have high water activity and ph between 3.0 and 10. if the surfactant can tolerate ph values above 10 or below 3.0, ph adjustment may be an effective way to preserve the raw material; vendors of preservatives can be consulted to identify the best preservative for the chemistry, the processing requirements and equipment, the regulations in the jurisdiction of sale, and the final use of the raw material (shaw, 2014; srikanth, 2018) .antimicrobial chemistry and advertising claims related to their efficacy are regulated in many countries (e. g., epa (2018b); hse (2018), cirs (2018), ec (2019)). active ingredients and formulations must be registered with proof of efficacy and demonstration of safety/environmental impact; inert ingredients must be registered as well. testing protocols/regulations vary by jurisdiction and final product application; these protocols require complete or nearly complete kill in a limited amount of time with a significant inocula population. significant lead time may be required to process registrations for both actives and formulations, and chemical efficacy and safety testing may be extensive and require significant financial investment. this registration is above and beyond that for chemical registries such as the united states toxic substances control act (tsca) and the european inventory of existing commercial chemical substances (einics).antimicrobial activity as described in this article or the references therein is not a guarantee of passing antimicrobial tests required for claims substantiation. those who wish to make such claims for products they intend to market need to consult regulatory agencies in their jurisdictions for specific requirements.in this brief overview of a large and complex topic presented at the 2018 surfactants in solution conference, the chemical nature of microbial interfaces was shown. through case studies, it was demonstrated that surfactants aid in the killing of microbes that cause illness. examples of microefficacy have been demonstrated in all major surfactant classes, but not all surfactants will demonstrate microefficacy, not all microbes will be equally susceptible to surfactants, and structural differences in a particular surfactant type can have an impact on antimicrobial efficacy. microefficacy may also vary with formulation variables such as ph and ionic strength. formulators who seek antimicrobial claims on disinfecting products should consult local regulations for the appropriate testing methodologies and requirements for making claims. this article, as it was derived from a conference presentation, is not intended to be a full review of this topic, but an overview to guide those formulating antimicrobial cleaning products for inanimate surfaces.middle east respiratory syndrome coronavirus (mers-cov) emerged in june 2012 in the kingdom of saudi arabia (ksa), 1 and the first healthcare−associated mers infection was described in multiple facilities in al-hasa, ksa. 2 since then, a total of 2,229 cases have been reported to the world health organization from 27 countries, with an overall case fatality rate of 35.6%. 3 most cases of mers-cov have been reported in the arabian peninsula, with ksa having the majority of reported cases. 4 mers-cov causes multiple outbreaks within and outside saudi arabia. 4 such outbreaks may cause economic and infection control burdens on affected healthcare facilities. during the severe acute respiratory syndrome (sars) outbreak, the disease had a great impact on infection control measures. 5 in a simulation involving outbreaks of sars, 2009 pandemic h1n1, and 1918spanish influenza, these situations resulted in additional costs of $25,000-$99,000 when no alert was present to as high as $1,537,000 for sars during an orange alert level. 6 during the initial years of mers-cov outbreaks, the exact infection control requirements were not known, 7 although there was a known need to increase infection control capacity in healthcare settings. 8 although a few articles have addressed the preparedness of hospitals to face mers, there are no data on the impact of mers-cov on infection control resources within hospitals. 9, 10 here, we study the infection control influence of mers-cov by analyzing data on specific infection control parameters using a hospital-based analysis.our hospital was the first outside the united states to be accredited by the joint commission and to subsequently maintain accreditation by the joint commission international. the organization has state-of-the-art infection control practices and procedures. the hospital was one of the first in the world to deal with mers-cov cases, when 99 patients who met the case definition of suspected mers-cov were admitted. of those cases, 17 tested positive and 82 tested negative for mers-cov between april 1, 2013, and june 3, 2013. [11] [12] [13] of the positive cases, as described previously, 30% had healthcare−associated infections, because the hospital received patients in transfer from other facilities. 2 in this study, we aimed to re-evaluate the impact of these cases on infection control practices, including the use of gloves, surgical masks, n95 respirators, alcohol-based hand sanitizer, and soap, expressed as ml per 1,000 patientdays. data on the monthly use of gloves (pairs), surgical masks, and n95 respirators were obtained from the central supply service, assessed based on retrospective analysis of overall supply ordering by the hospital, and expressed per 1,000 patient-days. we also evaluated any change in monthly hand hygiene compliance rates. the data span from may 2012 to july 2013 and include the pre-mers period (may 2012 to march 2013), the mers period (april to may 2013), and the post-mers period (june to july 2013). data were extracted from the infection control database, and monthly patient days were obtained from the health information unit. this study was approved by the institutional review board of the johns hopkins aramco healthcare.during the observation period, the utilization of personal protective equipment (ppe) with cases of mers-cov compared with the period before mers-cov cases increased dramatically from 2,947.4 to 10,283.9 per 1,000 patient-days (p < .0000001) for surgical masks and from 22 to 232 per 1,000 patient days (p < .0000001) for n95 masks (fig 1) . it is interesting to note that the increase in utilization of n95 masks preceded the increase in surgical mask utilization by about 1 month.the utilization of alcohol-based hand sanitizer and soap is shown in figure 2 ; there was a significant increase in the used amount (p < .0000001). hand hygiene compliance rates are shown in figure 2 . the hand hygiene compliance rate increased from 73% just before the occurrence of the first mers case to 88% during mers cases (p = .0001) (fig 3) . the monthly added cost was $16,400 for the included infection control items, such as hand sanitizers, soap, surgical masks, and n95 respirators.in the most recent updates by the world health organization, a total of 2,040 (31%) cases were healthcare facility−associated infections. 14 in addition, initial mers-cov symptoms tend to be nonspecific and might not be noticed. thus, adherence to standard precautions is a critical factor in the prevention of mers-cov transmission. 14 this adherence, as well as the initial uncertainty about transmission routes early in the course of the disease, had resulted in widespread fear of mers-cov. it is known that application of standard infection control results in the termination of mers-cov outbreaks. 2, 4, 15, 16 here, we showed a significant increase in the use of ppe (mainly surgical masks, respirators, alcohol-based hand sanitizer, and soap). there was a significant increase in the utilization of surgical masks and respirators during the study period. there are mixed recommendations for the care of patients with mers-cov with regard to placing patients in airborne isolation and thus the use of n95 respirators, droplet precautions, and surgical masks. 7, 15, 17, 18 the use of surgical masks was noted to increase significantly during the 2009 h1n1 influenza pandemic, with a reported 52% increase in use. 19 this increase in the use of ppe is paralleled by an increase in cost. it is recommended that hospitals maintain an adequate supply of ppe for use during infectious disease outbreaks. in 1 study, it was calculated that 4 sets of ppe (n95 respirators, double gloves, gowns, and goggles) per day are needed for each healthcare worker in the high-risk group, and 2 sets of ppe are required for medium-and low-risk groups. 20 another implication for the increased use of ppe is the generation of medical waste, which we did not address in this study. in 1 simulation exercise, an additional 570 l of waste was generated per day. 21 we were not able to show a significant increase in hand hygiene practices despite the significant increase in utilization of alcohol-based hand sanitizers. this observation may be related to the fact that baseline hand hygiene was about 88% in the preceding months. however, the hand hygiene compliance rate dropped to 73% just before the occurrence of the first mers case and then picked up to 88% (p = .0001). it has been shown that both observation and a multifaceted approach increase hand hygiene compliance, 22, 23 and that utilization of secret shoppers may give a false sense of the actual rates of hand hygiene compliance. 24 another possible explanation is that the utilized soap and hand sanitizer may have been used by patients and visitors.although the data are from 2013, which may be considered a limitation, they are still valid because this is the only study documenting the burden of this new virus on health infrastructure even though 5 years have elapsed since its emergence. other limitations of the study include the fact that the presented data are small and represent only one non−ministry of health hospital, and it was not possible to use the data to draw conclusions regarding a national estimate of disease burden. there are multiple hospitals supervised by the ministry of health, in addition to other hospitals supervised by various institutions and the private sector.there was a significant increase in the utilization of surgical masks, respirators, soap, and alcohol-based hand sanitizers during the study period. such an increase is a challenge and adds cost to the healthcare system.the 'sweating sickness' (sudor anglicus) . on yet other occasions, these changes are merely due to cultural appreciations, as it has happened with certain sexual practices such as masturbation or homosexuality, which used to be framed as stigmatized diseases. on the other hand, disease is not always considered only harmful: thus it may be considered a distinction of the gods, as was the case of epilepsy in ancient times, or among some historical aboriginal tribes. nevertheless, the hippocratic text on the sacred disease established the natural condition of this illness, similar to other medical affections. the same disease was associated with the devil by the christians, and historically, it had always been a supposed distinction of great personages from caesar to napoleon. disease can also be considered a way toward perfection or transformations, leading to the creation of art or to the salvation of the soul, as melancholy or sorrow were for centuries.disease may also have political repercussions: it is claimed that george the third's madness gave rise to problems for the british crown, while roosevelt's fragile health was considered to have placed him in a weak position in the yalta negotiations. socially, disease has sometimes unjustly been considered the stigma of groups (as acquired immune deficiency syndrome (aids) for homosexuals, and poor or marginal groups, or alcoholism for black or aboriginal peoples). medicine and politics have endeavored to preempt social changes by means of the contested eugenic theories and practices of social engineering, inspired by francis galton at the end of nineteenth century, which began with recommendations or laws to avoid marriages entailing risks (real or imaginary), and went on to such processes as sterilizations. heredity is today considered an important predisposition for disease, but mostly not in a deterministic way. hereditary conditions are thus intertwined with cultural, social, religious, and moral ones. besides, in contrast with the stark determination of former times, there is today an attempt to draw new optimism from the possibilities of genetic modifications. yet, in this latter respect, there is fear of a future where such a formidable force could rest in the hands of the rich and powerful.an important renewal in the study of infectious diseases was driven by bacteriological discoveries, and the theories about infection and immunity. in this respect, hans zinsser in rats, lice, and history combined them with human history, proposing biographical interpretations of epidemiological history. the study of the transmission of pathogens through animals and human beings (as vectors and hosts), living in a physical, biological, social, and cultural environment, was crucial in bringing about a new history of disease and also much later in fueling the most recent ecological history. in the meantime, the essential contributions of historical demography and social history licensed the consideration of the history of diseases as 'biographies,' shared by human cultures, living beings, and natural environment. but with the development of accurate technologies of diagnosis, the real identification of old plagues is more and more demanding.paleopathology enables us to discover the high incidence of diseases in the early inhabitants of the earth, especially where such diseases left their mark on bones. it is thus possible to detect remnants of tumors, infections, necrosis, osteoporosis, and malformations, as also traumatisms, dental alterations, rickets, rheumatism, and other diseases of the bones. today, laboratory analysis allows the possibility of detecting remnants of other diseases, germs, or lesions, in animal or human remains, including of course the famous mummies. from the first settlements in the fertile crescent, changes have taken place in the relationship of man and animals with their environment and it is possible to establish an extensive catalog of diseases that have largely subsisted down to this very day. particularly significant are the forms of settlement, the crops and hunting, and the contact of man with cattle, pets, and parasites, as well as the relations between peoples, through mixing and trade, wars, and migrations.malaria originated in tropical africa, accompanying the dawn of humanity, from plasmodia infecting animals and hominids. caused by different plasmodia (plasmodium vivax and plasmodium falciparum among others, with different geographical distribution), its relation with human populations is shaped by migrations and deforestation, hunting and farming, climate and soils, crops, animals and foods, and a complicated immunity resulting from ancient genetic mutations and new infections. thus, with the early human emigrations, it expanded through eurasia, and in the third millennia bc, malaria had already set in the early civilizations in marshy areas where the water, the climate, and the crops provided the conditions for the anopheles mosquitoes to infect in crowded populations. evidence for the existence of intermittent fevers is already to be found in ancient cultures, finding suitable conditions along the yellow, indus, ganges, euphrates, or nile rivers.different interpretations considered the disease to originate from climatic or environmental factors, from particles or small animals, because of spirits or gods, or from unbalanced or disharmonic alterations. the connection between fevers, splenomegaly, and marshy areas appears in the hippocratic texts, such as on airs, waters and places. deforestation, agriculture, temperature, and a greater population density, as well as military and commercial movements, favor the spread of the disease. in italy, in republican times, the disease becomes acute; and it was recommended that the marshy lands be either abandoned or sold and that people should dwell on high groundthe latter being traditional advice and here defense reasons also counted. also, the cleaning and draining of swamps was considered, this being the origin of systems of engineering sanitation. the spread of malaria got worse and worse in rome owing to negligence and flooding, climate and agricultural changes, wars, travels, and migrations, and it reached its zenith at the time of the fall of the roman empire, a cataclysm to which it may have contributed. but when the old empire declined, another frightening ghost traveled through the mediterranean sea.plagues were considered in ancient cultures as diseases originating in god's punishment, with a violent pattern, and quick and terrible diffusion, affecting and killing a large number of persons. destructive epidemic catastrophes were narrated frequently in mesopotamian, biblical, egyptian, indian, or chinese sources, and in 430-426 bc, thucydides describes the plague of athens in the war against sparta, but it is doubtful that this case refers to the bubonic plague. this epidemic death is considered the beginning of the decline of athenian hegemony, the crisis of the democracy, and culture of the pericles era. fear, war, siege of the city, and its maritime port were accompanied by the death of the great ruler pericles. later on, the first reliable description of this disease is that given by rufus of ephesus in the ad first to the second century, in the epoch of trajan; and in the sixth century, the plague of justinian initiates the first great epidemic cycles of bubonic plague. soldiers and merchants, animals and merchandises, and slaves and prisoners all contribute to linking up the extremes of the known world. a consequence of this contact was the antonine plague in the second century. this plague -and othersis attributed to smallpox, a disease that had already existed as far back as 3000 years ago, as certain mummies show.in the middle ages, leprosy spread widely, allegedly as a result of the increasing east-west relations trough trade, travels, and wars. this biblical and present day disease is accompanied by social repulse and malignant connotations since dirtiness and overcrowding provided the conditions for the spread of the otherwise not extremely contagious mycobacterium leprae. in this respect, the way to santiago de compostela where pilgrims slept in groups and under unhealthy and dirty conditions provided a fertile ground for this disease. another markedly religious character is to be found in the 'sacred fire,' 'st anthony's fire,' or ergotism; a disease that developed in people eating rye infected by ergot, it was soon prevented, but reappeared during the course of severe famines.these diseases are linked to many others that owed their spread to squalor and poverty, for example, parasites and infections, scabies, mycoses and lice, anthrax and ophthalmia. natural catastrophes, wars, poverty, and famines were escorted by mental diseases, tuberculosis and pneumonia, traumatisms and poisonings, diarrheal diseases and fevers, as well as smallpox and measles. in the mediterranean basin, malaria continued to be endemic with the population tending to resort to residing on the hills and mountains, far from marshy lands. the extension of malaria involved south and southeast of asia, central china and japan, and also north europe. the plague set in the growing cities with the burden of rats and fleas, making this disease an explicative example par excellence of epidemic history. a second epidemic cycle began with the black death in 1348. commerce and the cities collapsed, giving rise to the origin of the modern european kingdoms. at this time, venice established control over persons and ships, in order to avoid the spread of plague, arriving from distant lands. dark ages are ending, and new worlds are opening in culture and geography.european expansion meant a sudden traffic of diseases mostly toward the new world. the discovery of america, with its scattered population devoted to agriculture, where there were no dirty cities, and where the inhabitants were devoid of immunity to the diseases of old europe, produced an enormous demographic crisis. certain diseases, such as smallpox (and measles) ravaged the indigenous population; this very contagious and harsh illness was introduced in the caribbean and mexico, and destroyed american indigenous populations. syphilis came supposedly from america (although other human treponematoses were present in other continents), brought back by the spaniards and it caused havoc since renaissance in europe and soon all around the world. troop movements spread an unknown disease called 'tabardillo,' or 'typhus exanthematicus,' bringing about serious suffering for armies and poor people. sea voyages led to the development of scurvy, due to the lack of fresh food.other diseases also voyaged overseas, such as yellow fever; although it originated from africa, due to the commerce of slaves and merchandise, special temperature conditions and mosquitoes as vectors were required for the contagion. in the seventeenth century, it took root in brazil and also spread to the caribbean and throughout america, reaching new york and boston and likewise colombia, ecuador, and peru. it affected warm america and europe, through the iberian peninsula. immunity and cutoffs in commerce stalled the disease, but it remains endemic in tropical areas of america and africa. also, malaria arrived to america with the european conquest in sixteenth century, beginning in the caribbean and central america and soon spreading to south and north america, becoming endemic in hot, wet, and low lands. malaria was combated since the seventeenth century by the use of cinchona bark (peruvian bark), found in peru, as an indigenous medical practice. later on, the quininethe alkaloid obtained from the bark in french laboratoriesgave rise to rich industry and trade. trees were cultivated in british and dutch colonies, mainly in java. after being taken in the second world war by the japanese army, synthetic products such as atebrine and chloroquine were obtained. getting worse with agriculture, mining and livestock changes, settlements, and slavery trade, malaria becametogether with yellow fevera scourge along the warm and hot reaches. throughout the american conflicts between european empires, and later during the american independence wars, both diseases played an important role, infecting and killing nonimmune soldiers.plague slowed demographic growth in europe since the wars between modern and powerful nations, the crowded and dirty cities, and the developing trades impeded protection against the disease. the great writer daniel defoe remembered the terrible contagion in london in 1665 in journal of the plague year. after the great european plague of marseille in 1720, the relative peace of the eighteenth century allowed western europe to set up sea and land defenses, with austria becoming a solid bulwark in the face of the ottoman empire, thus sealing off all possible spread of the plague. toward the middle of the nineteenth century, the third wave of the disease broke out and, with the exception of europe, it spread to all countries including asia, africa, and paradises like america and australia, leaving remnants in many places. the eradication of plague in europe was a result of the advent of public hygiene, immunity to disease, and the disappearance of rats and of the old and dirty wooden buildings. the great london fire in 1666 'purified' the city, since the hygienic rebuilding was carried out in stone, eliminating animals and dirt.the disappearance of plague from europe was followed by the outbreak of cholera, which had been endemic in india for centuries. this disease was described by western travelers in the sixteenth century and its spread to europe and america was a consequence of pilgrimages, trade, and a lack of cleanliness in water. a great pandemic broke out in 1817 from india and spread through eastern africa and southern asia, arriving to china and the philippines, and in a second wave, it spread through persia reaching russia and poland in 1830. then this second wave swept across europe and reached america by 1832. throughout 100 years, terrible waves spread from the east. however, the timely and necessary cleansing of urban water supplies helped to progressively stall its advance. nevertheless, as late as 1892, the free hanseatic city of hamburg suffered an outbreak of cholera epidemic, while the neighboring altona, governed by the prussian reich, was able to avoid the disease, thanks to the successful filtering of its water. local and national governments advanced in hygiene and they attempted to bring about healthier cities by means of appropriate public health measures. the nineteenth century sees the beginning of the demographic revolution in europe, followed by developing countries, in america for example, with a sharp decline in mortality, especially maternal-infant mortality. old inoculation and the new vaccination proposed in 1798 by edward jenner fought smallpox successfully. studies about human immunity since the last decades of nineteenth century began a new medical approach to the prevention and understanding of illness, being successful in the contention of many diseases, which have a long record of burdens and deaths. mother care also advanced both throughout pregnancy and at childbirth and during lactation.the rise of great and industrial cities with low-grade outskirts and the emigration of peasants to the city favored the spread of maladies associated with poverty, hard work, squalor, lack of appropriate food, and exposure of people devoid of defenses. some of the diseases were strictly occupational as in the case of miners and textile workers who were exposed to injury, and to industrial poisons that affected the proletariat. sir percivall pott described in the eighteenth century the cancer produced in professional cleaners (chimney sweep) by chemical toxics contained in soot. many other diseases, such as cancers, will be attributed to chemical and physical aggressions, including radioactivity. other diseases were closely related to the harsh and dirty conditions of life such as spread of typhoid fever and pulmonary diseases. tuberculosis spread over the turn between the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries, and while it was represented as the disease in fashion, affecting notable and distinguished people, it struck the proletariat much more severely. the same can be claimed regarding the enormous spread of syphilis, and drug abuse, beginning with alcohol and continuing with cocaine and morphine.the discovery of the microbiological origin of infectious diseases, and of effective therapies against them, and the development of public health changed the pathological landscape in developed countries. the long way between ignaz semmelweis and alexander fleming arrived to the contention of infections in health care. the twentieth century marked the descent of the high mortality rates in countries that reached high standards of sanitary development, investing in health care and public health. such advances have been due to public health services, hospitals, antibiotics, surgery, and vaccination, and they have been reinforced by the developments in immunology and microsurgery, pharmacology, and biotechnology and with the promising future of genetic engineering. the international health solidarity promoted by the world health organization (who), and other governmental and nongovernmental organizations (ngos), including church missionaries, were accompanied by better governance of nations, and internationalization of information and resources. the twentieth century established a serious change in geopathology of diseases. smallpox is the first disease to be considered totally eradicated with only some samples of the virus being kept at a few laboratories for study purposes.a cuban doctor (carlos finlay) found the method by which yellow fever is transmitted through mosquitoes (aedes aegypti). after the cuban war and during the opening of the panama channel, yellow fever and malaria were studied and faced by us army and american sanitarians (walter reed, william gorgas), and later by the rockefeller foundation. impeding mosquito reproduction and avoiding bites and spreading chemical products were useful. fortunately, an effective vaccine against yellow fever was later discovered. during nineteenth century, malaria expanded all around the world, arriving to the central extensions of america and eurasia. emigrations and settlements, wars, famines, climate change, and revolutions in travels, such as railroads and steamships, contributed. during the napoleonic wars and the american civil war, malaria was seriously extended, as it was also during wars and revolutions in twentieth century.in the interwar years, the rockefeller foundation and the league of nations sponsored international campaigns against the disease. many governmental campaigns also fought against malaria; several national programs were effective, from taiwan and china to the united states, brazil, and argentina, passing across the mediterranean basin, from italy to egypt. opinions and campaigns oscillated between quinine treatment, fighting against mosquitoes (by dichlorodiphenyltrichloroethane (ddt)), and improvements in life, education, and land sanitation, clearing up the marshy areas. malaria has been eradicated from europe thanks to drainage, improvements in crop cultivation, mechanical barriers, quinine and modern drugs such as atebrine and chloroquine, and insecticides. colonial settlements entered tropical areas backed by quinine, nets in beds, hygiene, and sanitation, but transmissible diseases were continuously a serious burden for colonial armies, in america, africa, or asia. some chemical products such as ddt were a successful support for soldiers, travelers, merchants, or settlers. nevertheless, in 1955, the world health assembly, meeting in mexico, warned against the resistance of the mosquitoes to insecticides. mosquitoes are still today carrying both diseases, and also dengue. chagas disease produced by trypanosoma cruzi is endemic in america, and sleeping sickness caused by trypanosoma brucei (rhodesiense and gambiense) occurs in africa.today, an effort is being made to involve governments in the fight against malaria, a disease that represents a danger to nearly half of the world's population. in africa, the situation is very serious due to the changes in agriculture and irrigation as well as in work and migrations, the political and economic problems, the severe droughts, famines and wars, the bad sanitary conditions following in the wake of housing expansion and deforestation, and harsh social and economic exploitation. together with the who and the united nations international children's emergency fund (unicef), regional institutions such as the pan american health organization and the us government are financing programs of eradication. the who, through the 51st world health assembly of 1998, set up the program 'roll back malaria' and, with aid from unicef and the world bank, is endeavoring to bring about economic and sanitary improvements in developing countries. in twentyfirst century, the global fund to fight aids, tuberculosis and malaria is attaining important amount of resources and success. nets treated with insecticides are very useful for protection against mosquitoes. today, hope is also placed on vaccination and in the sterilization, or genetic modification, of the mosquitoes. yet, malaria continues to be endemic in warm zones of america, asia, and with severe cruelty, in africa.the rapid increase of world population in huge metropolitan areas was accompanied by new settlements and emigrations, wars, conflicts and revolutions, and marginalization of aboriginal cultures and disinherited peoples. throughout the past two centuries, economical, social, and political expansion of the west led to studies on tropical medicine, creating hospitals and laboratories and institutions on public health and sanitary departments. cholera continues to be feared in asia, between india and the far east, and also in warm zones in america and africa. wars and catastrophes, travels and migrations, as well as famines and unhealthy conditions allowed the expansion of the cholera germ, the vibrio cholerae isolated by robert koch in 1883, as was the case of the recent tragedy of haiti. at the end of nineteenth century, the third outbreak of bubonic plague allowed its bacteriological and epidemiological description. the germ of bubonic plague yersinia pestis, discovered by yersin and kitasato, is still to be found throughout the world. the germ is carried by rats, rattus rattus: rat fleas are the arthropod vectors transmitting 'epizootic' plague to humans from rodent hosts, and related species, but transmission among humans is also possible. almost forgotten in the developed world, with several and very effective antibiotic therapies, there is, nevertheless, always the possibility that the devil may once more send his rats to the old, rich cities.but other viruses have taken its place in the twentieth century. thus the very old and common influenza caused several cruel and heavy outbreaks; among many others, influenza pandemics began in 1918 and reappeared in 1957, 1968, and 2003 : these were known, respectively, as the 'spanish flu,' which perhaps originated in the united states, the 'asian flu,' the 'hong kong flu,' and the 'avian flu,' mostly coming from asia. vaccines are very useful in its prevention, as they are also in the control of many infectious childhood diseases, such as measles, rubella, mumps, chicken pox, whooping cough, diphtheria, and so on. old diseases such as poliomyelitis exploded in the united states and europe, affecting nonimmune children, and this disease has only been controlled in developed countries by means of vaccination. during the past century, individuals have observed astonished the spread of new or reemerging diseases, from plague, cholera, influenza, measles, and malaria, to aids, west nile fever, avian flu, severe acute respiratory syndrome, resistant tuberculosis, hemorrhagic fever (ebola virus disease), transmissible spongiform encephalopathy (creutzfeldt-jakob disease), and others. unfortunately today, many frequent or rare diseases do not have adequate treatment, and many germs are developing resistance to antibiotics, a serious threat for its affectivity.aids has meant a development in the study of viral infections, and this disease has associations with the exploitation of poor people, unsafe sex, and drug trading, but it also affected an elite sector, which has sprung rapid research in the field. the world commotion surrounding this disease has served both to reveal human altruism on the one hand, and, on the other, contempt toward those infected by the disease, since aids became more and more the lot of the poor, mostly in large areas of africa, or india, and of downcast or marginal groups such as the chronic patients, drug addicts, prostitutes, and homosexuals. nevertheless, heterosexual transmission through unsafe sex and transmission from mother to child are today serious dangers. safe sex and antiretroviral treatment are the best contention, while a vaccine will be obtained perhaps in the coming future.mental affections were considered till modern times, as devilish, criminal, or vicious behaviors, more an ethical or social than a medical problem. in the eighteenth century, the natural explanation of mental disease was established, according to alexander crichton, or philippe pinel, and in the nineteenth and twentieth centuries, its psychogenic process, following sigmund freud. from pinel to freud, the possibility of treatment and remedy of mental disease was established, leading the soul of the patient with convictions and health measures to the cure. the discovery in recent times of some effective pharmacological drugs acting on human mind, and conduct, has allowed better treatment. reclusion was considered a doubtful possibility, restricted to some severe problems. the old lunatic asylums, founded since middle ages, were being abolished or completely renewed. nevertheless, mental illnesses wreak serious havoc at present times all around the world, affecting all ages, genders, and conditions, without any distinction. sometimes, the misunderstanding regarding mental diseases still produces cruel treatments, harsh restrictions, or punishment.during the past decades, economic and social improvements led to quick globalization and urbanization, with longer human life and changes in disease patterns. political, sanitary, and economic development managed to stamp out infectious morbidity, and forms of suffering or living illnesses are changing. unicef and who, in collaboration with governments, foundations, and ngos, promote successful campaigns of vaccination, especially focusing on children. the burden of infectious, parasitic, and transmissible diseases changed to chronic diseases and sufferings related with aging and lifestyles, likewise, nutritional disorders, cancer, or heart and brain vascular diseases. on the other hand, the increase in life expectation favors the development of alzheimer and other chronic and degenerative diseases, neurological and muscular diseases, mental affections such as schizophrenia, mania and depression, diabetes, vascular diseases, and of course, the terrible presence of cancer. accidents and traumatisms, due to traffic and sports, factories and radiation, or even home accidents, are something that the twenty-first century is inheriting. blindness, deafness, dumbness, and other frequent physical and mental disabilities, with multiple origins in traumatisms or accidents, genetic, metabolic and degenerative diseases, infectious diseases such as poliomyelitis, or cerebral and vascular affections, make daily life difficult and, at the same time, make economical, institutional, and social support necessary. incapacitating and chronic diseases lead to severe dependency and so the need for protection of disabled individuals is leading to the founding of patients' associations looking for help and justice, creating new rights and demands. ghettos and migrations, hard work, poverty and unemployment, and some of the old drugs such as alcohol, heroine, and tobacco or new synthetic ones are causing havoc even to the rich world.but in developing countries, the old morbidity due to transmissible diseases continues to exist, maintaining a very low life expectation. certainly, the increase of migrations and of urban population are requiring more water, food, and energy, producing climate warming, deforestation and agriculture changes, and dangerous issues such as waste, toxics, and pollutants. potable water, health services (medical care or medical drugs), sanitation and hygiene are urgently requested. environmental degradation and the confrontations between national, social, and ethnic groupings are a serious danger for healthy life. china, japan, and south korea and other expanding countries have lived through these challenges in different ways from diverse british colonies such as australia or india. different traditions and cultures are extremely important to understand the relations between peoples and diseases. death is most rampant amid the least protected and poorest people, especially women, children, and the elderly, with harsh sufferings such as wars, famine, and exploitation. under such circumstances, diseases caused by deprivation and infection continue to be the most rampant, causing high death rates among the population. old and new diseases, such as malaria and aids, are ruining great stretches of africa. leprosy and cholera, tuberculosis and tetanus, and many child diseases, such as mumps, measles, tetanus, or meningitis are in poor countries and populations the salt of the earth. private and public funds, and international solidarity, are always necessary for relieving these harsh sufferings. the united nations millennium development goals are also facing them.according to the who report global health risks (2009), the better or worse conditions for mortality and for the burden of disease are seriously conditioned by several circumstances, related to lifestyles: blood pressure, blood glucose, physical activity, alcohol and tobacco, weight, safe sex, safe water, sanitation, and hygiene. obviously, these circumstances and their consequences are very different, depending on the social level of individuals and the public health governance of nations and peoples. if developing countries are freeing themselves from transmissible diseases, now they are fighting against noncommunicable diseases, related to social level, health organization, and hygienic customs. some american, asian, and african countries are still supporting a terrible burden of disease, which is also shared by low-income population in developed countries. the rio political declaration in the world conference on social determinants of health (who-rio de janeiro, brazil, 21 october 2011) is a new call looking for equity, justice, and universality of health. it has recommended adopting better governance for health and development; promoting information, justice, and participation in policy making and during the implementation process; including civil society like indigenous people; and reducing health inequities in the health sector. this declaration promotes research on the relationships between social determinants and differences (economic, ethnic, and gender inequalities) and health equity. we are all convinced about the relation between poverty, social discrimination, low education and low sanitation, and diseases and death.confidentiality to assure the right of the individual to privacy involves ethical issues in the use of health information systems. records of birth, death, reportable communicable and selected noncommunicable conditions (such as cancers, birth defects, neurological conditions), and hospitalization data—e.g. admissions by cause, length of stay—are essential data bases providing basic tools of epidemiology and health management. the use of detailed individual data, such as in mandatory reporting of infectious diseases and birth defects, e.g., is needed for case-finding and follow-up activities which is vital for population health monitoring and good epidemiologic management of disease outbreaks and routine monitoring functions of public health. however, caution is needed in data use to avoid individual identification to prejudice privacy, or that could be used punitively, such as in denial of access to health insurance or employment for smokers, alcoholics, or aids patients on the grounds that these are known causes of health damage that may be attributed to self-inflicted risk factors or preexisting conditions. this may become even more important if preexisting conditions or genetic susceptibility come to be used as determining factors to access health insurance or employment. reporting is mandatory for physical for sexual abuse and criminally linked injuries as a measure essential for protection of vulnerable groups such as children, women, elderly, ethnic minority groups, or the general public from serious harm from bullying, abuse, violence or incitement to genocide.protection of the individual’s rights to privacy, and freedom from arbitrary and harmful medical procedures or experiments may clash with the rights of the community to protect itself against harmful health issues. this conflict comes into much of what is done in public health practice, which has both an enforcement basis in law and practice as well as a humanitarian and protective aspect based on education, persuasion, and incentives. society permits, indeed requires its governments to act for the common good, but sets limits that are protected by the constitution, laws, courts and administrative appeal mechanisms.democratic societies have the right and obligation to legislate work, including mine and construction safety regulations, and traffic safety including speed permitted, wearing seat belts, use of car seats for small children and non-use of cellphones during driving. offenders may be punished by significant fines and be subjected to strict educational efforts to persuade them to comply. similarly, the community must ensure sanitary conditions to prevent hazards or nuisances for neighbors. society must act to protect the environment against the unlawful poisoning of the atmosphere, water supply, or earth. enforcement is a legitimate and necessary activity of the public health network to protect the community from harm. table 13.1 shows topics where individual rights and responsibilities predominate, and a second set of rights that are the prerogative of the community to protect its citizens against public health hazards. sometimes the issues overlap with political, advocacy, or legal action so that court decisions or new laws are needed to adjudicate precedents for the future.the 20th century was replete with mass murders, executions, and genocide with nationalistic, ideological, and racist motives perpetrated by fascist, stalinist, and radical xenophobic political movements when gaining governmental power by election or by revolution, in some cases using then-common public health terminology and concepts. in the 21st century, radical jihadist terrorist groups and governments such as in syria not only conduct mass killing of civilians, but also target ethnic minorities and religious groups with active genocide including deliberate use of chemical weapons, mass starvation, rape, murder and enslavement against civilians with bombings of civilians, medical workers, and hospital facilities.public health policy is guided by two distinct but interactive paradigms; the biotechnological disease and the social-ecological health paradigms. in the 19th century these were the germ theory and the miasma theories, long at loggerheads, yet both produced enormous gains in public health. the biomedical paradigm addresses alleviation of disease risk or manifest diseases, with immunizations, screening and risk-factor reduction. the social health paradigm addresses the improvement of the physical and socioeconomic environment and healthy living, with the objectives of reducing disease and inequities in health between socioeconomic and regional population health disparities.during the early part of the twentieth century, a segment of the social hygiene movement adopted ideas of racial improvement by compulsory termination of pregnancies and sterilization of the mentally ill, retarded, and other “undesirable persons.” by 1935, when the nazi sterilization laws were passed, about 20 states in america already had sterilization laws in effect with concurrence of the us supreme court. american eugenics policies were praised by hitler, and these ideas were adopted in nazi germany leading to execution of half a million “undesirables” under the eugenics concept, and were adapted for mass extermination of jews, gypsies, homosexuals, and others during the holocaust.the policies of eugenics were widely promoted by medical professionals in sweden, the united states and canada. this led to adoption of policies and programs to force legally sanctioned sterilization of mentally handicapped or mentally ill patients. this practice was attractive to nazi policy before and after its rise to power in 1933, with wide support among the medical and psychiatric professions. between 1939 and 1941, 180,000 psychiatric and physically handicapped patients were killed in germany with the active participation by medical doctors, psychiatrists, nurses, and ancillary personnel under direct guidance of the so called t4 program, named after the address of hitler’s headquarters from where it was directed.this corruption of public health distorted a socially oriented concept of public health to a racially oriented policy with horrendous actions of mass murder in the name of racial purity as a public health policy. this policy was supported and implemented by leading psychiatrists in a number of western liberal democratic countries providing a precedent adopted and expanded in monstrous manners in nazi germany with nearly total support and participation of a highly nazified medical profession. the t4 program utilized starvation and gassing to kill helpless people and these methods became the direct antecedent to the mass murder of jews, gypsies, homosexuals, soviet prisoners, and other “undesirables.”a noted cambridge professor of modern history, sir richard evans wrote:“at the heart of german history in the war years lies the mass murder of millions of jews in what the nazis called “the final solution to the jewish question in europe”. this book provides a full narrative of the development and implementation of this policy of genocide, while also setting it in the broader context of nazi racial policies toward the slavs, and toward gypsies, homosexuals, petty criminals and ‘asocials’.” (preface xiv).evans continues: “for many years, and not merely since 1933, the medical profession, particularly in the field of psychiatry, had been convinced that it was legitimate to identify a minority of handicapped as ‘a life unworthy of life’, and that it was necessary to remove them from the chain of heredity if all the many measures to improve the health of the german race under the third reich were not to be frustrated. virtually the entire medical profession has been actively involved in the sterilization programme, and from here it was but a short step in the minds of many to involuntary euthanasia” (page 82). “by the time the main killing programme had ended, in august 1941, a large part of the medical and caring professions had been brought in to operate the machinery of murder.… the circle of those involved had grown inexorably wider, until general practitioners, psychiatrists, social workers, asylum staff, orderlies, nurses and managers, drivers and many others had become involved, through a mixture of bureaucratic routine, peer pressure, propaganda and inducements and rewards.… having proved itself in this context, it was ready to be applied in others, on a far larger scale.” (p. 101).the t4 euthanasia program was administered directly from hitler’s main office “the euthenasia program was preceded by mass sterilization of nearly 400,000 ‘unfit’ germans before the war broke out” (p. 105).(evans rj. the third reich at war. new york: penguin press, 2006). the human and national cost of genocide lasts for generations. the hatred and fear may wane, but the trauma goes deep. it lasts with the victims and their descendants, but also with the perpetrating country and its culture. the nazi holocaust has downstream effects in public health in german-speaking countries over 65 years since the events took place. the eugenic theory assumption was that a healthy population must be “free” of “racially contaminated” individuals and inferior groups which led to a public policy to eliminate racially “unclean” members through forced sterilization and murder opening the door to a euthanasia program of mass execution of mentally and physically handicapped germans and others in psychiatric facilities, which provided a working model for the industrialized murder of the holocaust. this was in direct conflict to a 200-year tradition of germany’s socially-oriented public health grounded in the political philosophy of human rights and social justice, many of whose advocates were mostly exiled or murdered. many of the nazi oriented academic medical leaders during world war ii remained in key positions in the german public sector for many following decades.the nuremberg doctors trial in 1946–47 convicted many leading nazi physicians of crimes against humanity with severe punishments including hanging or long prison terms. however, many in the medical profession aligned with these horrors remained in leading positions in the medical community—one even being elected to head the world medical association then discussing the helsinki declaration of ethics in biomedical research before being forced to resign. the nuremberg trials and the subsequent helsinki declaration laid the fundamentals of biomedical ethics with regulations and requirements of ethical procedures and the institutional research board, often referred to as helsinki committees. these were established by individual research centers, universities, hospitals, and other health care facilities to supervise and approve (or refuse) applications seeking funding, conducting, and publishing research involving human subjects.the reappearance of genocide in the late twentieth century in the balkans and rwanda and in the twenty-first century in darfur with over 300,000 deaths and 2.5 million displaced persons highlight this as a public health concern and its prevention as a public health and international political responsibility. incitement to genocide is now considered a crime against humanity and was the basis for trials and convictions of leaders of the rwandan tutsi tribe, as well as inciters to ethnic violence and the political leaders and perpetrators of mass murders in the former yugoslav republic. the threat and practice of genocide is still present, whether it is the murderous raids of sudanese janjaweed militias in darfur and south sudan, or the threats of genocide by iran and associated terrorist organizations against israel and jews in general, the killing of christians in northern nigeria, muslims in myanmar and the genocidal civil war in syria. incitement to genocide is now accepted as part of international discourse, including the united nations, which acted to accommodate the rwanda massacres in 2003.the risk of “silent” genocide is present in the 21st century with forced migration, limiting access rights of refugees to host countries, use of chemical weapons against civilian targets, use of starvation, mass rape and abuse of civilian displaced persons, and persecution including mass murder, expulsion, and slavery of minority ethnic, religious and refugee populations.the unicef report of 2017 states: “2016 was one of the most dangerous years to be a child in recent memory. millions of children were threatened and displaced by crises around the world. millions more faced poverty, deprivation, violence, exploitation and discrimination.” there are 66 million displaced persons in the world in 2017 who are refugees from war, endemic violence, terror, sexual violence and slavery, ethnic violence, chemical warfare, bombing civilians and medical facilities, hazardous journeys to “safety,” and starvation as a tool of warfare, all forms of genocide. all of this in the 21st century when “never again: was the slogan following the holocaust and other horrors of the 20th century.genocide represents the most extreme assault on human rights and protection for life. in the 20th century, an estimated 200 million have perished from genocide. an outline of genocides of the past 100 years is seen in box 13.2 . the turkish genocide of armenians in 1917 was followed by horrific genocides carried out under the flag of communism in soviet ussr in the 1920s, in the peoples’ republic of china under chairman mao in the 1950s and the khmer rouge in cambodia in the 1980s, nationalism in the former yugoslav republics in the 1990s and ethnic hatred in darfur in the early years of the 21st century, and in civil war in syria in the second decade of the 21st century. totalitarian dictatorships, past war and defeat, ideologies of exclusiveness, ethnic purity and religious fundamentalism increase risks for genocide. perpetrators use dehumanizing, demonizing and delegitimizing hate speech to desensitize or intimidate bystanders and to incite, mobilize, order and instruct followers to carry out mass murder.box 13.2eugenics and genocide: “the slippery slope”eugenics was a movement within the “social hygiene” concept of the early part of the 20th century. it was widely promoted to improve the population by reducing births among mentally ill and handicapped people. legislation in some states in the us was upheld in decisions of the supreme court.in 1942, the american journal of psychiatry published three articles, one arguing that “feebleminded” people should be killed (i.e., euthanasia). a rebuttal argued against euthanasia. an unsigned editorial position was that “euthanasia” would be appropriate in some cases, and that parents’ opposition to this procedure should be the subject of psychiatric concern. the arguments referred to the context of eugenics and the murder of mental patients in germany. the editorial pointed out that those genetic theories in psychiatry could be a precursor for future similar proposals. forced sterilization was also practiced in canada and sweden.this idea was promoted by hitler in mein kampf and adopted by the nazi party, which was legally elected to office in 1933. organized massacres of mentally-ill and handicapped children and adults led to practices of various modes of killing, including starvation and gas chambers. these methods were then applied in concentration camps and the holocaust murder of six million jews and millions of others.genocide represents the most extreme assault on the respect for life. during the 20th century, an estimated 200 million have died during genocide. totalitarian dictatorships, past wars and defeat, ideologies of exclusiveness, ethnic purity, and religious fundamentalism increase risks for genocide. perpetrators use dehumanizing, demonizing, delegitimizing incitement by hate speech and propaganda to desensitize or intimidate bystanders and to promote, organize, order, and instruct followers ready to carry out mass murder. consider the following list:•1915–17: armenian genocide by ottoman turkish empire—1.2 million killed.•1920–40s: eugenics movement—united states, sweden, canada.•1920s: mass executions, deportations, starvation as policy in soviet union stalinist regimes killed millions.•1930–40s: mass sterilization of “defectives” in the us and sweden.•1930–40s: mass murder of “defectives” in nazi germany (750,000).•1940s: quarantining as pretext for ghettos by nazis.•1940s: concentration camps, human experimentation.•1940s: holocaust; six million jews and genocide in nazi occupied poland and the soviet union.•1947: nuremberg trials; convictions and capital punishment for crimes against humanity, genocide and criminal experimentation on humans by nazi leaders and medical doctors.•1950s: mass starvation in maoist china—estimated deaths of 21 million people.•1948: convention on the prevention and punishment of the crime of genocide.•1975–79: cambodian political genocide of 1.7 million; genocide of hmong in laos.•1988: iraqi genocide of kurds in town of halabja by poison gas.•1988: brazil genocide of tikuna people.•1992–95: serbian rape, starvation and massacres in srebrenica in bosnia, croatia and herzegovina.•1994: rwandan genocide of tutsi tribe with 800,000 killed over a 100-day period from april to july.•2003–12: sudanese genocide in darfur (400,000 plus).•2011–17: sudanese genocide of nuba people.•2012–17 iran incitement to genocide of israel.•2012–17: syria: civil war; mass civilian deaths by bombardment and gas, displacement of millions; genocide of yazidis and christians.•2012–17: democratic republic of congo massacres of kivu minority; mass violence and refugee flow from south sudan.•2017 expulsion and mass violence against over 600,000 rohingya muslim population of myanmar. source: adapted from tulchinsky th, varavikova ea. the new public health, 3rd edition. san diego, ca: academic press/elsevier, 2014, chapter 15 page 810. united nations. convention on the prevention and punishment of the crime of genocide. available at: http://www.hrweb.org/legal/genocide.html (accessed 4 may 2017). richter ed. commentary. genocide: can we predict, prevent, and protect? j public health policy. 2008;29(3):265–274. available at: http://www.genocidewatch.org/images/articles_can_we_prevent_genocide_by_preventing_incitement.pdf. united to prevent genocide. the bosnian war and srebrenica. available at: http://endgenocide.org/learn/past-genocides/the-bosnian-war-and-srebrenica-genocide/ (accessed 15 april 2017). joseph j. the 1942 ‘euthanasia’ debate in the american j psychiatry. hist psych. 2005;16(62 pt 2):171–179. abstract available at: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/16013119 (accessed 16 april 2017).the un convention on prevention and punishment of the crime of genocide (unppcg) of 1948 defines acts committed with intent to destroy, in whole or in part, members of a national, ethnical, racial or religious group as crimes against humanity. the unppcg specifies that incitement to genocide is itself a crime against humanity. legal action should focus on state-sanctioned incitement as a recognized early warning sign. the unppcg convention defines genocidal acts including the following as punishable under international law:•genocide.•conspiracy to commit genocide.•direct and public incitement to commit genocide.•attempt to commit genocide.•complicity in genocide. genocide prevention requires international surveillance networks for monitoring and reporting incitement and hate speech in media, textbooks, places of worship, and the internet. surveillance should monitor and identify the sources, and map their distribution and spread. dehumanization, demonization, delegitimization, disinformation, and denial are danger signs of potential genocidal actions. genocide results from human choice and bystander indifference. one lesson of the holocaust and subsequent genocides is that silence by nations and international organizations constitutes complicity. the public health community has a responsibility to speak out publicly on genocidal threats and its early warning signs (see box 13.1).human experimentation has been a subject of great concern since the nazi and imperial japanese armed forces’ horrific experiments on prisoners and concentration camp victims during world war ii. the nuremberg trials set forth ten principles of professional responsibility to comply with internationally acceptable medical behavior in regard to research on humans (see table 13.2 ).the helsinki declaration was first adopted by the world medical assembly in 1964, and amended in 1975, 1983, 1989, 1996, and 2013. it delineates standards of medical experimentation and requires informed consent from subjects subjecting themselves to medical research. these standards have become the international norm for experiments, with national-, state-, and hospital-helsinki committees regulating research proposals within their jurisdiction. funding agencies require standard approval by the appropriate helsinki committee, sometimes called institutional review boards (irbs) or ethical review boards (erbs), before considering any proposal, with informed consent on any research project. the process recognizes that medical progress is based on research that must include studies involving human subjects, but medical research is subject to ethical standards that promote and ensure respect for human subjects and protect their health and rights. the key issues examined include:•research objectives should outweigh the risks and burdens to the research subjects.•research should conform to generally accepted scientific principles and literature.•participants are volunteers.•informed consent must be obtained including warning of potential risks.•risks are minimized and monitored.•respect for privacy and confidentiality.•respect for human rights.•scientific integrity.•social solidarity and paternalism.•fairness and equity.•if the results are definitively positive, the research should be stopped. the tuskegee experiment (see box 13.3 ) conducted in alabama from 1932 to 1972 by the us public health service (usphs) was a grave and tragic violation of medical ethics. it was initiated in the context of the 1930s and consistent with widespread and institutionalized racism, detached from humanist values and historical medical ethics of “first, do no harm.” the tuskegee experiment, and a following similar study conducted by the usphs in conjunction with the ministry of health in guatemala, are remembered as important ethical transgressions which have had repercussions until the present time resulting in suspicion of public health endeavors, particularly among the african-american community in the us, even after a public apology in 1997 by then president bill clinton.box 13.3the tuskegee experimentthe tuskegee experiment was carried out by the us public health service between 1932 and 1972. it was meant to follow the natural course of syphilis in 399 infected african-american men in alabama and 201 uninfected men. the men were not told that they were being used as research subjects. the experiment had been intended to show the need for additional services for those infected with syphilis. however, when penicillin became available in 1942, the researchers did not inform or offer the men treatment, even those who were eligible when drafted into the army in 1942. the experiment was stopped in 1972 as “ethically unjustified” when the media exposed it to public scrutiny.the case is considered unethical research practice because, in the time it was conducted, it did not provide the patients with information on the research nor on the availability of curative care when it became available. the patients’ well-being was put aside in the interest of a descriptive study.a similar experiment was conducted by the us public health service in full cooperation with the guatemala ministry of health during 1946–1948 in which soldiers, prisoners, and others were deliberately exposed to prostitutes known to be infected with syphilis. this experiment was terminated when it was revealed in the us media by a historian.in 1997, president bill clinton apologized to the survivors and families of the men involved in the experiment on behalf of the us government. the tuskegee experiment is the source of widespread lingering suspicion of public health in the african-american community to the present time.source: adapted from tulchinsky th, varavikova ea. the new public health, 3rd edition. san diego, ca: academic press/elsevier, 2014, chapter 15 page 813. (accessed 5 may 2017). reverby sm. ethical failures and history lessons: the u.s. public health service research studies in tuskegee and guatemala. public health rev. 2012;34(1):189206. available at: https://publichealthreviews.biomedcentral.com/articles/10.1007/bf03391665 (accessed 3 december 2017).the line between practice and research is not always easy to define in public health, which has surveillance of population health as one of its major tasks. this surveillance is mostly anonymous, but relies on individually identifiable data needed for reportable and infectious disease control as well as for causes of death, birth defects, mass screening programs, and other special disease registries. it may also be necessary to monitor the effects of chronic disease, for example, to ascertain repeat hospitalizations of patients with congestive heart failure to assess the long-term effects of treatment, and the effects strengthening ambulatory and outreach services to sustain chronic patients at a safe and functional level in their own homes.preventive care practices—e.g., sanitation, healthy and safe food and diets, health promotion, immunizations, prenatal care, newborn screening, pap smears, mammography, and colonoscopies—as well as access to medical care and hospital utilization, are all part of public health. monitoring and impact assessment of preventive programs may require special surveys, such as those conducted by the us national health and nutrition studies (nhanes) and are important to assess health and nutritional status as well as other measures of health status and risk factors such as smoking and exercise. every effort in public health research must be made to preserve anonymity and privacy for the individual, but in some cases such as reporting of contagious diseases or birth defects, case contact is crucial. this can entail identifying people who attended an event or were on an airplane where an infected person may have been — such as with measles or antibiotic resistant tuberculosis — so as to take appropriate preventive measures.the general distinction between research and practice has to do with the intent of the activity. clinical research uses experimental methods to establish the efficacy and safety of new or unproven interventions; many drugs and procedures in common use have never been subjected to randomized controlled trials. in practice, many methods are devised that are held to be effective and safe by expert opinion and documented as such. researchers comparing hiv or hepatitis b transmission rates among intravenous drug users not using needle exchange programs would be doing unethical research, according to accepted current standards, by giving safe needles to the experimental group and withholding them from the control group. the scientific justification of an experiment must be made explicit but would not likely be approved by an ethical review board (helsinki committee). in some cases of new therapy for life threatening conditions, the fda will “fast track” what are called “orphan drugs” urgently needed as happened with the nih recommendation for antiretroviral (art) drugs for hiv/aids. this turned out to be a major success for treatment and prevention of hiv (faucci, 2014). clinical equivalence is a necessary condition of all clinical and public health research and provision of standard of care treatment to control groups is a minimal requirement for most research ethics boards. determination of the standard, and whether it should be place, time, and community specific, is an area of ongoing controversy.a 1996 us public health service study supported by the us national institutes of health (nih) and who compared a short course of zidovudine (azt) to a placebo given late in pregnancy to hiv-positive women in thailand, measuring the rate of hiv infection among the newborns. the experiment was terminated when a protest editorial appeared in a prominent medical journal. this study confirmed previous findings that azt given during late pregnancy and labor reduced maternal-fetal hiv transmission by half. the findings indicate that azt should be used in developing countries, and the manufacturers agreed to make it available at reduced costs. the result has been a major success with more recent medications to reduce maternal–fetal transmission of hiv in many places in africa with important financial and professional support from the global alliance for vaccine initiatives (gavi), international donors, and a slowing of the spread of hiv- and aids-related deaths.an outstanding case of breach of ethics in public health research occurred with the “wakefield effect” as described in box 13.4 . the importance of responsible medical journalism to keep a watchful eye on the possibilities of misleading scientific publications is of great importance for the ethical and legal aspects of public health.box 13.4the wakefield effectin 1998, one of the top medical journals in the world, lancet, published an article by a number of well-known researchers headed by dr. andrew wakefield. the article reported on 12 cases of autistic children and allegedly showed a connection to immunization with mmr vaccine (measles-mumps-rubella).the immediate effect of this “revelation” was widespread alarm in the united kingdom and abroad concerning mmr vaccine and a drop in immunization coverage with measles-containing vaccines in the united kingdom and elsewhere. this was mainly triggered by mothers refusing to have their child vaccinated with the “risk of autism”. as a result, measles epidemics occurred in the united kingdom and in many other countries with the disease again becoming endemic in many parts of europe and spreading to north and south america by travelers and tourists.after a long series of investigative journalism in the british press, the article came under scientific scrutiny and the withdrawal of many of the coauthors, but consistent insistence by the lead author of its authenticity. coauthors admitted to having been credulous and insufficiently vigilant in agreeing to be associated with the paper. british medical authorities later found dr. wakefield guilty of medical fraud and the uk general medical council withdrew his license to practice medicine. in 2000, 12 years after the original publication, lancet formally withdrew the article. this fraudulent scientific publication caused a serious loss of the credibility of immunization in general, and especially regarding mmr vaccine, one of the greatest life savers of public health.the return of measles in europe to endemicity with frequent international transmission, fostered loss of confidence by mothers in immunization. measles-containing vaccines were particularly affected due to the publicity given to the wakefield case and issues of scientific integrity. fraud and conflict of interests were proven in this case. the journal editors failed to ensure the scientific integrity of the lead author and coauthors, and were negligent in failure of the journal to retract fraudulent and disproven publications in real time, instead of waiting 12 years after publication.in other public health issues, single publications of findings of small sample and poorly assessed studies published in haste without adequate critical review occur frequently. in electronic media, the problem of disinformation provokes great anxiety and rejection of well-established successful public health interventions such as fluoridation, and folic acid fortification of flour, with unsubstantiated and disproven claims that they may cause cancer, asthma, and other ill effects.the interface between ethics, law, and science in public health requires continuous sensitivity to the downstream effects of reducing public trust and reduced parental compliance with immunization of their children and putting other children at risk.source: adapted from tulchinsky th, varavikova ea. the new public heath, 3rd edition. san diego, ca: academic press/elsevier, 2014, chapter 15, box 15.18, page 814. wakefield aj, murch sh, anthony a, linnell j, casson dm, malik m, et al. ileal lymphoid nodular hyperplasia, non-specific colitis, and pervasive developmental disorder in children [retracted]. lancet. 1998;351:637–641. (accessed 17 april 2017). office of research integrity. definition of research misconduct. available at: http://ori.hhs.gov/misconduct/definition_misconduct.shtml. murch sh, anthony a, casson dh, malik m, berelowitz m, dhillon ap, et al. retraction of an interpretation. lancet. 2004;363:750. available at: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/15016483 (accessed 21 april 2017). godlee f, smith j, marcovitch h. editorial. wakefield’s article linking mmr vaccine and autism was fraudulent. bmj 2011;342:c7452. available at: http://www.bmj.com/content/342/bmj.c7452 (accessed 17 april 2017). tulchinsky th, varavikova ea. the new public health, 3rd edition. san diego, ca: academic press/elsevier, 2014. page 814.the office of research integrity of the us department of health and human services defines research misconduct as: “fabrication, falsification, or plagiarism in proposing, performing, or reviewing research, or in reporting research results:• fabrication is making up data or results and recording or reporting them.• falsification is manipulating research materials, equipment, or processes, or changing or omitting data or results such that the research is not accurately represented in the research record. • plagiarism is the appropriation of another person’s ideas, processes, results, or words without giving appropriate credit.• research misconduct does not include honest error or differences of opinion.” the prevalence and publication of erroneous information and compromised research findings is an ongoing issue in the 21st century, which can spread false information in the media such as the internet. this can have serious negative consequences for population health. pseudoscience can feed populist movements with tragic consequences in public health.helsinki research ethics committees (or institutional review committees) are responsible to ensure that ethical principles are maintained in research proposals and publication of results of such research. these principles include informed consent, confidentiality, and scientific integrity. publication in peer-reviewed journals is essential for establishing and advancing the evidence base for public health practice. poor, or fraudulent science, can have a substantial adverse impact on public opinion both on health issues and on the priorities in the allocation of resources. it is essential that journal editors and reviewers adhere to high ethical and professional standards. they must be vigilant to avoid allowing poor professional standards of articles to be published or allowing non-professional factors or conflicts of interest to distort decision-making processes. professional integrity and high scientific standards are vital to advance public health practice.ethical issues between the individual patients and health care providers are important in health systems. a doctor is expected to use diligence, care, knowledge, skill, discretion, and caution in keeping with practice standards accepted at the time by responsible medical opinion, and to maintain the basic medical imperative to “do no harm” to the patient. patients should have the right to free choice of provider and treatment, to observance of quality standards, access to high quality health services, to be informed of his or her condition, give informed consent, to confidentiality of personal and health information, and to physical privacy during care and diagnosis, to available alternatives for treatment, to be informed of the risks and benefits involved, and to complain and seek compensation for negligence. ideally, patients have the right of access to high quality health services, to safety and freedom from harm caused by lack of resources, geographic inequality, poor functioning of health services, and from medical malpractice and errors. patients’ rights include the right of access to innovative procedures, including diagnostic procedures, according to international standards and independent of economic or financial considerations. patients may seek alternative medical opinions, but this right is not unlimited, as any insurance plan or health service may place restrictions on payment for further opinions and consultation without the agreement of a primary care provider, which is called “the gatekeeper” role.health insurance providers have responsibility beyond that of payment for health service and individual care by a physician, in institutions, or through services in the community or the home. the contract for service is becoming less between an individual physician and the patient, but increasingly among a health system provider group staff and a client. this places a new onus on the physician to ensure that patients receive the care they require. conversely, the us provider often faces the dilemma of knowing that a patient may not access needed services because of a lack of adequate health insurance, and the terrible practice of exclusions due to “prior health conditions”.the imperative to “save a life” is an important ethical and practical issue in health care. principles of physician-assisted euthanasia were based on a legal process including psychiatric assessment. physician-aided suicide of a patient is facilitated by providing the means or information—e.g., indication of a lethal medication dosage—provided by a physician who is aware of the patient’s intent. both are based on the right of the patient to decide to die with dignity when their illness is terminal and the individual is suffering excessively. this is not a medical decision alone. it is also an agonizing issue for society to address.the nazi euthanasia program in germany in the 1930s and its subsequent application as mass extermination in the holocaust with grossly unethical human experimentation provided the direst of warnings to societies of what may follow when the principle of the sanctity of individual human life is breached. the issue, however, returned to the public agenda in the 1980s and 1990s as advances in medical science have allowed the prolongation of human life beyond hope of recovery.legislation in the netherlands, belgium, the us (“assisted suicide” in six us states, washington dc, oregon, vermont, california, colorado, and montana as of april 2017), northern australia and canada legally sanctioned passive euthanasia (i.e., withdrawing medical assistance) with various safeguards in a variety of circumstances, such as long-term comas or late stages of terminal illnesses. the legislation in canada, known as “dying with dignity”,  is the federal regulatory framework with strict criteria for eligibility and procedures, provides for medical assistance in dying for those persons with a “grievous and irremediable medical condition; they have made a voluntary request for medical assistance in dying that, in particular, was not made as a result of external pressure; and they give informed consent to receive medical assistance in dying after having been informed of the means that are available to relieve their suffering.” the person must be eligible for government-funded health services and be over 18 years. doctors, patients, relatives, and health care organizations need clear guidelines, orientation, procedures, legal protection, and limitations where failure to take the utmost steps to “save” the patient by intubation, resuscitation, or transplantation may cause legal jeopardy. protection of the elderly or chronically ill from malicious application of this form of merciful death must ensure that it is truly the patients’ wish. this requires well defined procedures with legal, social, psychiatric and medical participation.even though a distinction can be drawn theoretically between permitting and facilitating death, in practice, doctors in intensive care units face such decisions regularly where the line is often blurred. hospital doctors routinely take extreme measures to prolong the life of hopeless cases. such decisions should not be considered for economic reasons alone, but in practice the costs of care of the terminally ill will be a driving force in debate of the issue. living wills allow a patient to refuse heroic measures such as resuscitation, with “do not resuscitate” standing orders and assignment of power of attorney to family members to make such decisions. family attitudes are important, but the social issue of redefining the right of a patient to opt for legal termination of life by medical means will be an increasingly important issue in the 21st century.as in other spheres of medicine and health, in public health the decision whether to intervene in an issue is based on identification and interpretation of the problem. a case must be made of importance even if a rare condition, establishing evidence of the potential of the intervention to improve the situation, to do no harm, and to convince the public and political leaders of the need for such intervention along with the resources to carry it out. this process requires patience and a longer time frame than many other fields in health.some interpretations of ethics in health consider that the only purpose for which power can be rightfully exercised over any member of a democratic community, without asking individual permission and possibly against their will, is to prevent harm to others. however, this is a dictum that is not always applied to public health, which is obliged to act to protect health in so many spheres such as water, sanitation, food and drug safety, and environmental health on a spectrum that extends to banning smoking in public places, mandating food fortification, and many other areas for improved population health in a civil society.failure to act is an action, and when there is convincing evidence of a problem that can be alleviated or prevented entirely by an accepted and demonstrably successful intervention, then the onus is on the public health leader/authority to advocate such action and to implement it as best as possible under the existing conditions. failure to do so is a breach of “good standards of practice” and could be unethical. inertia of the public health system in the face of evidence of a demonstrably effective modality such as adoption of state-of-the-art vaccines or fortification of flour with folic acid to prevent birth defects would come under this categorization and may even constitute neglect and unethical practice. this is not an easy categorization because there is often disagreement and even opposition to public health interventions, as was the case in opposition to vaccination long after jenner’s crucial discovery of this procedure in the late eighteenth century. this idea is also a significant problem true today with opposition to many proven measures such as immunization, fluoridation or fortification of basic foods. box 13.5 shows the ethical standards of the american public health association of 2002.box 13.5principles of ethical public health practice: american public health association, 2002 1.public health should address the fundamental causes of disease and requirements for health, aiming to prevent adverse health outcomes.2.public health should achieve community health in a way that respects the rights of individuals in the community.3.public health policies, programs, and priorities should be developed and evaluated through processes that ensure an opportunity for input from community members.4.public health should advocate and work for the empowerment of disenfranchised community members, aiming to ensure that the basic resources and conditions necessary for health are accessible to all.5.public health should seek the information needed to implement effective policies and programs that protect and promote health.6.public health institutions should provide communities with the information they have that is needed for decisions on policies or programs and should obtain the community’s consent for their implementation.7.public health institutions should act in a timely manner on the information they have within the resources and the mandate given to them by the public.8.public health programs and policies should incorporate a variety of approaches that anticipate and respect diverse values, beliefs, and cultures in the community.9.public health programs and policies should be implemented in a manner that most enhances the physical and social environment.10.public health institutions should protect the confidentiality of information that can bring harm to an individual or community if made public. exceptions must be justified on the basis of the likelihood of significant harm to the individual or others.11.public health institutions should ensure the professional competence of their employees.12.public health institutions and their employees should engage in collaborations and affiliations in ways that build the public’s trust and the institution’s effectiveness. source: american public health association. principles of the ethical practice of public health version 2.2, 2002. available at: https://www.apha.org/~/media/files/pdf/membergroups/ethics_brochure.ashx (accessed 15 april 2017).the problem of refusals of vaccination has become an issue in the us mainly among upper middle class families. in western europe delay in updating immunization programs such as the two doses of measles policy in the past has created a situation of measles outbreaks across europe since 2010 with many cases among unimmunized children or among young adults or those with only one dose and waning immunity. in many low- and medium-income countries funding levels for health are minimal leading to the delay in professional or governmental acceptance of “new” vaccines. this has been a serious issue but international donors have helped countries in sub-saharan africa to expand the range of vaccines in their routine programs with important life saving vaccines such as rotavirus and hemophilus influenza b. underfunding for health is an ethical dilemma in many low- and medium-income countries. in former soviet countries including the russian federation much of the overall low level of funding for health is due to their declining, but still relatively high, acute-care hospital bed supply with much longer average length of hospital stay leaving primary care and upgrading of immunization lagging.closure of hospitals involves difficult political and ethical decisions and is a source of dispute between central health authorities, the medical professions, and local communities. health reforms in many industrialized countries, such as reducing hospital bed supplies, managed care systems, promoting cost containment, and reallocation of resources raise ethical and political issues often based on vested interests such as private insurance systems, hospitals, and private medical practitioners (see chapters 8 and 15chapter 8chapter 15).where there is a high level of cumulative evidence from professional literature and from public health practice in “leading countries” with a strong scientific base and case for action on a public health issue, when does it become bad practice or even unethical public health practice to ignore and fail to implement such an intervention? such ethical failures occur frequently and widely. for example, is it unethical to not fortify grain products with folic acid and salt with iodine when there is overwhelming evidence of safety and cost effectiveness? should there be a recommended european immunization program; should milk be fortified with vitamin d; should vitamin and mineral supplements be given to pregnant and lactating women, and children; should all newborns be given vitamin k intramuscularly routinely? other examples include the issues of fluoridation of water supplies and opposition to genetically modified crops or generic drugs in african countries. these issues are continuously debated and the responsibility of the trained public health professional is to review the international literature on a topic and formulate a position based on the cumulative weight of evidence. it is not possible to wait for indisputable evidence because in epidemiology and public health, this rarely occurs. this is another reason that guidelines established by respected agencies and professional bodies free from financial obligations to vested interest groups are essential to review evidence which accumulates on a continuing basis on many issues thought to have been resolved or which appear de novo.a recent public health issue has been the banning of trans fats in baking and cooking, with legislation in new york city and some upstate new york state counties. the us food and drug administration (usfda) has declared trans fats, found in many popular processed foods, like baked goods and frozen foods, to be unsafe for consumption as they contribute to heart disease. the usfda promotes manufacturer compliance and will regulate banning of use of trans fats by 2018, which is expected to reduce coronary heart disease and prevent thousands of fatal heart attacks every year. the usfda reports that between 2003 and 2012, consumer trans fat consumption decreased about 78 percent and that the labeling rule and industry reformulation of foods were key factors in informing healthier consumer choices and reducing trans fat in foods. while trans fat intake has significantly decreased, the current intake remains a public health concern. the institute of medicine (iom) recommends that consumption of trans fat be as low as possible while consuming a nutritionally adequate diet.the who european region reports that five european countries are in the process of banning trans fats through regulation, while others have decided to use self-regulatory mechanisms. on the other hand, virtually no countries in the european region fortify flour with folic acid to prevent birth defects (neural tube defects), a lapse in current international public health standards. along with rising incidence of rickets in infancy due to lack of sun exposure and lack of vitamin d supplements in pregnancy care, birth defects and severe rickets are increasing especially among dark skinned mothers in full body clothing for religious reasons. most consumers do not know that some processed food categories contain large amounts of trans fats. consumption in some population groups, particularly poorer people, can be very high. removing trans fats from the food supply is one of the most straightforward public health interventions for reducing the risk of cardiovascular diseases and some cancers, and improving diets. a study comparing myocardial infarctions in new york counties that banned trans fat usage to counties that did not showed a greater reduction in acute myocardial infarctions in the counties that had banned trans fats. the ethical issue will be to see the rate of acceptance of this finding in other jurisdictions versus traditional opposition to too much interference by the state. the same issue regarding folic acid fortification of flour to reduce birth defects is similarly both a professional and ethical question. virtually all european countries have ignored the evidence and fail to adopt mandatory fortification thus harming poorer population groups with less money to buy healthier foods. the delay in implementation of proven safe and effective public health measures is one of the key ethical issues in public health practice.the aim of ethics education in public health should be to enhance the ability of public health professionals, policy makers and citizens to reason rationally about the moral dilemmas and value conflicts inherent to human rights, social justice, and the application of knowledge and technology in the health sciences and in public health measures.ethics analysis typically involves the capability to identify the public health issue and its contribution to health of the population. this requires a review of the professional literature to know the state-of-the-art techniques and to be able to articulate the factual information to the decision-makers and the public. this requires identification of the ethical issues of the case and to identify the “stakeholders”—those whose rights and interests will be most directly affected by the decisions made and the values, concerns, and information at stake in the case. the ability to identify options available to decision-makers in the case is vital to making the “case for action” and the decision-making process, before, during and after a public health event or process as in pandemic preparedness. the cost of action versus inaction is a vital factor.training current faculty on public health ethics issues should be mandatory in schools of public health in order to incorporate ethics into existing courses of formal educational programs. this requires specific and mandatory courses on public health ethics along with incorporation of discussion of ethical issues in core courses in the program.defining and applying ethical and high standards of practice of medical care as well as public health requires an ideological commitment to individual and community sanctity of life. ethics in health also requires commitment to advancement of health care and use of best practices of international standards to the maximum extent possible under the local conditions in which the professional is working. this is not an easy commitment as there is often dispute and outright hostility to public health activities in part because of past ethical distortions of great magnitude. but this is an optimistic field of activity by virtue of the great achievements it has brought to humankind. preparation for disasters and unanticipated health emergencies can raise issues of security, quarantine, isolation, rationing of vaccines due to insufficient supplies—e.g., in influenza epidemics—or restrictions on community events or family burials as in the case of ebola in west africa in 2014–16.public health also faces slow responses to advances in the science of vaccines or in health promotion measures with proven efficacy. addressing current issues is a vital part of the “new public health” and our ethical and professional commitments. the role of public health in climate change is both a professional and ethical issue, as are many other topics such as food fortification, fluoridation of community water supplies, access to birth control and other longstanding and new topics. advancement in global health requires consensus of national governments and international bodies working together to alleviate poor health conditions with available professional standards and resource mobilization to achieve this goal. most issues in public health have ethical aspects so that education on future public health requires adequate attention to the topic, perhaps best presented in case studies.ethical issues in public health include both definition of, and decisions to act on a problem, but also delay, avoidance, or inaction when best evidence available indicates action prevents harm to the population. failure to act in a timely fashion or to allocate resources to meet clear health needs of a population can be unethical just as much as acting in a harmful way. while resource allocation is a political decision, failure to act can be as injurious and unethical as being directly responsible for harmful acts. public health as a profession and a movement or ideology must be willing to point out the effects of nonaction as well as of ethical or nonethical acts. compliance with evil is unethical and the preparation of public health workers requires understanding of how to differentiate, and to how to advocate for the better choices in policy and its implementation. 1.ethics should be incorporated in all courses in public health as well as health policy and management programs.2.dedicated courses in ethics should be included in public health education curricula to provide interested students with an opportunity for more in-depth study.3.public health ethics along with public health law should be included in criteria for curricula as “cross cutting” courses required by accreditation agencies.4.public health ethics orientation workshops should be provided to help teachers in all topic areas of the curriculum, core and elective, incorporate ethics in their teaching material.5.the topic of public health ethics should be incorporated in ongoing educational programs for practitioners in the broad multi-disciplinary fields of public health.6.public awareness and engagement efforts that accompany public health programs and interventions should incorporate some measure of ethics education.7.critical thinking about the values involved in a public health controversy is vital to combat the public health problem in question.8.recognition that the concepts of social solidarity and obligations as well as individual rights are fundamental in public health practice.9.recognition that emergency preparedness and response includes mandatory immunizations such as measles and other public health measures as in influenza or cholera control immunization.10.training in ethical studies should be part of public health training at all levels including continuing education.11.curriculum development should include awareness of ethical issues of artificial and natural catastrophes of the past century as well as current topics.12.case studies are valuable teaching tools and incorporated and examined in class discussion. 13.teachers of other aspects of public health including epidemiology and health promotion should include ethics in their syllabi and course content.14.consideration should be given to development of helsinki committee procedures and review criteria for public health-related research based on data sets without individual identification in public health research proposals.15.teachers of ethics in public health should have dual training in public health and ethics.  1.why was eugenics a popular topic in western countries among intellectuals during the early part of the 20th century?2.how was eugenics practiced in liberal democratic countries?3.how did the eugenics idea become translated into mass murder of the handicapped in germany, and then adapted to genocide of jews and others in the holocaust?4.why is incitement to genocide seen as a precursor and crime against humanity?5.why is approval of a “helsinki committee” needed before applying for a research grant?6.why is assisted death permitted in some jurisdictions, and what steps are needed to ensure this is solely based on the patient’s wishes?7.discuss the ethics of requiring children to be fully immunized before they can attend school.8.what is the “wakefield effect”, and how is it affecting attitudes to immunization?9.how should practicing doctors and public health explain mandatory chlorination, and fluoridation of community water supplies?10.is banning cigarette smoking in public places an infringement of individual rights?11.is parental refusal of immunization without a valid medical reason ethical?12.discuss what you think are ethical issues in public health.13.discuss what you think are ethical issues in medical practice.14.discuss public health ethics issues in global health.15.discuss ethical issues in medical and public health research.16.describe the historical and current meaning of the nuremberg trials, the universal declaration of human rights, the helsinki declaration and the tuskegee experiments on public health and medical research ethics. 17.discuss the role of the news and social media in investigation of public health issues and in spread of “pseudoscience” disinformation on public health topics such as vaccination, fluoridation, and food fortification.18.describe the lasting implication of the tuskegee experiment for attitudes towards the public health profession in the us. with the ongoing coronavirus disease 2019 (covid-19) pandemic, the humanitarian and healthcare crisis in low-to-middle income countries (lmics) such as the occupied palestinian territory (opt) is expected to be amplified and this will further cripple the healthcare system. as of may 7, 2020, the world health organization (who) has recorded 547 confirmed cases of covid-19 in the opt; 527 in the west bank and 20 in the gaza stripwith 4 fatalities. (1) the united nations relief and works agency (unrwa) has been unable to support palestinians' covid-19 response needs at their full capacity at the consequence of funding cut and legal restrictions that were in place prior to the pandemic.(2) multiple covid-19 testing sites serving palestinians in east jerusalem have been closed by the israeli authorities. ( 3) the west bank is particularly vulnerable due to checkpoint closures, halt of the transportation of patients to hospitals, and redistribution of clinical supplies. the gaza strip is one of the most densely populated places on earth with 2 million inhabitants, mostly refugees, live in 365 sq. km 2 , allowing for an accelerated spread of disease should a covid-19 outbreak manifest. (4) other lmics in the middle east and africa have also reported scarcity of personal protective equipment (ppe) for front line healthcare workers (hcws).(5, 6) we hypothesize that (hcws) in the opt are largely underprepared to address covid-19 related needs of the palestinian population in both the west bank and gaza strip. shortages of ppe pose a serious threat to covid-19 containment in the opt. it is also expected that hcws in the opt have likely received insufficient training on how to address spread and containment of covid-19; institutions themselves may not have yet been equipped to draw up or implement preventative or management protocols. to the best of our knowledge, there have been no studies evaluating the preparedness of the hcws to face covid-19 pandemic. in this study, we aim to evaluate the availability of ppe and the level of preparedness among the hcws in the opt.we conducted a cross-sectional study using an online survey tool. our survey (supplementary material) was modified from two validated questionnaires; the first was utilized during the h1n1 influenza pandemic (7) and the second one was the personnel, infrastructure, procedures, equipment and supplies (pipes) surgical capacity assessment tool. (8) our modified questionnaire consisted of 22 questions divided into 3 different sections (respondent and healthcare facility characteristics, availability of ppe and hcws preparedness). availability of ppe and hcws preparedness were assessed on a 5-point likert scale. the questionnaire was distributed to hcws in the opt through convenient sampling between march 30, 2020 and april 12, 2020. e-mail lists for participants in an educational link (oxpal) and social media (facebook, twitter, and linkedin) groups of hcws in opt were used to disseminate the questionnaire. participants were required to sign in to limit the number of responses to one per respondent.. cc-by-nc 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. (which was not certified by peer review)the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 13, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.09.20096099 doi: medrxiv preprintthe primary outcomes assessed were availability of ppe and hcws preparedness in opt in the era of covid-19 pandemic. the secondary outcome was to assess the differences between gaza strip and west bank, and between governmental and non-governmental in opt in terms of availability of ppe and hcws preparedness to face the covid-19 pandemic.respondent characteristics were summarized using descriptive statistics. for continuous data, mean and standard deviation (sd) were used to report normally distributed data, while median and interquartile ranges (iqr) were used for non-normally distributed data. for categorical data, results were summarized as counts (n) and percentages (cumulative incidence). univariate analysis (chi-squared and fisher's exact tests) was also used to compare participants' profession, geographical location, and responses to questions related to the availability of ppe and hcws preparedness for the covid-19 pandemic. likert scale variables were converted from 5-point to binary variables for univariate analysis. for example, often available, sometimes available, rarely availably and never available were grouped together as 'not always available'. strongly agree and moderately agree were grouped into 'agree' variable compared to 'neutral' and 'disagree' categories. missing data were considered missing completely at random, therefore we performed complete case analysis. all statistical analyses were performed using ibm corp. released 2019. ibm spss statistics for windows, version 26.0. armonk, ny: ibm corp.of 140 completed surveys, two were excluded from the study as they were either working outside the opt or in a non-medical profession.of 138 hcws included in the study, 97 respondents (70.3%) were from gaza strip and 41 (29.7%) were from the west bank. the median (iqr) age was 28 (24-35) years with a range from 19 to 57 years old. 85 respondents (61.6 %) were males. exactly half of respondents were medical doctors, with approximately 35 (25.4%) in nursing and the remaining quarter in physiotherapy, dentistry, or another health-related profession. 20 (14.5%) of the respondents worked in emergency medicine and 19 (13.8%) in surgery, 14 (10.1%) in primary care and 13 (9.4%) in internal medicine. with regards to place of work, 63 (45.7%) of the respondents worked in a tertiary hospital, 29 (21%) in a secondary facility and 43 (31%) in a primary healthcare center or clinic. one respondent worked in a covid-19 isolation center. 98 (71%) worked in a governmental institution operated by the ministry of health, 26 (18.8%) worked in a private hospital and 13 (9.4%) in a non-governmental organization (ngo) or mission-based place of care ( table 1) .only 67 (48.6%) and 71 (51.4%) of hcws surveyed indicated that they always had alcoholbased sanitizer and gloves available in their institutions, respectively. only 38 (27.5%) of respondents indicated that regular face masks were always available when needed, and just over 15 (10.9%) of respondents reported that isolation gowns were always available in their . cc-by-nc 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 13, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.09.20096099 doi: medrxiv preprint institutions. over 128 (92.8%), 132 (95.7%), and 127 (92%) of respondents indicated that eye protection, n95 respirators, and face shields were not always available to them at their institutions, respectively. 57 (41.3%) of hcws surveyed indicated that their hospital did not provide a local protocol for the management of covid-19. only 57 (41.3%) of respondents had received any covid-19 related training courses by the time of survey administration. 16 (11.6%) of hcsw surveyed agreed with the statement of feeling confident or well-prepared to deal with a potential covid-19 case ( table 2) .compared to the west bank, respondents from the gaza strip reported significantly greater lack of alcohol-based hand sanitizers (p=0.03) and gloves (p<0.001), but no meaningful differences were observed between regions on other ppe or infection control readiness (table 3) .on average, governmental hospitals run by the moh were also reported by respondents to be significantly lacking in sanitizer, gloves, facemasks, eye protection, and face shields compared to non-governmental institutions (p<0.05) ( table 4 ).our study demonstrates that the availability of ppe in both gaza and the west bank is insufficient to support the covid-19 response needs of the opt. alcohol-based hand sanitizers, gloves, face masks, eye protection, isolation gowns, n95 respirators and face shields were reported to be inconsistently available, despite being internationally recommended as critical equipment needed for protecting health care workers from infection.(9) governmental hospitals, as opposed to non-governmental settings, appear to be particularly lacking in equipment. lessons from prior outbreaks have underlined the importance of ppe in infection control. (10) recommendations from the who suggest the inadequate supply of infection prevention and control measures is vital to address immediately, with assistance from international partners if necessary.(11) the who specifically mentioned supplies needed to implement recommended protocols, such as ppe, being a key resource to all national authorities currently not producing sufficient volumes themselves. suggestions for other methods of procurement, conservation and management of ppe have been extensively covered in the literature during the pandemic. (12) many of these suggestions may not be viable in the geopolitical and economic context in which opt operates. however, methods such as governmental coordination of all ppe supply, extending or creating new supply through 3d printing all provide viable means of blunting the dearth of ppe in opt currently. (13, 14) our study showed that most hcws surveyed did not receive adequate training on local protocol or measures to address covid-19 spread from an institutional perspective. comparing the preparedness of hcws in opt to those around the world, will be a vital element of the debrief from this pandemic and important in developing strategies to ensure the opt have protocols in place for future public health crises. the lack of current data makes this comparison impossible, . cc-by-nc 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 13, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.09.20096099 doi: medrxiv preprint currently. in previous pandemics, clinicians in other countries have been substantially more confident in their clinical ability to manage infected patients than what our results reflect; for example, chinese icu hcws during the 2009 h1n1 pandemic were substantially more confident in their preparedness. (15) this may partly be due to a far greater provision of ppe amongst these workers, that permits greater clinical confidence.our study has some important strengths. to our knowledge, this study represents the first attempt to assess the availability of ppe in opt and the preparedness of hcws to face the covid-19 pandemic. we provided a comprehensive evaluation of most ppe described in the literature and used clinically. participants were well-represented across gender, geographic region, department/specialty, level of training, profession and type of health care facility.potential limitations of this study include small sample size, which may impact generalizability to the greater population of palestinians. another weakness of our study was the failure to elicit whether the lack of appropriate ppe was one of the driving factors in reducing hcw confidence in their preparedness. this would then imply attempts to target increasing ppe provision could both protect hcw and improve clinical confidence in managing covid-19 patients. potential selection bias arises due to sampling method. most study participants were recruited from social media posts and emails to the networks of the researchers involved, which may limit some of the study's generalizability. however, other studies have demonstrated the viability of social media recruitment and snowball sampling to access difficult to reach populations.(16) additionally, participants were asked to report on their individual experiences and thus may or may not be wholly representative of the institutions in which they are employed. the cross-sectional nature of this study is also by definition unable to take into account any changes in equipment or training preparedness over time and is only representative of the point-in-time data were collected. these limitations were acknowledged by the authors during study enrolment due to the need to publish findings within the international community in a time-sensitive manner and address the gap in literature regarding covid-19's unique impact on the population in the opt.low-to-middle income countries (lmics) are particularly vulnerable to the spread of disease because they often grapple with detrimental resource and financial constraints that existed prior to the spread of pandemic. opt and other lmics often not only lack proper infrastructure and resources, but also have to navigate restrictions on movement, travel and transportation of essential supplies. in this global pandemic, procurement of adequate supply of ppe and the development of necessary protocols specific to the unique needs and challenges of the region are urgently needed.ethical approval: ethical approval was not needed as the study did not involve patients or animals. however, participants consented to share their responses for research purposes.we declare no conflict of interest.. cc-by-nc 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 13, 2020. . cc-by-nc 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 13, 2020. . cc-by-nc 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 13, 2020. . cc-by-nc 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 13, 2020. . cc-by-nc 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 13, 2020. is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. (which was not certified by peer review)the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 13, 2020. . cc-by-nc 4.0 international license it is made available under a is the author/funder, who has granted medrxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. (which was not certified by peer review)the copyright holder for this preprint this version posted may 13, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.09.20096099 doi: medrxiv preprintin 1918, the world was gripped with panic and apprehension as one of the most devastating pandemics ever recorded in human history, the h1n1 influenza virus, killed millions of people across the globe [1, 2] . dubbed "spanish influenza", the disease spread quickly, ravaging the world at a time that there were no antibiotics and medicine-as a field-was essentially infantile in its development. without the benefit of modern technology, data keeping was poor, making it difficult to have accurate mortality and morbidity figures; but even then, estimates suggest that the flu killed 1% to 3% of its victims, with the mortality rate reaching 10% in some communities [1] [2] [3] . while a 1991 report [3] put the death toll in the range of 24.7 -39.3 million, and related morbidity estimates between 25% and 90%, recent publications suggest that 50 -100 million died as a result of the pandemic [1, 4] .since 1918, the world has experienced more outbreaks of pandemic diseases. the 1957h2n2 "asian influenza" pandemic claimed more than two million lives; the 1968 h3n2 "hong deaths [1] [2] [3] 5, 6] . while the declining morbidity and mortality rate of each successive pandemic may be attributed to modern medicine, early diagnosis, ready availability of effective antibiotics to address secondary bacterial infections, the availability of artificial respirators to support life, and acute awareness of preventive measures gained from past pandemics, the threat of a severe devastating disease of global concern remains high.the ongoing pandemic of novel coronavirus (sars-cov-2) covid-19, serves as a vivid reminder that nature is unpredictable; no one knows what disease epidemic might emergethe benefit of exposure to the healing rays of the sun was so obvious that it became a common form of treatment against tuberculosis-another respiratory disorder, as well as wound infections, psoriasis, acne vulgaris, rickettsia, depression, jaundice, and a host of other diseases [10] [11] [12] [13] [14] [15] [16] [17] [18] [19] . indeed, records indicate that across north america, many healthcare facilities built sunrooms to which patients were wheeled for sun therapy, then known as heliotherapy [11] .written accounts of the successes of heliotherapy abound, and as the treatment became popular, it was adapted to include treatment with various lamps [15] [16] [17] [18] [19] .none of the foregoing should come as a surprise, because less than 25 years before the 1918 pandemic, a danish physician, niels ryberg finsen, had developed a light source that was successful in curing patients with skin tuberculosis (lupus vulgaris) and other ailments [20, 21] .between 1896 and 1901, he treated as many as 804 patients with skin tuberculosis and similar microbial infections at his medical light institute, achieving 83% cure rate [20, 21] . the finsen lamp became widely popular and was adopted in most of europe and north america, earning finsen the nobel prize in 1903. finsen himself acknowledged the healing power of sunlight but erroneously assumed that his lamp took advantage of the uv spectrum of radiation. it is quite conceivable that his pioneering work spurred many in the healthcare industry to use sunlight to treat victims of the 1918 influenza pandemic and beyond. to date, studies continue to extol the susceptibility of viruses to rays emanating from the sun [11, 16] .while it is obvious that finsen pioneered the scientific documentation of the bactericidal effect of light, the use of light to treat a variety of diseases predates him. perhaps the earliest record of sunlight as medical treatment dates back to the time of egyptian pharaohs-more than 5000 bc-as evidenced by images, archeological findings and artifacts [23] [24] [25] [26] . a popular ancient egyptian image clearly shows a family exposing themselves to the healing rays of the the greeks and the romans clearly recognized the healing power of the sun. they built solariums and sunbaths, and the greeks even used them to enhance the strength of athletes preparing for the olympic games by exposing them to several months of sunlight treatment. the word, heliotherapy, actually derives from the greek name for their sun god, "helios;" heliotherapy meaning sunlight therapy [23] [24] [25] [26] . furthermore, ayurvedic medical records show that as far back and 1400 bc; hindus used the combination of sunlight and photosensitive herbs, such as furocoumarins, to treat vitiligo and other conditions-a combined treatment, which many refer to today as photodynamic therapy [27] . moreover, records indicate that heliotherapy was a cardinal method used in early daoism, which lingyan tzu-ming introduced in china during the early as 1877, studies showed that uv killed anthrax bacilli [11] , and by 1890, it was determined that it played a role in rachitis, rickettsia and peritoneal tuberculosis [11, 16, 29] . by this time, lamps generating light from quartz, mercury vapor and other sources were built and used to treat acne, psoriasis, syphilis, leprosy, and pellagra, among others [11, 17, 25] . three years later, finsen began to use filtered sunlight to treat lupus vulgaris and through careful documentation published his nobel-winning work, in 1901. the use of lamps and other artificial light sources to treat skin diseases continued well into the second half of the 20 th century, but was quickly overtaken by easy availability of potent antibiotics, which became popular for their quick results and ease of use [11, 25] .the development of lasers in the late 50s and the early 60s, and the subsequent evolution of light emitting diodes transformed phototherapy; it gave rise to laser therapy or light therapy, which in turn evolved into photobiomodulation as a variety of light emitting technologies were devised. today, photobiomodulation, which takes advantage of the photochemical effects of low power lasers, leds and other monochromatic sources of light to treat various diseases and ailments, has evolved scientifically, allowing evidence-based practice. this development now enables clinicians and others to exploit the specific effect of each wavelength or spectrum of light for treatment purposes. detailed below are several studies, which show that we do not need uv to kill bacteria, viruses and other pathogens, and that safer wavelengths adjacent to uv, such as violet or blue light, are antimicrobial against microorganisms. furthermore, evidence shows that red and near infrared light have immense therapeutic value as well, and can be effective in treating a range of ailments, including the respiratory complications of coronavirus disease.advances in light technology and steady development of photobiomodulation through research and continual adaptation evolving technologies have enabled science to uncovered the beneficial effects of several spectra of light-in particular, violet/blue light, red light and near infrared light. we now know that light in the blue 400 -470 nm range is antimicrobial against numerous bacteria and has the potential to mitigate opportunistic bacterial infections associated with covid-19 and other coronavirus infections. furthermore, as detailed below, laboratory experiments show that red and near infrared light, with wavelengths approximately in the range of 600 -700 nm and 700 -1000 nm respectively, have the potential to reduce lung j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f journal pre-proof inflammation and fibrosis, and hence acute respiratory disorder syndrome, a major cause of death in every coronavirus pandemic, including the prevailing covid-19 pandemic. therefore, as a part of the ongoing effort to mobilize every clinical tool with the potential to alleviate the disease and minimize its spread, these recent studies offer compelling reasons to explore the potential effects of various spectra of light in reducing secondary bacterial infections associated with the disease, and the possibility of suppressing covid-19 and other viral infections.recent studies demonstrate that various wavelengths in the blue spectrum are antimicrobial against the deadly methicillin-resistant staphylococcus aureus (mrsa) [31, 32, 35, 45] , escherichia. coli [38, 40] , helicobacter pylori [39] , listeria monocytogenes [40] , pseudomonas aeruginosa [38] , salmonella [37] , acinetobacter baumannii [41] , aggregatibacter actinomycetemcomitans [46] , propionibacterium acnes [34] [35] [36] 47] , neisseria gonorrhoeae [48] [49] [50] , porphyromonas gingivalis [51] [52] [53] , fusobacterium nucleatum [51] , and others [42, 50] . an analysis of the nobel-winning work of finsen, supports these blue light studies, because it shows that the finsen lamp, used to heal many with tuberculosis infection, did not produce uv as finsen believed; rather, it produces light in the violet/blue range [59] (figure 2) . just as an analysis of finsen's lamp makes it clear that its effect was due to violet/blue light and not uv, so a thought analysis of the radiation from the sun renders vivid the fact that the bactericidal effect of sunlight, often ascribed to uv, is due to the immense amount of blue light reaching the earth from the sun. atmospheric ozone substantially absorbs solar uv rays, allowing transmission of violet/blue light to the surface of the earth. indeed, the peak transmission at the surface of the earth is in the blue region, and together with violet light, is 10 times more than the amount of uv reaching the surface of the earth [80] . given the absorption of violet blue light by most microbes and the resulting bactericidal effect, it seems reasonable to attribute a good proportion of the sun's environmental sanitization power to the violet blue spectrum of radiation, and not uv as many assert.modern technology now makes flexible printed micro-leds readily available, making it relatively easy to develop therapeutic tools with the potential to reduce bacterial and potentially viral infections. in relation to covid-19, some relatively easy targets are the nasal and oral j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f journal pre-proof cavities, and the upper respiratory tract, particularly as the nasal passage is an acclaimed point of entry of the virus into the human body [81] . antimicrobial blue light may serve another useful purpose in reducing the covid-19 pandemic; it could be used effectively to sanitize equipment, tools, hospital facilities, emergency care vehicles, homes, and the general environment as pilot studies have shown [54] [55] [56] .recent works now show that there may be as many as four mechanisms underlying the antimicrobial effect of blue light. the first and most well-grounded of which is that blue light triggers endogenous bacterial chromophores such as porphyrins, flavins, nadh and other photosensitive receptors to produce reactive oxygen species, which in adequate amount results in cell death [39, [46] [47] [48] [49] [50] [64] [65] [66] [67] [68] [69] [70] [71] [72] [73] [74] [75] [76] [77] [78] [79] . indeed, porphyrins with absorption peaks in the 405 to 470 nm range have been identified in microbial cells [39, [46] [47] [48] [49] [50] [64] [65] [66] [67] [68] [69] [70] [71] [72] [73] [74] [75] [76] [77] [78] [79] . in three recent papers [34- the second mechanism, which is continuing to gain traction, is that irradiation with blue light alters bacterial cell membrane integrity with a consequent decrease in membrane polarization and rapid alteration of cellular functions [64] . our recent electron microscopic study affirms this finding. it shows that even at a sub-lethal dose level, treatment with pulsed blue 450 nm light disrupts the structural architecture of mrsa cell membrane and its internal organelles.the third and fourth mechanisms of action, deserving further investigation and affirmation are that blue light alters a-dna 82 , and upregulates prophage genes to promote bacteria kill [83] . developed-will give their immune systems a better chance of overcoming the deadly disease.emerging data show that light in the red and near infrared light spectra can reduce lung inflammation, lung fibrosis, pneumonia, acute respiratory disorders, and other severe complications of coronavirus infections. this is an encouraging development since the experience of those at the frontline of the covid-19 outbreak in wuhan, china clearly show that acute respiratory disorder was the major cause of death [84] . moreover, lack of effective antiviral drugs against covid-19 remains a serious concern, making it unlikely that such lifethreatening complications may be resolved with medication in the short run. early reports on the wuhan covid-19 outbreak show that commonly used antiviral drugs, such as neuraminidase inhibitors (oseltamivir, peramivir, zanamivir and others), acyclovir, the corticosteroidmethylprednisolone, and ribavirin were ineffectual in treating the disease [81, 84] .there are indications that acute respiratory distress syndrome (ards) a critical complication of covid-19 infection [81, 84] , often characterized by airway edema, pulmonary inflammation, and lung fibrosis, could be ameliorated with photobiomodulation, as evidenced by early results in laboratory animals [85] [86] [87] . for example, following induction of pulmonary inflammation in rats, de lima et al. [85] showed that irradiation of the skin over the inflamed bronchus with a single dose of 1.3 j cm -2 of continuous wave (cw) red 650 nm laser administered one hour after induction of inflammation, inhibited pulmonary edema and downregulated several measures of inflammation. the treatment reduced activation and influx of neutrophils, damage to endothelial cytoskeleton, and the amount of tnf-α, and il-1β in the lung and bronchoalveolar lavage fluid.in a similar study, brochetti et al. [86] induced pulmonary fibrosis in mice, and then treated the animals with red 660 + 20 nm light (5 j cm -2 radiant exposure and 33 mw cm -2 irradiance) daily for eight days, beginning from day 14. they found that the treatment reduced collagen production and the number of inflammatory cells in the alveoli, decreased interstitial thickening, and static as well as dynamic pulmonary elasticity. further, cultures of pneumocytes and fibroblasts obtained from the animals showed downregulation of pro-inflammatory cells and collagen deposits in the lungs [86] . another study of the same murine model showed that j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f journal pre-proof infrared 780 nm light reduced inflammation and collagen deposits in the lungs of mice, downregulated pro-inflammatory cytokines, and upregulated the secretion of il-10 from fibroblasts and pneumocytes. moreover, it significantly reduced total lung tgfβ [87] . taken together, these early results suggest that red and near infrared light have the potential to reduce some of the critical complications of coronavirus infections, i.e., pulmonary inflammation and lung fibrosis. the preliminary nature of these results and the need for improved experimental methods and data reporting should not diminish their significance; rather it should draw attention to another spectrum of light that may be beneficial in the ongoing fight against coronavirus diseases that seems to challenge healthcare systems worldwide.in the race against the anticipated devastation of covid-19, clinicians have deployed chloroquine and hydroxychloroquine-two analogue medications commonly used to treat malaria but rarely used for coronavirus disease-to mitigate the disease, even though their mechanisms of action against viral infections remains poorly understood [84, [88] [89] [90] . the rapid spread of covid-19 and its clear capacity to kill on a massive scale obviously justify deployment of treatments that seem to work, even though their underlying mechanisms are not clear. thus, given the potential capacity of red and near infrared light to reduce the lifethreatening respiratory complications of covid-19, it goes without saying that every effort should be made to advance the work so that an effective therapy can be fashioned from the body of research work achieved to date. it will be a wise investment to urgently investigate these initial results clinically, and not wait for another deadly coronavirus pandemic to remind us of the inherent potential of light as a therapeutic tool. the urgency of this call is heightened by recent clinical results, which indicate that patients with chronic obstructive lung disease and others with bronchial asthma and allergy improved significantly following treatment with light [91, 92] .even more striking are reports showing that certain wavelengths of light inactivate viruses. light has been shown to inactivate baculoviruses [93] and prolonged exposure to blue light in the 420 -430 nm range inactivates leukemia virus [94] . one may argue that baculoviruses are confined to invertebrates and are not known to replicate in humans; but the fact that covid-19 traversed species barrier to humans [84] is a cause to worry. one or more of the 76 species of baculoviruses could mutate to survive and replicate in human hosts, more so because shrimps consumed by humans and mosquitoes that suck human blood are among their j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f the effect of blue light on common viruses, including covid-19. further, that light in the visible spectrum constitutes the basis for photodynamic treatment of plasma to inactivate several viruses, including herpes simplex and human immunodeficiency virus (hiv) [95] [96] [97] , offers strong reason to suggest that blue light-particularly pulsed blue light, which recent reports have shown to be 40 to 100 times more potent than continuous wave blue light [33] [34] [35] -has great potential to inactivate coronaviruses.already, fresh off the press is an early report that the common cold virus-a coronavirus-is inactivated by light [98] . in this recent study, broad spectrum light-mimicking sunlight-was tested on aerosolized influenza virus at 20% and 70% relative humidity, while the decay constant and half-life of the virus were measured as indices of survival. the results showed that relative humidity had no effect. the simulated sunlight alone significantly inactivated the virus, resulting in 0.29 + 0.09 min -1 decay constant and a half-live of approximately 2.4 minutes compared to non-irradiated controls, which had 0.02 + 0.06 min -1 decay constant and 31.1 min half-life. the resulting 93% increase in decay constant and the concomitant 92.3% decline in half-life due to light is impressive. this is supported by news report of a recent us department of homeland security study, which showed that exposure to the sun kills covid-19-a more virulent form of the common influenza virus [99] . these recent developments buttress the suggestion that blue light, in particular, pulsed blue light, which recent reports have shown to be 40 to 100 times more potent the commonly available continuous wave blue light [34] [35] [36] , has great potential to inactivate covid-19 and other coronaviruses, in addition to suppressing related opportunistic bacterial infections. this recent finding further elevates the urgency to explore the potential of blue light as an antiviral agent. when convincing clinical results prove that blue light is antiviral, in addition to being antibiotic against coronavirus opportunistic bacteria, it would be a revolutionary paradigm shift, considering the ubiquity of low cost blue light emitting devices and the low risk involved in terms of safety.moreover, the potential to disinfect equipment, the environment and spaces difficult to sanitize with common disinfectants, is huge. spectroscopy study, photochem. photobiol. b 2020 (2020)long before the human era, microbes competed for ecological niches in the environment. thus, ancient bacteria developed the ability to resist the assault of naturally occurring antibacterial substances, especially those made by fungi and other soil-dwelling organisms. by harnessing these substances (and by developing new antibiotics) for clinical use, we have dramatically accelerated this evolutionary process. the more we expose bacteria to these medications, the sooner we select resistant phenotypes. nobel laureate alexander fleming warned long ago that this process was inevitable and that medical professionals have an ethical responsibility to use antibiotics in a responsible fashion. less than a century later, his concerns have proven prophetic. antibiotic resistance to at least one class of drugs has been documented in almost all bacteria studied, including gram-positive bacteria (e.g., methicillin-resistant staphylococcus aureus, vancomycin-resistant enterococcus, and drug-resistant streptococcus pneumoniae), and gram-negative bacteria (e.g., extended-spectrum beta-lactamase-producing escherichia coli, mdr pseudomonas aeruginosa, and carbapenem-resistant enterobacteriaceae). some mechanisms of resistance are specific to a particular species, but in many cases the genetic determinants of resistance lie on mobile elements, such as plasmids and integrons, which can move between species. thus, in some regions of the world there seem to be ideal conditions for the creation and spread of resistant microbes, in which antibiotic use is uncontrolled and sanitation is insufficient. there is no single, reliable, international surveillance system for detecting and reporting antimicrobial resistance. the world health organization oversees a consortium of regional laboratories around the globe, but their funding streams and staffing are often insufficient to generate timely data, especially in sub-saharan africa. high-quality data are essential for our understanding of this phenomenon, and they are sorely lacking—this situation needs to change right away. however, the trend is clear: many bacterial infections are becoming tougher to treat worldwide, including in the tropics.there is no hope of eradicating pathogenic bacteria from the face of the earth with antibiotics—resistance is inevitable. the global question is whether we can reduce, delay, and anticipate the emergence of resistance in a way that helps humans live side-by-side with bacteria in a sustainable way. our understanding of the human microbiome—the universe of microorganisms on and inside us—is still incomplete. but we do know that more than 90% of the cells on us and in us are microorganisms, so by the numbers we are more “them” than “us.” the notion of human dominance over the microscopic world is naïve, and a more nuanced view of our position in the world is called for. for medical providers dealing with mdro infections in their individual patients, these questions have very urgent clinical meaning.reducing the threat of mdros on an international scale will require coming to terms with several key factors that are currently out of control.• meager drug pipeline. new antibiotics may help turn the tide, but the current pace of progress is discouraging. industry has precious few financial incentives to develop novel agents, because the process is time-consuming and expensive. and with resistance on the rise, there is concern that new agents will have limited effective lives—and, thus, limited profit potential. a new “public-private partnership” model may be called for, in which government incents industrial activity via financial rewards beyond traditional drug sales. viewing these drugs as national assets, rather than simple profitable commodities, may yield meaningful change.• ineffective infection control. limiting the spread of infection between patients is common sense, with an importance easily grasped by physicians. however, there are other crucial reasons to limit the transmission of pathogens: bacteria are sometimes able to swap genetic information with each other, across species. many genetic determinants of antibiotic resistance are contained within mobile elements such as plasmids and integrons. when infected patients are cared for in clinics or hospitals, these genes may be transferred efficiently if hygiene protocols are breached. even more alarming is the frequency with which this may happen in the built environment when sanitation practices are insufficient, and human effluent mixes together and then enters the water supply without proper treatment. fortunately, simple interventions, such as hand hygiene by healthcare workers and the installation and use of proper pit latrines or flush toilets in austere settings, can have a huge impact.• agricultural use of antibiotics. the more selective pressure we assert on the microbiome, the more we accelerate the evolution of mdros. according to the food and drug administration (fda), over 80% of antibiotics in the united states—more than 13 million kilograms annually—are given to livestock to promote growth or prevent infection. this practice has been associated with the development of mdr gram-negative rods, such as fluoroquinolone-resistant campylobacter species, which can be transmitted to humans via unsafe meat handling processes. these massive quantities of antibiotics may also enter the water supply, and then the human host, leading to unpredictable alterations in the gastrointestinal microbiome. other nations have banned this practice, without suffering detrimental increases in the cost of producing poultry or beef. whether the united states will reduce this practice from a regulatory perspective or whether market demands will lead to change remains to be seen.• injudicious use of antibiotics in human medicine. although the use of antibiotics in humans is less than in animals in most industrialized nations, medical providers around the world bear a huge portion of the blame for our current predicament. multiple expert reviews of large patient cohorts reveal a stubborn truth that has not changed appreciably over the decades: in general, 50% of antibiotic prescriptions are inappropriate (in terms of indication, spectrum, dose, or duration). the wise use of antibiotics is called “antimicrobial stewardship.” all clinicians have important roles to play as good antimicrobial stewards. resources are listed in the further reading section of this chapter. fundamentals are included in table 29.1 . mdro infections are part of the reality of traveling abroad, and this topic should be included in pre-travel counseling. core points to discuss with patients before leaving include the following:• protect yourself without becoming a “germophobe.” most of the toughest-to-treat mdros acquired overseas are gram-negative rods, from the family enterobacteriaceae. in other words, human fecal bacteria. prevention of gastrointestinal illness is an excellent way to prevent gut colonization with these mrdos. hands should be cleaned before and after eating, and after using the lavatory, with soap, water, and a clean towel—or a hand rub containing at least 60% alcohol if this is not possible. food should be chosen wisely, because of concern for contamination with human coliform bacteria introduced during preparation and storage. the mantra “peel it, boil it, cook it, or forget it” is a fine start, but this may be difficult for patients to accomplish. the principles of smart eating and drinking habits are reviewed in depth in chapters 7 and 8. wearing a surgical mask when in public has a very small chance of preventing bacterial mdro infections and is not usually recommended for this purpose.• get all appropriate immunizations, including seasonal influenza. some bacterial mdro infections may be directly prevented by immunizations (e.g., typhoid fever and pertussis). but the prevention of viral infections can also reduce the risk of mdro bacterial infection, principally by reducing the likelihood of developing a febrile illness that might lead to healthcare interactions and inappropriate antibiotic use. add this to the list of the many reasons why travelers should receive all appropriate vaccinations before leaving.• avoid “medical tourism.” as the cost of surgical procedures seems to continue to rise in industrialized nations, some patients seek more affordable care overseas, particularly in mexico, india, and china. certainly, there are centers of excellence in these nations and elsewhere around the globe. furthermore, post-procedural infections still happen in north america with unacceptable frequency. however, numerous case reports substantiate the concern that infection control and quality assurance overseas are often provided at a level below that achieved in europe and north america. patients may fail to grasp the impact—personal and financial—of healthcare infections acquired overseas. these can be dangerous, debilitating, disfiguring infections, and the cost of aftercare alone may meet or exceed the savings envisioned. thus, in general, planning trips for medical procedures should be discouraged. seeking care for an acute medical problem while overseas is quite different, and patients should not be discouraged from seeing a healthcare provider if the need arises.• use antibiotics wisely. as described above, antimicrobial stewardship can have major impacts on public health; it can also benefit individual patients. every prescription for antibiotics written pre-departure should come with clear guidance on when to initiate self-treatment during the trip. patients who take antibiotics for uncomplicated secretory diarrhea put themselves at risk for c. difficile infection, prolongation of symptoms due to altered microbiota (“antibiotic-associated diarrhea”), and development of de novo antibiotic resistance within their own native bacteria. for this reason—among others—antibiotics should not be taken as “routine prophylaxis” but rather reserved for the unusual occurrence of high-risk infections, such as dysentery, except in exceptional cases as described in chapter 8.• quit smoking. most smokers acknowledge that their addiction is hazardous to their health, and are interested in quitting. here is another motivator: respiratory infections are more frequent among smokers, and thus they are more susceptible to mrdos; they also require antibiotics more often, which in turn puts them at even higher risk of creating new mdros in their own bodies.• practice safe sex. certain bacterial sexually transmitted diseases (stds), such as gonorrhea, are becoming more and more drug resistant over time and may require higher doses, longer courses, and parenteral routes of therapy (see chapter 42). pre-travel safe sex counseling should pay dividends in terms of preventing acquisition of mdro stds.• probiotics are probably safe but of unproven benefit. the “health-savvy” patient may seek your advice on probiotics. the concept is attractive: use friendly microbes to keep the bad ones at bay. published studies to date vary in terms of design—different settings, different interventions, and different outcome measures. recent meta-analyses suggest a trend toward benefit in the treatment arms, but rarely a large enough benefit to achieve statistical significance. given the complexity of our gastrointestinal microbiomes, it is small wonder that taking megadoses of one or a few microbes fails to reliably set things to right, including prevention of traveler's diarrhea. further complicating the issue is a lack of ingredient standardization or regulatory oversight by the fda for these products, which are classified as dietary supplements rather than medications. on the other hand, probiotics are unlikely to harm the patient—unless he or she has a suppressed immune system, in which case the probiotic microbes can become invasive, leading to colitis or bloodstream infection. in summary, patients should be told that the jury is still out, but for those with a healthy immune system it is reasonable to add once- or twice-daily probiotic supplements to their diets while abroad, although this is not a substitute for any of the other interventions outlined above. because most bacteria have the potential to become mdros, and because they can infect virtually any part of the body, a comprehensive discussion of the clinical presentation and management of these infections is beyond the scope of this chapter. however, advice regarding the most common mdro syndromes in returning travelers includes discussions about the following:• silent colonization. conceptually, when a germ comes into contact with a human being, one of four things happens: the two simply ignore each other; the germ kills the host; the host kills the germ; or an agreement is reached—a state referred to as “colonization.” in colonization, bacteria inhabit an ecological niche within the patient, such as body hair follicles, the anterior nares, the oropharynx, the lower gastrointestinal tract, or the genitourinary tract. by definition, colonizers are clinically silent and cause no signs or symptoms of disease. however, colonizers can become pathogens in a moment, if given the opportunity by the host. this could happen with waning humoral immunity (as during chemotherapy), impaired cellular immunity (as in untreated human immunodeficiency [hiv] infection), anatomical injury (as in surgical wound infections), or alteration of the competitors within an ecological niche (as in antibiotic-associated diarrhea). surveillance data are lacking, but clinical experience suggests that many patients who acquire mrdos while overseas have asymptomatic colonization of the gastrointestinal tract. by itself, this is harmless; however, if these germs are allowed to flourish under the selective pressure of antibiotics, or if they migrate to other anatomic sites, then infection may develop. mdro colonization may last for days, years, or anything in between. patients who have traveled overseas for any considerable period of time, especially those who received health care during the trip, are at elevated risk for gastrointestinal mdro colonization for at least the first 6 months after return. however, this is an arbitrary number, and there are many cases in which patients have demonstrated sustained colonization years after their exposure. this may have implications for infection control in the hospital or clinic. currently there is no national consensus on whether to look for asymptomatic mdro colonization, for example, via a rectal swab or fecal culture, in part because of the challenges this poses in the laboratory, and because it is not entirely clear what to do with that information. it may be simpler to assume these patients are colonized, and thus to treat them using contact precautions (diligent hand hygiene, gowns, and gloves). however, it is reasonable to consider surveillance cultures as part of a comprehensive infection control strategy if your clinic or center encounters these organisms frequently.• gastrointestinal infection. the gastrointestinal tract is a leading reservoir for mdro colonization, although invasive infection is relatively uncommon. as described in chapters 21 and 30, enteric fever due to salmonella enterica serovars typhi and paratyphi are leading causes of fever among travelers returning from the tropics. in the past, fluoroquinolones such as ciprofloxacin and levofloxacin were reliable treatment options for these infections; currently, the majority of isolates acquired in southeast asia, in particular south asia, are partially or fully resistant to fluoroquinolones. third-generation cephalosporins such as ceftriaxone are more reliable empiric choices and can be used in uncomplicated disease, but unfortunately resistance to this class is also on the rise. someone who is septic with suspected salmonella infection acquired in india should be admitted and treated empirically with a carbapenem such as ertapenem, until antibiotic susceptibility testing confirms a narrower-spectrum agent can be used. similarly, enterotoxigenic e. coli (etec), which was once predictably susceptible to fluoroquinolones, is increasingly resistant—again particularly in southeast asia—and alternative drugs such as azithromycin are more reliable today. other mdr enterobacteriaceae, including carbapenem-resistant species, may require toxic agents such as aminoglycosides for treatment. fortunately, symptomatic infection of the gut is uncommonly caused by carbapenem-resistant enterobacteriaceae, presumably because these bacteria infrequently carry extra virulence genes. drug resistance and increased virulence are not necessarily found together.• urinary tract infection (uti). mdr gram-negative rods, especially from the enterobacteriaceae group, which includes e. coli, may be detected in the urine of returning travelers, particularly women. presumably, this is because gastrointestinal colonization is a common source of mdros in travelers (see above), and proximity of the urethral meatus to the anal aperture facilitates bacterial entrance into the urinary tract (just as happens with all utis). because treatment can be challenging, it is essential to distinguish between true uti and asymptomatic bacteriuria (abu). if a patient does not have signs or symptoms of uti such as urinary urgency or frequency, hematuria, pyuria, suprapubic tenderness, or an abnormal urinalysis, or if her urine was tested for reasons that are unclear, then by definition she has abu, which should not be treated with antibiotics. on the other hand, if clinical suspicion for true uti is high, then treatment is appropriate. guidelines of the infectious diseases society of america suggest that uncomplicated uti be treated empirically, without sending a urine culture unless symptoms persist or recur. however, patients who have recently been overseas may not fit into this category of “uncomplicated,” and our practice is to send a clean-catch midstream urine specimen for urinanalysis and reflexively for culture if the urinanalysis is abnormal at the first presentation for these patients. culture data will take time, however, so an empiric prescription will be necessary. ideally, these patients should receive one dose of fosfomycin 3 gm po, because resistance to this drug is less common than to the alternative first-line treatments (trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole 1 dose po bid for 3 days or nitrofurantoin 100 mg po bid for 5 days). alternative oral treatments are even less likely to succeed against mdr enterobacteriaceae, such as ciprofloxacin or cefpodoxime. after culture and resistance data are available, empiric treatment can be changed if the patient has failed to improve. in many cases, no oral treatment will have a favorable in vitro resistance profile. this is an appropriate situation in which to consult a specialist in infectious diseases, who may have access to experimental oral treatments or who can assist with parenteral treatment if indicated. in many cases, an intravenous course of a carbapenem, such as ertapenem 1 gm iv daily for 5 days, may be required.some patients will develop recurrent uti symptoms, which can be stubborn and frustrating for everyone. an emerging strategy that may hold promise involves resetting the microbiome of the vagina. e. coli does not belong in the vagina in substantial amounts, and most utis in otherwise healthy women are caused by e. coli ascending the urethra from the introitus. a leading hypothesis is that the vagina is usually protected from high-level e. coli colonization because of its low ph, which is provided by the activity of human lactobacilli, including lactobacillus crispatus and lactobacillus iners, among other species. these healthy bacteria may be wiped out inadvertently by antibiotic courses given for other reasons, such as rhinosinusitis. sadly, most commercially available lactobacillus supplements contain bovine species such as lactobacillus rhamnosus, which do not lower vaginal ph appropriately. fortunately, clinical trials of human lactobacilli in vaginal suppositories have shown a protective effect, and there is hope that fda registry trials will result in approval of this product in the near future. if so, it would be appropriate to offer this technique to patients with recurrent uti (regardless of their bacterial resistance profile). this is also yet another reason to prescribe antibiotics prudently, to prevent altering the vaginal microbiome in the first place. patients who ask for antibiotics for inappropriate indications may respond to this teaching by their physician.• skin and soft tissue infections. in developed nations, the origin of skin and soft tissue infections is relatively predictable: cellulitis without purulence is usually caused by streptococcal species (including group a beta-hemolytic streptococcus pyogenes), whereas purulent infections such as “boils,” furuncles, carbuncles, and abscesses are usually caused by staphylococcus aureus (both methicillin-susceptible s. aureus and methicillin-resistant s. aureus). in a returning traveler, this pattern remains accurate (see chapter 36). however, other pathogens should be considered as well, depending on host factors and environmental exposures. providers must obtain a careful, detailed history in order to avoid missing drug-resistant bacterial infections. for example, the risk of mdr gram-negative skin infections is greatly increased among patients who have undergone surgical procedures overseas or who sustained a wound exposed to fresh water. such wounds may have become infected by environmental organisms such as acinetobacter, pseudomonas, aeromonas, burkholderia, and rapidly growing mycobacteria, which can be profoundly resistant to most, if not all, antibiotics. thus, an interdisciplinary approach is required for these patients: there should be a low threshold to admit severely infected patients to the hospital (with full and aggressive contact precautions). there, tissue and blood specimens should be submitted for culture and sensitivity testing, and consultation should be sought from specialists in both infectious diseases (because toxic medications may be necessary, such as aminoglycosides, polymyxins, or tigecycline) and surgery (because in some cases rapid debridement or even amputation may be life-saving).• respiratory infections. infections of the lung and respiratory tract among returning travelers are second only to gastrointestinal infections. the great majority are either presumed or proven to be caused by viruses (e.g., influenza, parainfluenza, rhinovirus, or coronavirus). these infections may be “garden variety” or novel forms acquired during travel, such as highly pathogenic avian influenza (hpai) or middle east respiratory corona virus. furthermore, these viral processes may mask, mimic, or predispose patients to drug-resistant bacterial infections. for example, s. aureus or haemophilus pneumoniae infections may follow influenza infection. so-called atypical bacterial pneumonia due to legionella or chlamydia may have a clinical and radiographic appearance that looks very much like viral pneumonia. these infections require early detection and antibiotic coverage in order to prevent substantial risk of morbidity and mortality. all physicians know well the principle of “occam's razor,” in which the single answer with the fewest uncertainties should be selected. this is usually a wise approach in infectious diseases medicine; however, because there are so many microbes that threaten people in austere settings, multiple infections may present simultaneously or in close sequence. thus, caution should be advised in the ill traveler returning from the tropics, where “occam's razor may grow rusty in the humid atmosphere,” so to speak. when pandemics manifest, novel and sometimes unscientific ideas proliferate as to how they can be prevented, treated and cured. conspiracy theories can proliferate (uscinski and enders, 30 april 2020; anderson et al, 1 may 2020) ; as douglas has observed, -people have an epistemic need to know the truth and they also have an existential need to feel safe. in times of crisis these needs are unmet so conspiracy theories can seem appealing‖ (van prooijen and douglas, 2018; knapp, 2020) .there can be other consequences too. anxiety, fear and the beguiling temptations of a vulnerable patient group provide the unscrupulous with incentives for lucrative quackery and exploitation. during a pandemic, fuelled by alarmist saturation publicity, and propagated by social media, the contagion of fear stalks alongside the disease itself (debiec, 2020; honigsbaum, 2020; honigsbaum, 2009) , resulting in a preparedness on the part of a crosssection of patients or potential patients to panic, to suspend rationality and to invest hope in unlikely offerings of prophylactic agents, treatments and cures (taylor, 2019) . in addition, during a pandemic more people than normal are spending time at home searching online for answers to the threats about which they have read. in such a context false claims, misinformation narratives and rumour-mongering on social media can achieve high levels of currency. it is important in such a context for government messaging to work against fears, dread (honigsbaum, 2013) and anxieties. it is also essential for the community to be provided promptly and consistently with comprehensible, scientifically-based information so as to make sound therapeutic decision in their own and the community's best interests (garrett, 1995; garrett, 2000) . citizens need to be protected against the misrepresentations and false facts (ball and maxmen, 27 may 2020) propagated by unethical purveyors of spurious or unproven treatments and medical instruments.this article contextualises inappropriate representations about preventing, treating and curing covid-19 within the historical backdrop of quackery and charlatanism during previous pandemics. it reviews the extent of false claims in the early stages of the covid-19 pandemic and reviews legal responses taken in diverse countries to protect patients against unscientific overtures and promises about treatments, remedies and preventative options. it argues that the combination of robust consumer protection measures and ongoing publicity from public health authorities is critical for the protection of members of the community who may not be in a position to exercise medico-scientific discernment in their own best interests. liable to be a pandemic of fearnot only are we afraid of the emerging infection but we become fearful of those around us as it may be they who are the sources of potential transmission of a fatal infection to us. (strong, 1990: 293) as taylor (2019: 5) has observed, pandemics are ubiquitously disruptive: they -are associated with a score of … psychosocial stressors, including health threats to oneself and loved ones. there may be severe disruptions of routines, separation from family and friends, shortages of food and medicine, wage loss, social isolation due to quarantine or other social distancing programs, and school closure.‖ in addition, hospital and medical facilities can break down under the pressure of patient numbers to which they cannot cater. there can be a feeling that the fabrics of our communities are buckling and social structures are faltering under the pressure of the medical crisis.a pandemic arises from virulent pathogens (shah, 2016: 206) and exposure in significant part is involuntary. it can be fatal for any given person, it is not visible, and it is hard to prevent and problematic to treat effectively. during a pandemic citizens are particularly dependent on government authorities for information, guidance and protection but the ability of such authorities to manage the risk to the community often does not always command universal confidence. (lu, 2015) non-compliance with governmental exhortations and even orders can exacerbate the levels of transmission risk. media treatment and some authors' accounts can be framed in a way that unhelpfully generates panic. an archetypal example of such anxiety generation occurred when preston (1995) wrote of the ebola virus transforming -virtually every part of the body into a digested slime of virus particles.‖ (see too quammen, 2014; 46; preston, 2009 ) perceptions of the relative impotence of doctors in the face of a pandemic can propel some who may already have been suspicious of mainstream medicine to become mistrustful and disillusioned with it and to search for other options, even if from a rational perspective they are unlikely to be efficacious and they may be manifestly unscientific.for some years virologists have spoken apocalyptically about the potential for a plague that will endanger the viability of the human race; larry brilliant in a 2006 ted talk, for instance, related how in a survey he undertook of leading epidemiologists 90 percent said they thought there would be a catastrophic pandemic in their lifetime in which a billion people would become ill and up to as many as 165 million people would die, accompanied by a global recession. (see too shah, 2016) in short, pandemics are the domain of linguistic hyperbole, unhelpful predictions of a viral armageddon, and a forum for anxiety-inducing prognostications.as sontag (1988: 41-42) nothing is more punitive than to give a disease a meaningthat meaning being invariably a moralistic one. any important disease whose causality is murky, and for which treatment is ineffectual, tends to be awash in significance. first, the subjects of deepest dread (corruption, decay, pollution, anomie, weakness) are identified with the disease. then, in the name of the disease (that is, using it as a metaphor), that horror is imposed on other things. the disease becomes adjectival.black death, giving a fillip to public panic and the miasma theory of pandemics -that a miasma (bad air) unleashed by god was the cause of the disease.scapegoating and discrimination too are a common response in face of a pandemic (mcneil jr, 2009; cooke, 2015) . during the antonine plague of 166ad, for instance, there was an eruption of persecution of christians who were blamed for the plague by reason of their rejection of local gods, their blasphemies and their indulgence in black magic. (seaman, 2018) between 1347 and 1352 during the black death there were multiple attacks on members of social minorities, including those suffering from leprosy, mental illness and foreigners. (colet, santiveri, ventura et al, 2014) . they were an example of a fear-induced reaction. in anticipation of, or shortly after, outbreaks of plague, too, jews were accused of poisoning food, wells and streams. they were tortured into confessions, rounded up in city squares or synagogues, and exterminated (mostly by burning) en masse (cohn, 2007; mcneil, 2009; jedwab, johnson and koyama, 2019) . more than 200 jewish communities across europe were devastated during the years of the black death, in particular in spain and germany (cohn, 2007; einbinder, 2018) . in more recent times discrimination in the form of assaults, insults and business boycotts has taken place against chinese communities (even during its earliest phases in italy), fanned by claims that china was responsible for the covid-19 pandemic (liu, 18 february 2020) and references to descriptors such as the -chinese flu‖ and -kung flu‖. (restuccia, 22 june 2020; sojo and bapuji, 2020)) fear is apt to generate stress responses (meisenhelder and lacharite, 1989; bennett, 1998) , to which some persons are more predisposed than others by reason of a combination of genetic, psychological, biological, educational and situational factors. in face of the pressures of a pandemic we are all vulnerable but some amongst us have especial psychological frailties as a result of rigidities of personality, particular levels of fearfulness or a propensity to anxiety that can be exploited. this is the more pronounced in an era in which all forms of media, including social media, make information, including alarmist and stress-inducing information, the more accessible and ubiquitous. it has been suggested that the speed of social media creates an -echo chamber‖ of skepticism and conspiracy theories. (gorter, 2020) . those who are less educated, who have disabilities (see kavanagh, 2020) or who are socially isolated by reason of limited linguistic facility in their country of residence have additional vulnerabilities in terms of their ability to understand and process governmentissued information. this can leave them with impairments of health literacy (at least in respect of the pandemic) (paakkan and okan, 2020) , emotionally and informationally isolated, and prone to make decisions based upon fear and rumour. the diathesis stress model is useful in this context. it postulates that if the combination of predisposition and stressor exceed a threshold, this can result in the development of pathology (lazarus, 1993) . however, at a subclinical level vulnerabilities can render people at risk for poor decision-making and inhibiting their capacity for clear thinking and the analysis of available information about how they should respond to risk. pandemics generate high levels of anxiety, paranoia, stigmatisation and xenophobia (taylor, 2019) , with the potential for maladaptive decision-making. such responses can be exacerbated by cultural, educational and religiose overlays that are apt to engender confusion, guilt and anxiety, as well as by emotive tropes encountered in a variety of contexts. religion, literature, films and j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f board and online games are a significant part of our shared cultural experience that frame our expectations and influence our responses to reality. (dehority, 2020) for instance, in the old testament of the bible plagues and pestilences (which also ravaged the ancient world) are depicted as a punishment by an often merciless god as a retribution for the commission of sins (see eg exodus 9: 14; numbers 11: 33; 1 samuel 4: 8; psalms 89:23; isaiah 9: 13). as huremovic (2019: 7) has observed: -throughout the biblical context, pandemic outbreaks are the bookends of human existence, considered both a part of nascent human societies, and a part of the very ending of humanity.‖ the bhagavad purana pragmatically warned villagers to flee their dwellings as soon as dead rats were seen, as dead rats were a harbinger of death in humans. (blaser, 1998; liston, 1924) in islamic tradition there are multiple exhortations as to how a person must respond in face of the danger of contagionfor instance, the holy prophet recognised the urgency of preventative responses and preached the importance of travel bans and quarantine in places contaminated with disease in order to mitigate the spread of illness: -if you hear of an outbreak of plague in a land, do not enter it; and if the plague breaks out in a place while you are in it, do not leave that place.‖ (sahih al-bukhari) similar depictions are found in literature. it was homer who first used the term epidemios to describe those returning to greece while hippocrates employed it in a medical sense to refer to -that which circulates or propagates in a country‖. this paved the way for awareness of the potential for an infection to spread uncontrolled from one community to another. thucydides recounted the fearfulness of the plague in athens between 429 and 426 bc and the breakdown of law and order:there was no previous record of so great a pestilence and destruction of human life. the doctors were unable to cope, since they were treating the disease for the first time and in ignorance: indeed, the more they came into contact with sufferers, the more liable they were to lose their own lives. no other device of men was any help. moreover, supplication at sanctuaries, resort to divination, and the like were all unavailing. in the end, people were overwhelmed by the disaster and abandoned efforts against it. (history of the peloponnesian war, ii. viii.5-12).the better part of a millennium later, procopius in his account of the justinian plague in 543ad (history of the wars, ii: 22), which the emperor himself termed -god's education‖, and john of ephesus called -the chastisement‖ (pearse, 2017), commented that -the whole human race came near to being annihilated‖.the accounts of both chaucer (1343-1400) in the canterbury tales (-ther cam a privee thief men clepeth deeth, that in this contree al the peple sleeth‖) and boccaccio (1313 boccaccio ( -1375 in the decameron (-in this sore affliction and misery of our city, the reverend authority of the laws, both human and divine, was all in a manner dissolved and fallen into decay, for (lack of) the ministers and executors thereof, who, like other men, were all either dead or sick or else left so destitute of followers that they were unable to exercise any office, wherefore everyone had license to do whatever pleased him.‖) postulated, amongst other things, that fear of contagion increases vices such as avarice, lust and corruption. both alessandro manzoni (1785 manzoni ( -1873 in the betrothed (i promessi sposi) (1827, revised 1842) and history of the column of infamy (storia della colonna infame) and daniel defoe in the diary of a plague year catalogued reactions of anxiety and desperation within milan and london respectively during pandemics. manzoni described the fears of poisoning arising from scaffolding carried by workers in a cathedral in the betrothed and in a history of the column of infamy the belief that the plague had been caused by the actions of the evil (-the untori‖) who were possessed by the devil, resulting in the execution of the innocent and erection of a column in milan to commemorate the imposition of death on two -greasers‖.in the last man mary shelley (1797-1851) portrayed the need of the central character to stay away from others for fear of being infected and edgar allan poe (1809-1849) meditated on the role of the plague in being a purveyor of death. similarly, in the scarlet plague published in 1912 jack london (1876-1916) portrayed a post-apocalyptic scenario in 2073 following the spread of the red death, in which an uncontrollable pandemic had depopulated the world 60 years before. albert camus ' la peste (1947) , in which -the plague was posting sentries at the gates and turning away ships‖ was a critique of -repugnant materialism‖ as well as disturbing account of cohabitation with death. he described reactions of complacency that placed all at risk (-many continued hoping that the epidemic would soon die out and they and their families be spared. thus they felt under no obligation to make any change in their habits, as yet. plague was an unwelcome visitant, bound to take its leave one day as unexpectedly as it had come.‖) and anxious fears about the threat to come (-a pestilence isn't a thing made to man's measure; therefore we tell ourselves that pestilence is a mere bogy of the mind, a bad dream that will pass away. but it doesn't always pass away and, from one bad dream to another, it is men who pass away‖).multiple films have portrayed the catastrophic impact of epidemics and, in particular, pandemics. as a genre they have been described as -reel bio-horror‖ films (sutton (2014) . the andromeda strain (1971) , based on the novel by michael crichton, for instance depicts the spread of a deadly organism of extraterrestrial origin. death in venice (morte a venezia) (1971) relates the story of a composer who travels to venice for health reasons but the city becomes stricken by cholera and the health authorities do not inform holiday-makers of what is happening for fear of the consequences. in outbreak (1995) the setting is a fictional ebolaform of motaba virus in zaire which then spreads to a california coastal village via a capuchin monkey which is host to the virus. the plot focuses on strategies, including sinister military interventions, and conspiracies to conceal the virus so it can be used as a biological weapon. fatal contact (2006) portrays an american businessman who becomes infected with a mutated bird flu virus and brings it back to the united states. it spreads around the world and riots erupt with armed mobs attempting to hijack vaccines and the pandemic continues to mutate causing further international waves of panic. contagion (2011) portrays the medico-scientific quest for a cure to a virus transmitted by respiratory droplets and fómites. it includes a sub-plot in which the jude law character, a blogger, spreads rumours about forsythia (wang et al, 2018) , a herbal treatment he claims works to cure the virus. the last days (los últimos días) (2013) centres around a trend of agoraphobia, and -the panic‖, where people die if they leave shelter. extinction (2015) goes a step further, portraying a post-apocalyptic world in which a virus has turned the populace into zombies. the series of resident evil horror films starting in 2002 and followed by sequels in 2004, 2007, 2010, 2012 and 2016 is based on attempts to control the spread of the t-virus that has escaped from a secret underground genetic research facility. in 2015 containment, set in a southampton apartment block, explores a world patrolled by figures in hazmat suits keeping people within their apartments which no longer have electricity, water or contact with the outside world, repeating the refrain, -please remain calm. the situation is under control.‖ there are many other popular exposures to pandemics which generate associations of fear, panic and the imminence of human annihilation. for instance, the popular board game, pandemic (2008), was based on the premise that four diseases had broken out in the world, each threatening to wipe out a region. the game accommodates two to four players, each playing one of seven possible specialists: dispatcher, medic, scientist, researcher, operations expert, contingency planner, and quarantine specialist. through the combined effort of all the players, the goal is to discover all four cures before any of several game-losing conditions (global catastrophe) are reached.computer games about viral outbreaks are also prevalent and a potentially significant influence on the generation of gamers. for instance, in deus ex (2000) a lethal pandemic, -the gray death‖ has ravaged the population. there is no cure but a synthetic vaccine, ambrosia, can nullify the effects of the virus but is in short supply. because of its scarcity, ambrosia is available only to those deemed "vital to the social order ", and finds its way primarily to government officials, military personnel, the rich and influential, scientists, and the intellectual elite. with no hope for the common people of the world, riots occur worldwide, and some terrorist organizations have formed with the professed intent of assisting the downtrodden. in the last of us (2013) an outbreak of a mutant cordyceps fungus has ravaged the united states, transforming its hosts into aggressive creatures known as -the infected‖. it is an action adventure survival horror game. civilisation has been decimated by the infection and survivors live in heavily policed quarantine zones, independent settlements and nomadic groups. joel works as a smuggler and his task is to smuggle ellie who has been infected but it is believed her community may have a cure. plague inc: evolved (2014) is a real-time strategy simulation game where the player creates and evolves a pathogen in an effort to destroy the world with a deadly virus. it and its predecessor, plague inc (2012), have been banned in china. in a plague tale: innocence (2019) the player has to battle hordes of ravenous rats in 1348 aquitane to survive the onset of plague. tom clancy's the division (2016) is an online game set in a near future new york city in the aftermath of a viral pandemic which has been planted on banknotes. its successor, clancy's the division 2 was released in march 2019. it is set in a near-future washington dc in the aftermath of a potent strain of a smallpox pandemic engineered in new york city by an environmental terrorist.in christian tradition, world literature, film, board games and computer games pandemics have been vividly and emotively portrayed in diverse ways, requiring urgent prophylactic or avoidance responses, all of which are redolent with fear and paranoid ideation. thoughts of the reader, the viewer and the gamer are turned toward the potential for dire outcomes. sometimes offence caused to the godhead is mooted as a cause for the threat. frequently doubts are ventilated around the bona fides and effectiveness of the measures taken by government and public health authorities to contain and eradicate viruses and bacteria. helplessness is a prominent trope and catastrophising can find expression in the form of both eschatological and apocalyptic ruminations about the consequences of the pandemic for oneself, all whom one knows, and even the future of humanity. in all contexts, global disaster is at hand; armageddon is close. this creates a fertile field for opportunists and charlatans; as porter (1989: 26) observed, in the face of invasions of epidemic sickness, there is desperation j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f which in turn creates a voracious demand for a multiplicity of healers, among whom are quacks. 2 thus, a variety of influences can combine to generate high levels of fear and anxiety, all of which can exacerbate pre-existing vulnerabilities and militate against calm and informed decision-making during a pandemic.the russian flu (also known as la grippe) and the spanish flu have many lessons for dealing with the phenomenology of the covid-19 pandemic, including the regulation of quacks and predatory charlatans.the russian flu. the russian flu is often described as the first modern influenza pandemic. it took place between 1889 and 1892 and is believed to have killed more one million people (honigsbaum, 2020) , including queen victoria's grandson, the duke of clarence (honigsbaum, 2011; mcginnis, 1988: 123-124) . newspaper advertisements touted many cures for the russian flu, including castor oil, bronchial inhalers and an electric battery. quinine too was offered (mcginnis, 1988) . doctors even promoted the idea that drinking brandy and eating oysters were a key to staving off infection. (knapp, 2020) the best known questionable remedy proposed for the russian flu, though, was the carbolic smoke ball which consisted of a rubber ball filled with powdered carbolic acid (snell, 2001) . the patient squeezed the ball sending a puff of acidic smoke up a tube inserted into the nostrils. it was advertised with testimonials by well known personalities, as was common at the time in the pall mall gazette, offering a £100 reward to anyone using it correctly who then contracted influenza (mcginnis, 1988: 124) . the purveyor of the smoke ball deposited £1,000 in the alliance bank in regent street to show the money was there. (coleman, 2009) the carbolic smoke ball prophylaxis had a notorious legal outcome. louisa elizabeth carlill purchased a ball from a chemist in oxford street, london, and used it, as directed, three times a day for nearly two months. however, she contracted the flu. she claimed her -reward‖ but was rebuffed by the carbolic smoke ball company which replied to correspondence from her husband, who had trained as a solicitor, saying that, if used properly, it had total confidence in its product. it failed to return her money. this resulted in her suing the carbolic smoke ball company in the high court for breach of contract. she succeeded (carlill v carbolic smoke ball company, 1892) but the company appealed to the court of appeal, arguing that their advertisement was -mere puff‖. however, this argument was rejected on the basis that the company had deposited £1,000 to show its seriousness. as mcginness (1988: 127-128) has observed: a legal decision supporting that type of argument would only serve to encourage the telling of even more outrageous untruths. advertisers could attempt with impunity to trap consumers with progressively bigger lies and then avoid liability by laughing at the gullibility of the gulled. instead, the court said that it was going to look at the j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f contract as printed and to interpret it according to its plain meaning, on the sensible assumption that what is exactly what mrs carlill and other buyers like her would have done.secondly, the company maintained that it had no way of ascertaining whether mrs carlill had followed its instructions correctly. this contention was rejected by the court of appeal out-of-hand (carlill v carbolic smoke ball company, 1893) . thirdly, the company argued that an offer such as it had made could not be understood to have been made to the whole world. this argument too failed with the court of appeal finding that the offer was clear and to a group of consumers, and anyone fulfilling its terms could be deemed to have accepted the offer. finally, the company argued that the requisite consideration for a contract did not exist. however, the court of appeal rejected this too, concluding that any use of the smoke ball would be likely to promote sales and thus be of value to the company. thus, mrs carlill's use of the smoke ball constituted valuable consideration.the outcome of the decision was an emphatic endorsement of contract law as a means by which the vulnerable could be protected against false representations, which were not honoured, during a pandemic.the editors of the lancet exulted:we are glad to learn that in spite of the ingenuity of their legal advisers the defendants have been held liable to make good their promise. people who are silly enough to adopt a medicine simply because a tradesman is reckless enough to make extravagant promises and wild representations as to its efficacy may thank themselves chiefly for any disappointment that ensues. still for this folly, which is only foolish and nothing worse, it is possible to feel sympathy when the disappointment comes. it is a pleasant alternative to learn that the dupe has been able, as in the present instance to enforce a sharp penalty and that the process of reaping a harvest from the simplicity of one's neighbours is attended with dangers of miscarriage which must materially diminish its attractiveness in the eyes of those people who supply the popular demand for quack medicines. (editorial, 1892 ; see too simpson, 1985) the spanish flu. the spanish flu is believed to have infected close to one third of persons on the planet between 1918 and 1920, killing between 60 and 500 million persons (kent, 2013; spinney, 2017 , honigsbaum, 2020 . those fearful of contracting the influenza and those suffering its symptoms sought the assistance of orthodox medicine but conventional medical practitioners had little in their medicine cabinet to assist. clinical drug development was in its early stages, few human trials had been conducted and double blind, placebocontrolled trials were almost unknown. aspirin and drugs such as quinine, known for its utility with malaria, were trialled, as were arsenic, digitalis and strychnine concoctions, as well as a variety of alcohol-based remedies. a host of alternative healers emerged around the world. as spinney (2017: 125) records:witch doctors in the hills of india moulded human figures out of flour and water and waved them over the sick to lure out evil spirits. in china, besides parading the figures of dragon kings through their towns, people went to public baths to sweat out j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f the evil winds, smoked opium and too yin qiao sana powdered form of honeysuckle and forsythia that had been developed under the qing for ‗winter sickness'.catharine arnold (2018: ch 12) has documented how willingness to try anything during the spanish flu era was accompanied by a proliferation of advertisements in the west for influenza-related remedies:from the times of london to the washington post, page after page was filled with dozens of advertisements for preventive measures and over-the-counter remedies.-influenza!‖ proclaimed an advert extolling the virtues of formamint lozenges. -suck a tablet whenever you enter a crowded germ-laden place.‖ another advertisement announced -as spanish influenza is an exaggerated form of grip,‖ readers should take laxative bromo quinine in larger doses than usual, as a preventive measure. for those who had already succumbed, hill's cascara quinine bromide promised relief, as did dr jones's liniment, previously and mysteriously known as -beaver oil‖ and intended to provide relief from coughing and catarrh. demand for vick's vaporub, still popular today, was drummed up by press adverts warning of imminent shortages.carbolic soap was touted in the british midlands as a disinfectant and cleanser. various forms of alcohol were touted as remedies for influenza:in denmark and canada, alcohol was only available by prescription, while in poland brandy was regarded as highly medicinal. one brave soul in nova scotia recommended fourteen straight gins in quick succession as a cure for spanish flu. the result of this experiment was unknown; if the patient had survived he had doubtless forgotten the proceedings entirely. in britain the royal college of physicians stated that -alcohol invites disaster,‖ a conclusion which was ignored by many. the barman at london's savoy hotel created a new cocktail, based on whisky and rum, and christened it -the corpse reviver!‖ (arnold, 2018, ch 12) consumer protection by governments during the spanish flu was only in its infancy and relatively few measures were adopted by the state to inhibit false and misleading representations about medical products.during the covid-19 crisis in 2020 spurious remedies were championed from early in the pandemic in many countries. the issue became sufficiently serious that as early as 15 february 2020 the world health organization director-general, tedros adhanom ghebreyesus, identified that the world was not -just fighting an epidemic; we're fighting an infodemic‖, a component of which related to the propagation of conspiracy theories, bogus cures and misinformation about the pandemic. the world health organization responded by publishing an extensive list of myth-busters, endeavouring to provide counter-information to issues such as: particular risks are posed when market-surveillance on bogus cures is less available in the course of a pandemic. as delese darko, the chief executive of ghana's food and drug authority, has observed, in an atmosphere of desperation to explore unorthodox cures, in spite of the lomé initiative (by which many countries in january 2020 pledged to prevent, detect and respond to substandard and falsified medical products) (world health organization, 18 january 2020) -… there could be an influx across porous borders of substandard medical productsincluding those for covid-19.‖ (knott, 30 april 2020) this has led to fabricated versions of a number of products, including chloroquine.another issue is the availability of what have been promoted as covid-19 cures, even including blood of allegedly recovered patients (iggulden, 30 april 2020) , marketed on the dark web (broadhurst, ball and jiang, 2020; martin, 5 may 2020) . although it appears that as of may/june 2020 such forms of promotion and sale were not extensive, they are particularly difficult to regulate effectively. there have been some signs that the dark web has been prepared to self-regulate against false cures for covid-19 (cuthbertson,3 april 2020) but of its nature the dark web is largely unregulated from the outside and its encrypted environment is an ideal vehicle for the unscrupulous to exploit the fearful, the desperate and the undiscriminating. (shah, 19 may 2020) a troubling variety of false treatments for covid-19 has been touted by persons of influence, including politicians and religious figures in the months after the commencement of the pandemic. (graham-harrison, 2020) . it has been suggested that -prominent public figures continue to play an outsized role in spreading misinformation about covid-19.‖ (brennen, simon, howard and nielsen, 7 april 2020) in the united states president trump's unscientific enthusiasm for hydroxychloroquine, remdesivir, azithromycin, bleach and ultraviolet light is one example. in brazil president jair bolsonaro went a step further and ordered j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f the distribution of hydrochloroquine (o'grady, 23 may 2020), prompting a run on -quina tea‖ (langlois, 4 june 2020) while in belarus president alexander lukashenko propounded the idea of a vodka cure. (bennetts, 29 march, 2020) . in madagascar president andry rajoelina endorsed the benefits of artemisia annua (sweet wormwood), a herbal remedy promoted as a treatment for covid-19, which prompted orders from equatorial guinea, guinea-bissau, niger and tanzania, (finnan, 20 april 2020; nordling, 6 may 2020; hirsch, 13 may 2020) , prompting denunciation by the world health organization regional office for africa as lacking a scientific basis. (vaughan, 15 may 2020) in ghana a popular islamic cleric, numerologist and philosopher, mallam sham-una uztar jibril, proclaimed that he had identified a cure to covid-19 in (unspecified) roots and leaves found only in saudi arabia and afghanistan. (-i have discovered the cure to the deadly coronavirus -popular islamic cleric, 27 february 2020)in iran it was reported that a muslim cleric advocated the application of what he called the -prophet's perfume‖ under the nose of coronavirus patients in a northern iranian hospital in gilan province. in korea the river of grace community church sprayed saltwater in parishioners' mouths as a prophylactic agent. (shim, 16 march 2020) cow urine as a covid-19 cure was promoted by a member of the legislative assembly in assam in india (nath, 2020) . hundreds of people attended a -gaumutra party‖ sponsored by the hindu mahasabha and in march 2020, bjp mla in assam suman haripriya introduced a variation, propagating that cow dung could also destroy covid-19. (kundu, 2020) . nayak (2020) has described the rise of one form of alternative remedy purveyors in india during the covid-19 crisis:the sugar-pill quacks are having their moment in the sun. universally they have prescribed arsenicum album, of 30c potency, as prophylaxis for covid-19. while this level of potency would ensure that not a single molecule of the allegedly active ingredient would be present in a given dilution (1x10 to the power of 30), their claims have been accepted by the government authorities, including highly-placed institutions such as the nuclear power corporation of india and the government of kerala-which has otherwise done a good job of containing the virus but has distributed strips of these sugar pills all over the place.when the sugar pill dispensers have put in their might, can the vendors of roots, plants and spices be far behind? ayurveda has stepped in with its own versions of grandma's soup. they advise you to:1. drink warm water throughout the day.2. practice yogasana, pranayama and meditation for three minutes a day.3. consume spices such as zeera (cumin), coriander, turmeric and garlic.unani and siddha have also contributed: the tamil nadu government has especially advised government servants to consume zinc, vitamin c (neither is a proven prophylactic or treatment) along with the siddha herbal powders, nilavembu kudineer and kabasura kudineer.other coronavirus remedies available from various -holistic‖ practitioners have included oil of oregano and -spirit dust,‖ an -adaptogenic‖ concoction of powdered mushrooms and roots from the los angeles cult brand moon juice. (pan, 3 april 2020) in indonesia there have been rushes on traditional herbs and medicinal plants (jamu) such as turmeric, curcumin, lemongrass and ginger to strengthen the immune system. president widodo informed an agricultural and food conference that he was drinking a herbal elixir of red ginger, lemongrass and turmeric three times a day to help to prevent infection by the coronavirus. (stein, 23 march 2020) his minister for home affairs encouraged more people to eat bean sprouts and broccoli. (weydmann et al, 20 may 2020) in the united kingdom, suggestions that appeared on the stop mandatory vaccination website related to inclusion of elderberry syrup, placing sliced onions on the bottom of feet and rubbing the back with lemon and lavender oil to draw the coronavirus away from the brain. colloidal silver, which can lead to skin turning a light bluish-grey, is another treatment that has been promoted online. (proctor, 2020) theories have been propagated on social media too that china created covid-19 as a bio-weapon to attack the united states (tucker, 10 march 2020) and that the 5g network's ability to control the oxygen supply of patients has created the virus.the consequences of bizarre conspiracy theories and the promotion of unscientific remedies can have very serious consequences. in iran during early 2020 it was reported that at least 200 citizens died and many others were hospitalised after drinking bootleg or modified industrial strength alcohol because of a rumour that its consumption would make them immune to covid-19. iranian media also reported that a five year old boy had gone into a coma and lost his sight after being given tainted alcohol by his family in the belief it would protect him against covid-19. (esfandiari, 2020) a man died in the united states, too, after taking a form of chloroquinehailed by president donald trump as a potential -gift from god remedy‖ (levine, 21 march 2000) he took a form of the drug his wife had used to treat her pet fish. the wife told nbc news, -i saw it sitting on the back shelf and thought, ‗hey, isn't that the stuff they're talking about on tv?' -banner health, a non-profit health care provider based in phoenix, said on its website that -a man has died and his wife is under critical care after the couple, both in their 60s, ingested chloroquine phosphate, an additive commonly used at aquariums to clean fish tanks.‖ (fake cures, risky rumors: virus misinformation hits home, 2020) it is evident that the promotion of unscientific strategies for the prevention, treatment and cure of covid-19 has been a global phenomenon and that a percentage of the time it has had highly undesirable and sometimes fatal consequences.two strategies have been deployed internationally to counter gullibility and lack of discernment in the community arising out of fears of covid-19: provision of scientifically based health information, such as described above from the world health organization, and the invocation of a variety of forms of consumer protection laws (developed since the time of the spanish flu) to prevent the gullible and the vulnerable from being duped by advertising of products or devices which have not been rigorously tested and demonstrated to be efficacious, hope, rumour and expectation notwithstanding.in the united states such consumer protection efforts have been pursued with energy but a wave of e-commerce sites has attempted to attempted to circumvent them, selling -phantom‖ and bogus products which have made false or exaggerated claims about their capacity to counter covid-19 (keller and lorez, 24 march 2020) . as early as the day after the world health organization designated covid-19 a pandemic, new york's attorney-general sent a cease-and-desist letter to a number of vendors who were passing off colloidal silver as a treatment. they included the silver edge company (letter, officer of the attorney general, 11 march 2020), whose micro-particle colloidal silver generator ($us250) had already sold out and dr sherrill sellman, a naturopathic doctor with a criminal history (see aratani, 9 march 2020) , who, during a screening of the jim bakker show, when asked about whether his silver solution would be effective against the corona virus, responded, -let's say it hasn't been tested on this strain of the coronavirus, but it's been tested on other strains of the coronavirus and has been able to eliminate it within 12 hours.‖ (letter, officer of the attorney general, 11 march 2020).on 12 march 2020 a similar cease and desist letter was sent to alex jones who through his website had been marketing and selling toothpaste, dietary supplements, creams, and several other products as treatments to prevent and cure the coronavirus: -jones fraudulently claims that these products are a -stopgate‖ against the virus and that the united states government has said his superblue toothpaste ‗kills the whole sars-corona family at point-blank range.'‖ (letter, officer of the attorney general, 12 march 2020) the attorney general letitia james was stated: -as the coronavirus continues to pose serious risks to public health, alex jones has spewed outright lies and has profited off of new yorkers' anxieties. … mr jones' public platform has not only given him a microphone to shout inflammatory rhetoric, but his latest mistruths are incredibly dangerous and pose a serious threat to the public health of new yorkers and individuals across the nation. if these unlawful violations do not cease immediately, my office will not hesitate to take legal action and hold mr. jones accountable for the harm he's caused. any individual, company, or entity that deceives the public and preys on innocent civilians will pay for their unlawful actions.‖ (letter, office of the attorney general, 12 in addition, the federal justice department directed all 94 united states attorneys to prioritise the investigation and prosecution of coronavirus fraud schemes, with the public able to report such frauds to a national center for disaster fraud hotline. (department of justice, 27 march 2020). by mid-april americans were reported to have communicated about $us12 million in covid-19-related fraud losses. (christie and park, 11 april 2020) . the potential was even raised for those who threatened or attempted to spread covid-19 to be classified as having engaged in federal terrorism offences because of their use of a biological agent.a further initiative employed was an order by the environmental protection agency (epa) in june 2020 to amazon and ebay to stop selling pesticides that made false claims to kill the novel coronavirus. it applied to products, such as the disinfectant known as -virus shut out‖, as well as methylene chloride, which is hazardous and already subject to a partial ban in the united states. (united states environmental protection agency, 6 june 2020) the epa also issued an advisory in relation to products making claims to kill coronavirus, particularly disinfectants and pesticidal devices (united states environmental protection agency, may 2020).j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f 5.2 united kingdom initiatives. in the united kingdom, too, efforts have been made to quell false advertising about medications to prevent, treat and cure covid-19. the united kingdom's medicine's and healthcare products regulatory agency (mhra) warned the public not to be fooled by products ranging from self-testing kits to antiviral misting sprays. the mhra announced that in the early stages of covid-19 it had disabled nine domain names and social media accounts for selling fake coronavirus-related products, and that it was investigating five further cases. lynda scammell, a senior enforcement advisor to the mhra, made the point that: -there is no medicine licensed specifically to treat or prevent covid-19, therefore any claiming to do so are not authorised and have not undergone regulatory approvals required for sale on the uk market. we cannot guarantee the safety or quality of the product and this poses a risk to your health. the risk of buying medicines and medical devices from unregulated websites are that you just don't know what you will receive and could be putting your health at risk.‖ (medicines and healthcare products regulatory agency, 4 april 2020; lovett, 2020) it stated on 19 march 2020 that its annual operation in relation to the illegal online sale of medicine -identified a disturbing trend of criminals who are taking advantage of the covid-19 outbreak by exploiting the high market demand for personal protection and hygiene products.‖ it also stated that:globally, 2,000 online advertisements related to covid-19 were found and more than 34,000 unlicensed and fake products, advertised as -corona spray‖, -coronavirus medicines‖ or, -coronaviruses packages‖ were seized. whilst there were no coronavirus related products found to have reached uk borders on this occasion, operation pangea aims to tackle serious organized crime globally and the mhra plays a big role in ensuring unlicensed medicines and medical devices are not making their way onto uk markets. (medicines and healthcare products regulatory agency, 4 april 2020) by may 2020 ms scammell went further: -we want to caution people that products claiming to do so are not authorised and have not undergone regulatory approvals required for sale on the uk market. we cannot guarantee the safety or quality of these products and this poses a risk to your health. we have been receiving reports of ‗miracle cures', ‗antiviral misting sprays', antiviral medicines being sold through websites. offering to sell unauthorised medicines is against the law.‖ (medicines and healthcare products regulatory agency, 7 may 2020).criminal charges have also been preferred, including by the city of london intellectual property crime unit, for fraud and unlawful manufacture of medicinal products for the treatment of covid-19. (city of london police (25 march 2020); 25 march 2020; coronavirus: man in court over fake covid-19 treatment kits, 21 march 2020) .in addition, an investigation was launched by the charity commission, which regulates charities in england and wales, as well as trading standards, into the camberwell kingdom church that had been reported to be selling coronavirus -protection kits‖. however, the j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f church then relaunched the kits, priced at £uk91, claiming them to be -divine cleansing oil.‖ (coronavirus: camberwell church continuing to sell fake covid-19 cure, 20 april 2020) 5.3 japanese initiatives. in japan advertisements that make false or exaggerated medical claims are illegal under a law that prohibits the making of misleading representations. in addition, advertisements for uncertified products claiming to prevent or treat medical conditions are a violation of the pharmaceutical and medical device law.in march 2020 the consumer affairs agency announced that sellers of products claiming prophylactic effects against covid-19 in online advertisements were obliged to revise their advertising. by 11 march it had conducted emergency surveillance and identified 46 items sold by 30 companies to have breached permissible advertising rules. in particular, there had been advertisements touting vitamin c and chinese herbs as efficacious but to be neither objective nor reasonable. (japan govt warns about online ads for ‗anti-coronavirus' goods, 11 . what followed were multiple raids of drugstores in an attempt to suppress the sale of quack coronavirus products.by june 2020, concerns about the phenomenon had grown and it was being theorised that entrepreneurial e-commerce site operators were taking advantage of inadequate regulatory oversight at a time when people were staying at home and were relying more heavily on ecommerce. surveys of infringing products showed significantly elevating availability of products making false claims on sites such as amazon.com in japan and rakuten. (kanematsu, 9 june 2020) japan's ministry for health made clear that selling products as antiviral agent for use on the body, rather than as a deodoriser or cleanser, violates pharmaceutical and medical device laws and the tokyo metropolitan government, which monitors legal compliance for commercial products sold in the capital and provides guidance where necessary, provided clear messages to a similar effect. however, research by the nikkei asian review found that a significant number of e-commerce operators were circumventing the law by using suggestive language connoting anti-viral efficacy for their products (kanematsu, 9 june 2020) .in australia the major regulator of therapeutic goods and devices is the therapeutic goods administration. during the first half of 2020 it was active to inhibit the making of false representations about the efficacy of goods to prevent, treat and cure covid-19. for instance, on 24 march 2020 it published an advisory that:unfortunately, some people are taking advantage of the current situation by advertising products that claim to prevent or cure covid-19.claims being made include unregistered products that 'kill covid-19', air purifiers that help fight the coronavirus, complementary medicines that prevent the virus, and a j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f medical device that treats a number of serious diseases including covid-19, hiv aids and cancer. (therapeutic goods administration, 24 march 2020) .therapeutic goods are broadly defined by s3 of the therapeutic goods act 1989 (cth) (-the act‖) to be goods that are represented to be or for any reason are likely to be taken to be for, therapeutic use. -therapeutic use‖ under s 3 is defined to mean, amongst other things, use in or in connection with -preventing, diagnosing, curing or alleviating a disease, ailment, defect or injury in persons.‖ under s42dd a -restricted representation‖ is an advertisement about therapeutic goods that refers to a form of a disease, condition, ailment, or defect identified in a part of the therapeutic goods advertising code (no 2) 2018 (-2018 advertising code‖) as a serious form of a disease, condition, ailment or defect.‖ section 28(1) of the advertising code states that a form of a disease, condition, ailment or defect is a serious form if:it is medically accepted that the form requires diagnosis or treatment or supervision by a suitably qualified health professional, except where the form has been medically diagnosed and medically accepted as being suitable for self-treatment and management; orthere is a diagnostic (including screening), preventative, monitoring, susceptibility or pre-disposition test available for the form (including a self-administered test), which requirements medical interpretation or follow-up.section 10 of the 2018 advertising code provides that:advertising for therapeutic goods must: (a) support the safe and proper use of therapeutic goods by: in 2014 media reported that ten victorians had been poisoned by mms in the previous five years. (minear, 2014) it reported that victorian poisons information centre specialist, dr dawson macleod, said that people had reported symptoms including vomiting and diarrhoea after using mms with four having to be hospitalised. he said it could cause -potentially lifethreatening illnesses‖ and that the long-term consequences of using mms were not known. the president of the australian medical association, victorian branch, dr tony bartone, castigated -snake oil salesmen‖ for preying upon vulnerable people with -magic potions‖: -there's no evidence whatsoever and certainly no clinical trials to suggest this is anything more than bleach. it certainly should be banned.‖ (minear, 2014) this prompted the tga to j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f publish an advisory stating that: -products containing this concentration of sodium chlorite pose a serious health risk if consumed by humans and should be labelled with warnings and the word 'poison'. mms is not approved by the tga for any therapeutic use. in australia, products that are used in the purification or treatment of drinking water, and which do not make therapeutic claims, are not considered therapeutic goods. however, based on the media reports, the tga is concerned that some people may be using mms to treat illnesses or for other therapeutic purposes. using mms in this way will not have any therapeutic benefit and may have toxic effects.‖ (therapeutic goods administration, 13 november 2014)on 13 the body fined was associated with the genesis ii church of health and healing. its leader, mark grenon, had written to donald trump, the united states president, telling him that that chlorine dioxide is -a wonderful detox that can kill 99% of the pathogens in the body‖. he added that it -can rid the body of covid-19‖. a few days later, at his daily coronavirus briefing at the white house, president trump promoted the idea that disinfectant could be used as a treatment for the virus, stating that disinfectant -knocks it out in a minute. one minute!‖ he went on to ask a public health official: -is there a way we can do something, by an injection inside or almost a cleaning? because you see it gets in the lungs and it does a tremendous number on the lungs, so it'd be interesting to check that.‖ (pilkington, 25 april 2020)in a number of countries, concern has been expressed about the propagation of a diverse array of forms of false information online in relation to covid-19. in russia, for instance, investigators were announced to be considering whether to bring a criminal prosecution as a result of a youtube video falsely alleging that organs were being harvested from coronavirus j o u r n a l p r e -p r o o f patients for medical treatment of covid-19. (prosecutors demand probe into fake news about harvesting of covid-19 patients' organs, 23 april 2020) in israel a rishon letzion resident allegedly sent a message in the name of the health ministry to his girlfriend, who had returned from miami, in an effort to get her to self-quarantine. he was conveyed for investigation at the cybercrimes unit of the lahav 433 police anti-corruption unit for four crimes, including publishing false information to cause fear and panic and transmitting false information. he had used software to make his messages look as though they came from the health ministry. he sent a message to the woman to quarantine herself and another to her friend, telling her to keep her distance. (beiner, 6 april 2020)perhaps, the extreme end of repression of ‗fake coronavirus news‖, though, raising the risk for government action to constitute an unreasonable contravention of human rights (mcdonald, 23 march 2020) , occurred in cambodia. a 14 year-old girl in kampot was detained and compelled to apologise publicly for writing in a message on facebook that there were three people ill with covid-19 at her school and that others had died from the disease. (vicheika & tum, 14 march 2020) a number of factors can create a conducive environment for the making of false claims and communications online in the context of a pandemic. anxieties and fears engendered by the pandemic can render people vulnerable, especially in an online environment. dread of contracting and being harmed by a disease such as covid-19 can be exacerbated by religious associations with pestilences and plagues, literary traditions, film portrayals, and computer game tropes, as well as factors such as personality issues, educational deficits, language limitations, social isolation and disabilities. alone and in combination such vulnerabilities are apt to be fanned by chronically anxiety-inducing media coverage. an outcome is the potential for predatory opportunities to exploit those vulnerable to credulity and the suspension of faculties of discernment.the reality of pandemic vulnerability raises the question of how most constructively public health authorities can respond in the context of the covid-19 pandemic to meet both conspiracy theories and therapeutic misrepresentations. recent responses by some governments have provided a useful perspective.firstly, health messaging needs to be communicated in a calm and straightforward tone which does not exacerbate anxieties and irrational fears, but rather encourages prudent caretaking conduct. secondly, there needs to be a continuing flow of medico-scientifically evidence-based education which works toward disabusing members of the community of misunderstandings, fears and fallacies which otherwise may gain popular traction and exacerbate paranoid and anxiety pathologies, as well as render people more prone to be victimised.thirdly, there is a need for governments to be assertive in taking preventative and deterrent action against those who are misusing the covid-19 era to enrich themselves opportunistically or to take advantage of those who lack the capacity to be discerning about false claims of capacity to prevent, treat, or cure the disease. for good reason, the traditional public health approach to such misrepresentations is to provide a clear warning initially tothe tragedy of the haitian cholera epidemic-where united nations peacekeepers introduced a previously unknown disease into the country, causing the most serious cholera epidemic anywhere in the world in over a century-has propelled a range of complex international law issues into the public eye. 1 the most prominent among these have related to un accountability and justice for the victims of the epidemic. 2 these issues have been the subject of extensive advocacy efforts, including highprofile legal proceedings on behalf of the victims. 3 only after more than six years did the united nations finally acknowledge a role in the epidemic and, in a weakly worded apology, accept its moral, though not its legal, responsibility to address the damage it caused. 4 in the absence of a binding legal decision, the debate over accountability, and the point where un immunity tips into impunity, remains unresolved.despite the undeniable importance of these issues, however, they have overshadowed the violation of an even longer-standing principle of international law that remains at the epicentre of the haitian tragedy: that the international community shares responsibility for taking measures to prevent certain infectious diseases, and in particular cholera, from spreading across borders. while the boundaries of this principle continue to evolve, particularly as new threats emerge ranging from avian flu to zika virus, it was preventing the international spread of cholera that first brought nations together to lay the foundations of international health law over 160 years ago. cholera was in turn the sole subject of the first binding multilateral agreement in international health law-indeed, the first three such agreements-and the disease has remained a constant thread woven throughout the history and development of international health law to the present day. the haitian epidemic thus serves as a reminder both of why the international community first came together to address the shared threat of cholera using the tool of international law, and the deadly consequences of ignoring this longstanding principle.legal measures to prevent the international spread of cholera also offer an intriguing perspective on the development of international law, as in contrast to other fields, international health law is necessarily influenced by scientific knowledge alongside legal theory and state practice. from the very first international sanitary conference onwards, national delegations usually comprised both diplomats and scientists. 5 1 jenson et al. (2011). 2 transnational development clinic at yale law school, global health justice partnership of the yale law school and the yale school of public health, and association haïtienne de droit de l'environnement (2013). 3 weinmeyer (2016). 4 united nations (2016). 5 howard- jones (1975) .after all, bacteria do not obey legal diktats rooted in abstract concepts such as state sovereignty. 6 thus, effective rules to prevent the spread of disease must involve what we might now term evidence-based policy.this being the case, a historical analysis of international health law is complicated by the realisation that what may once have been accepted as scientific fact, and therefore seen as a sensible basis for law and action, may by modern standards seem inadequate or even entirely incorrect. this is readily apparent in the early development of international law around cholera and will be discussed in detail later in this chapter; for the time being, it suffices to say that while acceptance of the principle that evidence-based measures should be taken to prevent the international spread of cholera is widespread and longstanding, the precise measures thought capable of doing so have necessarily evolved alongside changes in scientific knowledge and understanding. the evidentiary aspect has implications not only for what measures might be considered sufficient, but also those that might be deemed excessive; as discussed below, one of the key goals of adopting international standards relating to the spread of cholera has been to avoid undue interference with international trade through overzealous application of measures like quarantines or import bans. as such, adherence to the underlying principle of preventing the international spread of cholera cannot be assessed by determining whether the practice of states or other international law actors is the same as it was a century ago; rather, it must be by whether their practice at any given time has been guided by contemporaneous evidence-based standards in the service of that principle. nevertheless, while our understanding of the manner in which the international spread of cholera could be prevented has evolved considerably over the last 160 years, certain elements of our knowledge have changed more drastically than others. some central concepts, such as the importance of clean water and proper sanitation, have long been well understood; others, such as the utility of vaccination as a preventative measure, have fluctuated over time, as new vaccines, and evidence of their efficacy, emerge. furthermore, collection and sharing of accurate information has also historically been a core component both of the law (particularly in the recording and notification of cases) and of the broader science that informs what measures the law should either require or, in cases where overreaction is a concern, permit, in fulfilment of the principle of preventing the international spread of cholera. although international health law has expanded over the past 160 years, these core elements, and cholera itself, remain constant. all these elements come into play in what unfolded in haiti.imported diseases have played a crucial role in haitian history since long before the cholera epidemic. european contact brought diseases like smallpox that devastated the original indigenous inhabitants, removing a source of manual labour for the colonial powers and leading to their replacement with african slaves. in turn, yellow fever first brought from africa as an inadvertent by-product of this human cargo later took a serious toll on soldiers freshly dispatched from france, playing a valuable supporting role in making haiti the first and only modern state to gain independence through a successful slave revolt. 7 it has even been suggested that popular perceptions associating haiti with the emerging hiv epidemic in the early 1980s caused a drastic reduction in american tourists, in turn leading to a drop in income that helped destabilise and eventually topple the duvalier regime. 8 the bitter irony of these events is that historical records indicate haiti was one of the few countries to escape the scourge of cholera during the nineteenth century epidemics that propelled the very development of international health law that forms the focus of this chapter. 9 by the turn of the twenty-first century, haiti was the poorest country in the western hemisphere. beginning in 2004, it was also home to the united nations stabilisation mission in haiti, better known by its french acronym minustah. then, on january 12, 2010, an earthquake of magnitude 7.0 devastated the country. estimates of the number of people killed have varied widely, from the official haitian government figure of over 300,000 to other estimates below 100,000. 10 hundreds of thousands more were left homeless, and haiti's already inadequate health and sanitation infrastructure suffered considerable damage.despite concerns about the potential for the rapid spread of disease in crowded temporary camps housing displaced victims of the earthquake, it was not until ten months later, in mid-october of 2010, that the first cases of cholera appeared. 11 this unwelcome appearance was not in the capital city of port-au-prince, but in the rural area of mirebalais. it was here that a minustah base had recently welcomed a contingent of soldiers from nepal, a cholera-endemic country in the midst of its own outbreak. at least one of these soldiers was carrying vibrio cholerae, the bacterium that causes cholera. 12 cholera is spread through water contaminated with infected faeces. it causes severe vomiting and diarrhoea, and can cause death by dehydration within as little as a few hours if left untreated. due to improper sanitation practices, infected faeces from the minustah base entered the artibonite river system, which is relied upon by tens of thousands of haitians for farming, bathing and drinking. 13 the disease spread rapidly throughout the country, and was found in all ten regions of the country by the following month, as well as over the border in the dominican republic. 14 it subsequently spread into cuba and mexico. 15 7 marr and cathey (2013) . 8 evans (1988 the cholera-naïve population of haiti had no resistance to the disease, exacerbating its toll. although the number of new cases decreased considerably following the initial peak of the epidemic, infections continued, with spikes occurring in the wake of further natural disasters such as hurricane matthew in 2016. 16 as of early 2017, according to world health organisation statistics, the epidemic had killed over 9000 people and sickened close to 800,000 more. 17 there is also evidence that these figures reflect substantial underestimates, particularly during the early months of the epidemic. 18 sadly, this previously unknown disease now appears to have firmly established itself in haiti, where it will continue to pose a threat in the absence of access to clean water and sanitation. a combination of basic shoe-leather epidemiological investigation and high-tech genetic analysis of disease samples demonstrates conclusively that the haitian strain of cholera has its origins in nepal and arrived via the minustah base. 19 had the un adhered to the longstanding international law principle of preventing the international spread of cholera, this tragedy could have been prevented.customs and binding rules to prevent the spread of disease have a long history in virtually every culture. the bible, which influenced the development of the law in many modern states, provides examples of such rules. for instance, leviticus devotes two chapters to leprosy and how it should be dealt with, coming out in favour of isolation as the preferred recourse: "all the days wherein the plague shall be in him he shall be defiled; he is unclean: he shall dwell alone; without the camp shall his habitation be." 20 in turn, governments at all levels have long imposed rudimentary legal measures to keep disease from their own territories; the term quarantine itself originates from the italian "quaranta", referring to the length of the forty-day isolation period imposed on incoming ships by city-states like venice to prevent the arrival of bubonic plague in the fifteenth century. 21 historically, however, such efforts focused on protecting the state from outside threats rather than collaboration among states to address mutual interests. it took a new menace to bring nations together to explore novel ways of tackling shared concerns. the menace in question was cholera.the landmark occasion bringing states together was the first international sanitary conference, convened in paris in 1851. it would be the first of fourteen such conferences spanning a period of nearly ninety years. today, this first conference is widely recognised as the origin point of international health law. 22 the conference occurred at the beginning of a period of rapid change in the development of international law and policy, thus also playing a role in the broader development of modern international relations. 23 to give some perspective, at the time of the first conference, foundational agreements in international law such as the first geneva convention, as well as accords on other issues that underpin the modern diplomatic and legal order such as telegraphs and postal service, were still a decade or more away. the underlying goal of preventing the spread of disease was also an easy place to find common ground; as one later conference delegate would state, "the only researches made in common by the different governments of europe were to oppose a barrier in the way of the march of epidemic diseases, and especially of cholera." 24 historically found in the indian subcontinent, and thus referred to as "asiatic cholera" in numerous sources, cholera's rapid spread echoed that of globalisation. although both bubonic plague and yellow fever were also on the agenda of the conference, it was primarily the initial two cholera pandemics-the first (approx. 1817-24) sweeping across asia and lapping europe's eastern boundaries, and the second (approx. 1829-51) penetrating deep into europe's heart-that provided the impetus for states to come together to address the threat posed by the international spread of disease. unlike plague and yellow fever, which posed a risk mostly to trade interests and colonial possessions, cholera threatened europe itself.although endemic diseases like tuberculosis exacted a higher toll overall, the trail of a cholera epidemic across the continent was a particularly obvious one, with the arrival of the disease following soon after news of an outbreak in a neighbouring port. moreover, cholera was especially capable of making an impression: the trappings of death by cholera-profuse vomiting and the characteristic rice-water diarrhoeawere particularly shocking to polite sensibilities, carrying none of the romanticism of wasting away from consumption (tb). 25 even today, in the era of headline-grabbing diseases like ebola, it retains the "ignominious distinction of probably being the pathogen that can kill the most number of humans in the shortest period of time", something that would also help stoke fear upon its arrival in haiti. 26 not only was cholera an early priority in developing a shared legal framework, it was also intimately linked with other driving elements of globalisation in the nineteenth century. such links have continued until the present day. 27 in particular, its spread was tied directly to the increasing size and speed of international trade, which was itself rapidly redefining international relations. in turn, striking the balance between preventing the spread of cholera and minimizing disruption to burgeoning international trade has been a constant theme in the development of the law. other 22 see for instance, fidler (2005) . 23 huber (2006) . see also harrison (2006) . 24 world health organisation (1958) . 25 evans (n 8) . 26 ryan (2011) . 27 lee and dodgson (2000) . conditions in the nineteenth century helped facilitate its spread as well. unlike many other diseases that increasingly drew the attention of european politicians and scientists in the age of colonial expansion, cholera was readily adaptable to life outside the tropics. it was spread through poor sanitation, meaning it could be passed on as readily, if not more readily, in england or france as in its historical home in the ganges delta. rapid european urbanisation in the era of industrialisation fuelled precisely such conditions; crowded slums with inadequate sanitation proved a fertile breeding ground. ultimately, as one commentator describes it, "asiatic cholera has a good claim to be regarded as the classic epidemic disease of the nineteenth century, above all of europe in the age of industrialisation." 28 taken altogether, these factors ensured that cholera became the focus of the conference.nonetheless, the international sanitary conference of 1851 is notable mostly for its significance as the starting point for international health law. only twelve states participated in the initial event; in a sign of the very different map of the world in 1851, four of these states would be absorbed into a unified italy shortly after. 29 furthermore, although it brought control of disease into the international sphere, its focus was not global collaboration against a mutual threat, but rather regional collaboration to protect europe from foreign contagion, an approach that from a modern perspective could be charitably described as eurocentric. 30 its tangible outcomes were even less impressive, with no lasting multilateral agreement emerging from the conference. however, as discussed in detail below, it was not ultimately disagreement over the value of preventing the spread of cholera that created the delay in agreeing upon the concrete and codified steps to address it. rather, it was lack of understanding of what those measures should be, hindered by the dearth of basic knowledge such as what caused cholera and how it was spread. interestingly, the balance of the medical and the political was struck in the delegations for each participating country, with each team of two consisting of a diplomat and a physician. as howard-jones notes, the voting system at the first conference allowed these two members to vote separately, even contradictorily. 31 under such circumstances, it is difficult to know what to make of the knowledge that "[i]n his address at the closure of the first conference, the french minister of agriculture and trade congratulated the participants on their discretion and wisdom in divorcing themselves not only from all questions of politics -but also of science." 32 ultimately, despite the involvement of an increasingly large and diverse set of countries over subsequent conferences, a scientific consensus on cholera and its causes was not quickly forthcoming. nevertheless, birn argues that the meetings themselves, "far more than the elaboration of the germ theory, the identification of vectors and microorganisms, or the signing of 28 evans (n 8). 29 world health organisation, first ten years (n 24). 30 huber (n 23). for another interesting perspective, see ersoy et al. (2011) . 31 howard-jones (n 5). 32 world health organisation, first ten years (n 24). conventions best characterise success in this initial stage." 33 this is fortunate, given that it would take another six meetings over 41 years before sufficient consensus was found to permit a binding agreement to be reached.it is tempting to look at the history of the health sciences as a linear series of discrete, progressive steps, but the development of the international sanitary conferences serves to illustrate that this is certainly not the case. as outlined by howard-jones in his masterful exploration of the progression of scientific knowledge over the course of the fourteen conferences, medical concepts today considered basic facts were bitterly contested or entirely unknown at earlier junctures, making it difficult to take evidence-based action. 34 as was subsequently said of the first conference, "both diplomats and doctors who participated in these…discussions had in common their total ignorance of the nature and mode of propagation of the three diseases -cholera, plague, and yellow fever -under consideration." 35 and even as science was posited as objective and free of political considerations, the discoveries of eminent scientistssuch as the german robert koch and louis pasteur of france-could also fuel national rivalries. 36 consider what is widely agreed to be the seminal moment in the field of epidemiology, which itself stems directly from the cholera epidemics of the nineteenth century. this moment did not even occur until three years after the initial international sanitary conference. in 1854, doctor john snow mapped cholera cases during an epidemic in london's soho district. his map allowed him to trace the source of the epidemic back to a well in broad street, demonstrating that the disease was transmitted through contaminated water. 37 despite justified acclaim today, the medical establishment of the era was not so accepting of snow's theory that cholera was waterborne; for decades afterwards, other theories on the origins of cholera continued to hold sway at the conferences, ranging from airborne transmission to some unique property of the soil, or to elaborate combinations of such factors. even after robert koch, the founder of modern microbiology, identified the cholera bacterium in 1884, helping advance the germ theory of disease in the process, widespread acceptance of the cause of cholera was not immediate. one of the most influential proponents of alternative theories, the famed german hygienist max von pettenkofer, would hold onto them until the end of his career. 38 indeed, as a further illustration of the fickle integration of scientific discovery into mainstream medical thought, vibrio 33 birn (2009). 34 howard-jones (n 5). 35 world health organisation, first ten years (n 24). 36 bynum (1993) . 37 for more detail on john snow, including his other work on cholera, see halliday (2007) . 38 morabia (2007) . cholerae had already been isolated and identified as the cause of cholera, to virtually no acclaim, by filippo pacini in 1854, the same year that snow had the handle removed from the broad street pump. 39 in the end, unanimous acceptance of cholera as a waterborne disease would not come until the eleventh conference in 1903. 40 as a result, the desire to take effective steps to prevent cholera transmission was initially hampered by a lack of scientific knowledge, further exacerbated by the slow mainstream acceptance of new discoveries.during the course of the six international sanitary conferences that took place during the period leading up to the first binding agreement, international interest had increased considerably, with more than thirty countries and territories participating in at least one. haiti itself would participate in the 1881 international sanitary conference in washington, the only one of the conferences ever to take place in the western hemisphere. this increasing internationalisation was due in large part to the fact cholera itself had become a truly global problem over the same period, affecting almost all corners of the globe. during the latter half of the nineteenth century, the world suffered through the third (approx. 1852-1860) and fourth (approx. 1863-1875) cholera pandemics, and it was in the midst of a fifth (approx. 1881-1896) by the time the first binding multilateral agreement on preventing international transmission of disease was signed at the seventh international sanitary conference in venice.a landmark agreement in international law, the international sanitary convention (1892) is the first link in an unbroken chain of international health law agreements that continue to bind countries today. fourteen nations, including all the major european (and, by extension, colonial) powers, ratified the first convention. 41 given global concern about the disease, it is little surprise that the sole subject of the first binding agreement in international health law was cholera. despite its significance as the first agreement in international health law, the scope of the first international sanitary convention is quite limited. its focus was the suez canal, which had shortened the travel time between europe and the indian subcontinent considerably since it opened in 1869. as such, the convention addressed only westbound shipping through the suez canal, in response to concerns about this direct path between the perceived source of the disease and european ports. once sown, however, the seeds of international health law sprouted quickly. in quick succession, subsequent international sanitary conventions yielded the first expansions of the field of international health 39 lippi and gotuzzo (2014) . 40 howard-jones (n 5). 41 protocoles et procès-verbaux de la conférence sanitaire internationale de venise inaugurée le 5 janvier 1892 (rome: impr. nationale de j. bertero, 1892). law, or, perhaps more precisely in the earliest years, the field of international cholera law. measures agreed upon in dresden (1893) included expanding the geographic scope of the agreement and adding notification provisions. 42 the next agreement, this time in paris (1894), dealt specifically with the islamic pilgrimage to mecca, continuing the emphasis on keeping "asiatic cholera" out of europe. 43 cholera thus remained the sole topic of international health law throughout the earliest three agreements. not until 1897 did international health conventions expand to encompass a second disease, with an agreement focusing on bubonic plague. 44 subsequently, in 1903, the previous agreements were consolidated into a single new agreement, which maintained the focus on cholera and plague, but added reference to yellow fever. 45 the resulting list of three diseases would remain the three constants throughout the subsequent history of international health law, even as later agreements would adjust both the roster of diseases addressed, and the scope of measures countries needed to undertake in order to monitor, prevent and address their spread.the international sanitary conferences would continue until the outbreak of world war ii, with further conferences in 1911 and 1926 before ultimately concluding with the fourteenth international sanitary conference in 1938. haiti itself participated in the 1926 conference and was among over 60 countries to be party to the resulting convention. the 1926 international sanitary convention emphasised the importance of mandatory case notification for select diseases including cholera, and highlighted the role of international organisations in the sharing of this information. 46 it also required states to prevent the embarkation onto ships of individuals showing symptoms or people whose relations with the sick placed them at risk, and imposed measures in a range of circumstances regarding the disinfection of human waste where cholera was confirmed or suspected. 47 public health and national interests remained awkward companions; the us surgeon general pronounced the agreement "a decided improvement" over the previous conventions, with the caveat that it was still the result of negotiation among states with varying goals conducted "by men of all degrees of intelligence". 48 meanwhile, the inclusion of the first two diseases considered native to europe rather than necessarily imported from abroad-smallpox and typhus-was still outweighed by the addition of extensive further regulation around religious pilgrims in the middle east. cumming (1926) . 49 fidler (n 22). further conventions emerged from the conferences, though they were not always completed in the same years; for instance, the international sanitary convention for aerial navigation came into force in 1935. just as steamships and railways had previously changed the speed with which diseases could disseminate, this convention highlighted the role new technologies could play in rapidly spreading new diseases, and prescribed special measures for six diseases, including cholera. 50 cholera, the first disease to be regulated under international law, would thus remain a constant presence throughout the development of international health law within the first century of its development; it would also justify its presence by continuing to pose an international threat to health.by the early twentieth century, international cooperation on public health also led to the development of formal international health bodies, including the office international d'hygiène publique (ohip) in 1907 and the health organisation of the league of nations in the aftermath of world war i. at times, politics came to the fore; plans to combine the two were undone by objections of the united states, a member of ohip but not the league. 51 these organisations were complemented by regional bodies like the international sanitary bureau, the precursor to the pan-american health organisation (paho). this organisation was in fact the oldest of all international health bodies, having been formed in 1902; it would promptly address cholera within its own regional convention in 1903. 52 concern for cholera was evident at all levels. for instance, a 1920 report from a league of nations delegation highlights the role of foreign soldiers-foreshadowing events in haiti-in spreading cholera from russia to poland. 53 these organisations in turn have a direct lineage to today's world health organisation (who), which inherited their functions or, in the case of paho, absorbed the entire organisation under its umbrella. since its formation in 1948 as a specialised agency of the united nations, the who has assumed the role of coordinating international public health. in the process, it has moved towards creating a truly global approach to health, shifting away from the eurocentric viewpoint of the early conventions towards a more universalist outlook in line with the objectives of the un system. furthermore, from its inception, the who has had more power than its predecessor organisations. in particular, article 21 of the who's constitution gives the organisation the authority to create regulations to address "sanitary and quarantine 50 international sanitary convention for aerial navigation (1935), 49 stat. 3279; treaty series 901. 51 world health organisation, first ten years (n 24). 52 'first general international sanitary convention of the american republics, held at new willard hotel, washington, d.c., december 2, 3, and 4, 190' (1903) 18 public health reports 233. 53 pottevin and norman white (1920). requirements and other procedures designed to prevent the international spread of disease". 54 further enhancing its reach is its "opt-out" model for such regulations, replacing the opt-in nature of traditional treaties such as the international sanitary conventions, thus ensuring the near-universal reach of its rules. 55 it is also important to note that in addition to its legal function, the who also plays a key role in promoting international standards for cholera prevention and control from a scientific perspective. 56 although not themselves legally binding, these standards influence national policy and international responses, including around proper measures for the prevention of cross-border spread. these standards thus necessarily inform the legal response.even more direct is the lineage of the international sanitary conventions themselves; they were inherited by the who and adopted by the fourth world health assembly as the international sanitary regulations (isr) in 1951, exactly a century after the initial international sanitary conference. 57 at the time of their adoption, they covered six "quarantinable diseases" including cholera. nonetheless, after the initial adoption of the international sanitary regulations, evolution over the next half century would be slow; as fidler notes, one of the only large-scale changes was to cut back drastically on the number of restrictions governing religious pilgrimages. 58 still, the isr were revised and re-christened as the international health regulations (ihr) in 1969, at which time typhus and relapsing fever were removed from the list of diseases, leaving only four: cholera, plague and yellow fever, plus smallpox. 59 at this point, improved sanitary standards had largely removed cholera as a concern in the european states that first gathered in 1851, but it remained a threat in many parts of the world.indeed, by this time the seventh cholera pandemic was underway, having begun in indonesia in 1961. further complicating matters, the strain of cholera responsible, el tor, posed new challenges for detection and eradication, as it was more both more resilient in the environment and more likely to be carried asymptomatically. 60 thus, as a serious health concern, cholera remained a focus of the international health regulations under the auspices of the who, just as it had been the initial impetus for the first conferences and subsequent conventions.however, the threat of the seventh pandemic also demonstrated that the existing ihrs were inadequate to the task of preventing the international spread of cholera. choi (2008) . 60 cvjetanovic and barua (1972) . "to undertake a study of the implications of the removal of cholera from the international health regulations and to report to the next meeting of the committee on international surveillance of communicable diseases." 61 the central debate at the twenty-sixth world health assembly (1973) consequently focused around the failure of the ihrs to effectively stop the spread of cholera. in turn, the decision to keep cholera in the ihrs, while modifying the specifics of the response, highlights the international consensus on the importance of maintaining binding legal rules hindering its international spread. 62 at the same time, the resulting modifications reflect how emerging scientific evidence resulted in changes to the measures to be taken to prevent that spread. the biggest modification to the ihrs at the time was to remove requirements around cholera vaccination, including the right of countries to demand a vaccination certificate from incoming travellers. what had once been considered an appropriate action was now judged an overreaction not supported by scientific evidence of its public health efficacy. this is because it was determined that the vaccine then in use was ineffective. 63 as will be seen, this shift in vaccine policy as a result of monitoring the effectiveness of existing tools holds lessons for what would occur in haiti.a similar discussion took place around cholera and the concept of "preventive medication in international traffic." the committee on international surveillance of communicable diseases, tasked with examining the issue, noted that "preventive medication would be justified… provided that the drug used was effective in preventing the spread of the disease when administered orally as a single acceptable dose without adverse effects, and did not cause bacterial resistance." 64 however, the committee concluded that existing evidence did not suggest any of the drugs under discussion for cholera would meet this standard. this discussion too would gain renewed relevance four decades later.the interaction of scientific/medical developments and the law is further illustrated by the subsequent revision of the ihrs in response to one of the greatest triumphs of modern medicine: the eradication of smallpox, the first-and at this time only-successful eradication of any human disease. smallpox was removed from the ihrs in 1981. by contrast, the need to keep cholera within the scope of the international health regulations was periodically reinforced, as when it reappeared in latin america after a century-long absence in 1991, affecting over 330,000 people, and killing more than 3500, across 13 countries in the first nine months alone. 65 as such, its capacity to emerge in new territories, spread rapidly, and cause drastic loss of life was aptly demonstrated nearly 100 years after the first binding agreement designed to prevent its international spread. tauxe and blake (1992) .the next landmark development for international health law was the dramatic revision and expansion of the international health regulations in 2005, and their entry into force in 2007. as outlined in article 3(3) of the revised ihrs, "[t]he implementation of these regulations shall be guided by the goal of their universal application for the protection of all people of the world from the international spread of disease." 66 to this end, the international health regulations of 2005 cover a far broader range of infectious diseases, accommodating new threats from emerging and previously unknown diseases alongside long-standing ones such as cholera. immediately prior to the revisions, by contrast, the ihrs still focused only on the first three diseases to be tackled by international health law: cholera, plague and yellow fever. the need for such a revision had been debated since the mid-1990s. 67 nevertheless, the ultimate catalyst for revision was once again a new global threat, much as cholera had been for the first international sanitary conference over 150 years earlier. 68 in this case, the severe acute respiratory syndrome (sars) epidemic of 2002-3 highlighted numerous barriers to preventing and managing the cross-border spread of disease. among these was the reticence of china to share information with the rest of the world about this novel disease. consequently, the revised ihrs expressly require states to develop appropriate surveillance with "the capacity to detect, assess, notify and report" events that, according to a laid-out set of criteria, could be termed "public health emergencies of international concern" rather than relying upon a small and finite list of diseases. nevertheless, given its intimate connection to the development of the ihrs, and its long-held status as an internationally notifiable disease, cholera can still be thought of as the definitive example of a disease whose spread is a matter of international concern. this status is further supported by the fact that, under the updated ihrs, it remains explicitly identified as a disease for which any incident must always be evaluated using ihr criteria, given cholera has "demonstrated the ability to cause serious public health impact and to spread rapidly internationally". 69 the current ihrs require states to develop a minimum capacity to address public health emergencies of international concern at airports, ports, and other border crossings. for the first time, the ihrs also make explicit room for third parties, such as non-governmental organisations (ngos), to provide information where state communication is insufficient; this highlights the role of non-state parties in upholding an important legal principle. furthermore, in addition to minimum capacities, the ihrs emphasise the need for any additional response measures taken by states to 66 take into account scientific principles, available scientific evidence, and any available guidance or advice from the who. 70 establishing such standards also offers a degree of protection to states that might be reticent to report a disease for fear of disproportionate reprisal by other states. thus, who guidance, and increasing scientific knowledge about a disease like cholera in general, both explicitly inform the steps that must be taken to comply with the ihrs.the 2005 ihrs are the most recent iteration of a set of rules around the international spread of disease whose development began in 1851. in the often hazy world of international law, where knowing who accepts the rules is as important as the rules themselves, the current ihrs are one of the most widely accepted agreements in existence. thanks to the who's opt-out structure, they are legally binding on 196 states as of 2017-more parties than there are members of the united nations itself. 71 certainly, even these revised ihrs have their deficiencies, perhaps most notably the absence of a proper enforcement mechanism. however, these weaknesses do not undo the virtually universal acceptance of the ihrs. to paraphrase an analysis of a previous iteration of the ihrs in the aftermath of the reforms of the early 1970s, despite their imperfections "the present regulations remain the most acceptable means of trying" to attain their underlying objective. 72 existing weaknesses also do not negate the underlying goal of preventing the international spread of disease-a principle whose development within international health law began with cholera. as the haitian tragedy illustrates, adherence to this principle remains as important today as it was in 1851. furthermore, the ihrs are not the only place where cholera is integrated into international law.while the who is the primary un body dealing with rules to prevent the international spread of cholera, other international legal instruments can help to further this goal. some such instruments do so in broad strokes encompassing cholera within their ambit. for instance, the international covenant on economic, social and cultural rights obliges states to take steps necessary for the "prevention, treatment and control of epidemic, endemic, occupational and other diseases". 73 at the same time, evolving human rights norms also increasingly implicate cholera; for example, the united nations now has both a special rapporteur on the right to health, and a special rapporteur on the rights to safe drinking water and sanitation. in turn, 70 ibid., art. 43. 71 world health organisation (2005) . 72 delon (1975 international humanitarian law highlights obligations not to destroy or render useless key infrastructure such as drinking water installations and supplies. 74 and the burgeoning field of international environmental law has numerous implications for preventing the spread of cholera. this includes not only rules around clean water and sanitation that would necessarily affect the spread of the disease, but also the emergence of both transboundary responsibility between states and the notion of the precautionary principle. 75 while these evolving areas of law have serious but indirect implications for cholera, it also remains an explicit consideration in multiple fields of international law outside that of health. even prior to the formal establishment of the un, concerns about the international spread of cholera and other diseases found their way into other areas of what would soon become the un framework. the convention on international civil aviation (1944) explicitly highlights the need for each state "to take effective measures to prevent the spread by means of air navigation" of cholera and other designated diseases. 76 although the convention, under the auspices of the international civil aviation organisation (icao), has gone through eight revisions since that time, this provision remains the same today, and as such is binding on 191 state parties as of 2017. cholera has also been an explicit consideration in far more recent agreements. for instance, the international convention for the control and management of ships' ballast water and sediments, which entered into force in 2017 under the auspices of the international maritime organisation (imo), explicitly includes cholera as the first of its "indicator microbes, as a human health standard" for ballast water. 77 this is little surprise given that ballast water was a prime suspect in the international spread of cholera in the aftermath of the peruvian epidemic. 78 taken together, it is clear that the international spread of cholera has been explicitly considered by states in the context of international law-making on multiple occasions, even outside the auspices of the ihrs.but it is in the area of international trade that cholera has appeared most often. one novel tool offered by international trade law is that it also supplies enforcement mechanisms largely absent from other areas of international law such as health. as noted earlier, minimizing trade disruption by standardizing measures taken against 74 jorgensen (2007) . 75 jones (1999 cholera was a primary goal from the first international sanitary conference onwards. this objective was highlighted early in the first conference by the french minister of foreign affairs, who stated that "the imbalance created in the international system and trade by having separate sanitary regulations has to be eliminated." 79 when fidler outlines the "classical regime" of the first century of international health law, he describes it as having "two basic parts: obligations on states parties to (1) notify each other about outbreaks of specified infectious diseases in their territories; and (2) limit disease-prevention measures that restricted international trade and travel to those based on scientific evidence and public health principles." 80 these issues are reflected throughout the development of international health law. for instance, the international sanitary convention (1903) notes, "no merchandise is capable by itself of transmitting plague or cholera. it only becomes dangerous when contaminated by plague or cholera products." 81 similar debates around the effectiveness of cholera prevention measures and their impact on trade have surfaced much more recently, particularly in the context of states imposing excessive, scientifically unsupported measures on others to prevent the importation of cholera. the economic consequences can be severe; as one example, it is estimated the 1991 epidemic cost peru hundreds of millions of dollars in lost trade and tourism. 82 as such, highlighting the need for proportionate, evidence-based responses is important in order to help minimise the possibility states will cover up epidemics for fear of the economic consequences.consequently, measures in excess of what is necessary to prevent the international spread of cholera have been the subject of trade disputes. it is important to note that the motivation of preventing the spread of cholera-when exercised in good faithis not questioned; it is only the character and quality of the measures taken for this purpose that are. today, the most important agreement governing the question of scientifically appropriate measures for restricting trade in the interests of public health protection is the wto agreement on the application of sanitary and phytosanitary measures. 83 this agreement has underscored the vital importance of scientific knowledge, including the availability of evidence of the efficacy of measures undertaken by countries to avoid cholera.for instance, in 1998, the wto committee on sanitary and phytosanitary measures met to discuss concerns raised by tanzania over the prohibition placed on fish imports from tanzania and other east african countries by the european commission over fears of importing cholera. 84 the meeting makes particular reference to standards set by both the who and the food and agriculture organisation (fao), reinforcing the importance of un bodies in developing the standards underpinning 79 ersoy et al. (2011) . 80 cash and narasimhan (2000) . 83 law. 85 once again, it is important to note that while in this case the use of a total embargo on imports is criticised as excessive, the underlying goal of preventing the international transmission of cholera is not. thus, international trade law highlights how seriously the issue of cholera transmission is taken, as well as the importance of scientific standards in determining which measures are appropriate, and which measures are not, to prevent international transmission.the examples discussed up until this point highlight unremitting attention to the principle of preventing the international spread of cholera not merely in international health law but in international law more broadly. at the same time, it is true that legal commentators have expressed scepticism about the strength of international law as it regards infectious disease. 86 certainly many of the criticisms frequently raised, particularly in relation to specific rules that have been breached nearly as often as observed, have some validity. nonetheless, in the case of cholera in particular, states have demonstrated a continuous and consistent pattern of integrating the prevention of its spread into international law. this is not simply a matter of historical inertia; cholera has been inserted explicitly into new agreements in a variety of fields of law, while the need to retain it during the reform of existing instruments has been explicitly debated and its presence reconfirmed. at the same time, ongoing discussion has ensured that both the minimum precautions that need to be taken to prevent the international spread of cholera, and the maximum measures that scientific evidence will support, have evolved over time. at a minimum, the development of international health law over the past century and a half shows a clear recognition by international law actors that the principle of prevention of the international spread of cholera is an important one. indeed, if any longstanding principle relating to any disease can be thought to have attained the status of customary international law, it is this one. unfortunately, this would not be reflected in the actions of the united nations in haiti.there remains some ambiguity as to precisely where the united nations fits in under international law. a detailed exploration of this issue is well beyond the scope of this chapter. nevertheless, given its key role in the development of international law, and promotion of respect for the same, it does not seem credible to suggest the longestablished principle of preventing the international spread of cholera should have 85 ibid. 86 see for example, fidler (1997). no implications for the un. this is all the more the case given that minustah's mandate explicitly involves assisting with "the restoration and maintenance of the rule of law, public safety and public order in haiti". 87 consider chang's assertion that [a] factor that sets the un apart from an ordinary public organisation is its role as the guardian of international norms and order. this role not only confers the un what is commonly referred to as a 'moral authority', but carries with it a special responsibility to discharge duties in a manner that is consistent to the very standards it seeks to promote, thereby demanding an ethical sense of accountability higher than those already required in the political, legal or administrative realms. 88in turn, the status of forces agreement (sofa) between the un and haiti explicitly establishes that minustah shall cooperate with the haitian government "with respect to sanitary services and shall extend to each other the fullest cooperation in matters concerning health, particularly with respect to control of communicable diseases, in accordance with international conventions." 89 furthermore, although the focus of this chapter is on international law, it is worth noting that were immunity removed from the picture, the un's actions likely would have violated domestic haitian law. haitian laws and regulations prohibit both (a) disposal of human waste in waterways and (b) negligence, including the negligent transmission of a contagious disease. 90 given the role of the un and its specialised agencies not only in developing both binding laws and relevant standards around cholera, but in responding to outbreaks on the ground in vulnerable settings, the un cannot fail to be aware of what measures might be taken, from open communication to basic sanitation, to uphold the principle of preventing the international spread of cholera. even if the principle were to be found to fall within the scope of the operational immunity afforded the united nations, they would still generally be expected to act in accordance with it, particularly in the absence of any justifications for departing from it. thus, it seems rational to conclude that the un would be expected to take reasonable steps (and refrain from unreasonable ones) to prevent the international spread of cholera based on scientific and public health principles, while also sharing information about cholera with other international law actors.ultimately, the un's conduct in haiti, both in the circumstances leading up to the epidemic and after its consequences became clear, fail to demonstrate the respect that this longstanding principle-one predating the un by nearly a century, and codified over 50 years before its formation-deserves. in 1851, when nations first joined together to recognise the threat posed by cholera, it took over four decades to agree on appropriate measures. as discussed earlier in this chapter, that delay was rooted primarily in a lack of scientific knowledge necessary to put the underlying legal principle into effect. the un in 2010 had no such excuse.consequently, an evaluation of what occurred in haiti must also take the state of scientific knowledge into account. here, it is clear that the epidemic was entirely foreseeable, particularly for an organisation experienced with post-conflict and postdisaster settings. although disasters do not automatically result in outbreaks of disease, they are a harbinger of conditions that may fuel such outbreaks. the situation following the earthquake was aptly summed up by the us centers for disease control and prevention (cdc) in a briefing document nine months before the epidemic began:an outbreak of cholera is very unlikely at this time. for a cholera outbreak to occur, two conditions must be met: (1) there must be significant breeches [sic] in the water, sanitation, and hygiene infrastructure used by groups of people, permitting large-scale exposure to food or water contaminated with vibrio cholera organisms; and (2) cholera must be present in the population. while the current water, sanitation, and hygiene infrastructure in haiti would certainly facilitate transmission of cholera (and many other illnesses), cholera is not circulating in haiti, and the risk of cholera introduction to haiti is low. most current travelers to haiti are relief workers from countries without endemic cholera, and they are likely to have access to adequate sanitation and hygiene facilities within haiti, such that any cholera organisms they import would be safely contained. similarly, importation of cholera through contaminated food has not been documented in haiti in decades and is unlikely to become a problem during the relief efforts. 91under such circumstances, and boasting similar expertise, the un could not fail to be aware that the introduction of the cholera bacterium would be "like throwing a lighted match into a gasoline-filled room." 92 yet although nepal is a cholera endemic country, and despite the fact it was itself experiencing an increase in cholera cases at the time, nepalese peacekeepers were deployed without effective measures to mitigate the possibility they might be bringing a deadly disease with them. 93 once they arrived, terrible sanitation practices ensured that the local community would soon be exposed.there are some legitimate questions as to exactly what preventative measures the un should have taken in 2010; just as the state of knowledge was not the same in 1851 as it was in 1892, so too has it developed in the fallout from the haitian epidemic. in fact, the epidemic has served as a springboard for new research, and knowledge gleaned in its aftermath will inform future actions. for instance, one review of the genetic evidence establishing the source of the epidemic not only 91 centers for disease control and prevention (2010) . 92 sontag (2012) . 93 maharjan (2010) .proposes that genome sequencing should become a frontline screening method for promptly identifying the origin of infectious agents, but that current barriers limiting such use, such as the absence of a public database of recurring pathogens from different regions, be addressed to make this possible. 94 however, it is clear that risks arose even before the infected peacekeepers arrived in haiti. one fundamental problem arises from the fact that at the time the epidemic began, the medical manual for un peacekeeping then in use focused entirely upon preventing peacekeepers from falling ill, without considering what threats peacekeepers might introduce into the populations they are meant to protect. 95 much like the fortress europe approach of the early international sanitary conventions, this is an archaic approach treating disease as a one-way threat emanating from certain populations to menace others. this is despite both hundreds of years of history of soldiers serving as vectors for disease, and the more recent fact that un peacekeeping presents a unique set of risk factors for introducing outside diseases into vulnerable populations. 96 recall the cdc briefing document highlighted earlier, which states "[m]ost current travelers to haiti are relief workers from countries without endemic cholera". 97 by contrast, the current model of un peacekeeping relies heavily on troops from lower income countries which themselves face higher domestic burdens of infectious disease. in turn, peacekeeping brings these troops into contact with vulnerable populations in interactions that would otherwise be unlikely to occur. here, trade serves to illustrate the unique international interactions facilitated by united nations peacekeeping. given that, according to nepalese government statistics, bilateral trade with haiti in 2010 amounted to roughly us$10,000, peacekeeping appears to have been responsible for creating an interaction that would not have happened outside the auspices of the united nations. 98 this is not to suggest for a moment that such interactions are undesirable; it is simply to note the importance of ensuring that the accompanying risks are evaluated and addressed. indeed, as international cooperation between countries of the global south increases outside the un framework, it is important that the potential health ramifications are considered by both national governments and nongovernmental organisations.thus, it is clear that guidance on specific pre-deployment measures to prevent the spread of cholera by un peacekeepers was lacking. in fact, cholera is mentioned only once in the manual, and then only in a chart contained in an annex to the document. 99 the obvious inadequacy of the measures in place is underscored by the fact the united nations sought to untruthfully embellish what actions they had taken. for instance, edmond mulet, then under-secretary-general in charge of minus-tah, told media that peacekeepers were tested for cholera before deployment to 94 orata et al. (2014) . 95 united nations department of peacekeeping operations (1999) . 96 for further discussion, see houston (2015) . haiti, something repeatedly demonstrated to be untrue. 100 the lack of any such predeployment measures was confirmed by the nepalese army's chief medical officer, among others. 101 while there is room for some debate over the precise pre-deployment measures that should have been taken based on the state of knowledge in 2010, there is no such ambiguity when it comes to sanitary practices on un bases. even once the cholera bacterium was imported, meeting basic sanitary standards-in essence, ensuring that the water source relied upon by tens of thousands of haitians was not contaminated with human faeces-would almost certainly have prevented the epidemic. as documented both by journalists and epidemiological investigators, sanitary practices at the un base were deplorable, with leaking pipes and overflowing open-air waste pits on the banks of the river. 102 in confirmation of these views, a leaked un report reveals that an internal un investigation had itself revealed serious concerns with sanitation practices at the time of the outbreak. 103 it is also helpful to examine the actions of the un following the initial outbreak, and how they conform with the principle of preventing the international spread of cholera. here, the un's actions do not reflect the importance of open sharing of information that helped catalyse the reforms leading to the 2005 international health regulations. most immediately, the un attempted to cover up what had happened, including efforts to hide or repair facilities, while issuing misleading press statements about sanitary standards on the base. 104 they also refused a request by haitian epidemiologists to examine the minustah soldiers at the base in the early days of the epidemic. 105 it is hard to justify such actions in the context of the legal principle discussed in this paper, or even of the who guidance document on national cholera policies that states "[m]ore detailed information on the sources and routes of transmission of infection should be sought by epidemiological investigation of outbreaks." 106 the un's actions have not greatly improved over the longer term. this is most clearly illustrated in their response to the final report of the un-appointed independent panel charged with investigating the epidemic, which made seven recommendations. 107 although secretary-general ban ki-moon promised a prompt follow-up on these recommendations, such action was not forthcoming. 108 in 2013, two years after the report was made public, an ngo report noted that of the seven recommendations made by the panel, only two had been implemented, and a further two partially implemented. 109 none of the suggested pre-deployment measures-prophylaxis, screening and vaccination-had been acted upon at all. also not acted upon was the recommendation that un installations treat faecal waste using on-site systems that inactivate pathogens before disposal.in 2014, three years after the seven recommendations were made, the un posted a "fact sheet" online outlining their response to them. notably, it states that the un accepts the proposal to vaccinate peacekeepers for cholera, an example of how both evolving technology and ongoing evaluation can change policy: consider how cholera vaccination was accepted in the 1920s and rejected in the 1970s. at the same time, it rejects the recommendations on screening and prophylaxis. 110 the fact sheet does not provide the evidence relied upon to support this decision, instead referring to a closed-door paho/who expert consultation on pharmacological measures for prevention of cholera introduction in non-endemic areas; although a final report was generated in this consultation, it has never been publically released. 111 thus, while the actual results of the expert consultation may indeed be compelling, it is impossible to evaluate them. concealing from public and expert scrutiny what is presumably an objective evaluation by scientific experts of prospective methods of preventing cholera transmission is not in any way conducive to preventing the international spread of cholera in future. by contrast, where further research has been conducted and shared publically, very different conclusions have been reached. modelling from yale university suggests that not only would screening and prophylaxis be effective, but that they would be more cost-effective than vaccination. 112 the un has yet to directly engage with this study and its implications.as for the recommendation to treat faecal waste on-site, the fact sheet notes "the un has undertaken substantial actions to improve wastewater management in field missions." however, a subsequent internal audit of waste management in minustah facilities conducted in 2014 gives a final rating of "unsatisfactory", indicating serious on-going problems even four years after the epidemic began. 113 such revelations cast doubt on the efforts of the un to reform its practices. that this audit report was not made public until 2016 does not help their case. this is not to say the un has not learned anything about the consequences of poor sanitation. for instance, leaked internal documents from the minusca peacekeeping mission in central african republic identify health hazards to the local population from a un dumpsite, and state "[t]he mission should be highly concerned as this could easily culminate in litigation against minusca which should be avoided taking into account lessons learnt from the haiti case". 114 similarly, given the inadequacy of the existing medical guidelines for peacekeeping missions, the united nations also quietly updated its medical manual for peacekeeping operations five years after the epidemic began. the updated version directly acknowledges the risks that peacekeepers pose to vulnerable populations, noting "the danger inherent in the introduction of diseases into the host country's environment, particularly where such diseases are assumed to be non-existent prior to peacekeeping." 115 it adds: "this is especially important for communicable diseases such as cholera." the revised manual also explicitly includes extensive guidelines for educating peacekeepers about cholera. while these changes are to be welcomed, it remains to be seen how the updated manual will be applied in practice.importantly, it must also be noted that the more substantive changes focus heavily on cholera and preventing a repeat of the haitian scenario, rather than effectively tackling the broader concern of introducing diseases into vulnerable populations. malaria, for instance, already presents a risk to individual peacekeepers across multiple un missions, where they are frequently exposed to malaria vectors in the field. in turn, this poses the threat of the introduction, or re-introduction, of malaria into malariafree areas, or the introduction of drug-resistant strains into areas where those drugs are still effective. 116 this latter scenario is of particular concern given that peacekeepers from countries where resistance to artemisinin-based drugs has emerged are frequently deployed in regions of africa where the burden of malaria is especially high and those drugs remain a vital public health tool. 117 this is a key example of the need for further practical reforms in the aftermath of haiti.lastly, the haitian epidemic serves as a reminder of a fundamental concept drawn from the field of medicine applicable not only to the un but to any states or ngos engaging in activities that carry a risk of the international transmission of disease: first, do no harm. this should be a primary consideration no matter how well intentioned the intervention, particularly where it affects communities whose circumstances heighten their vulnerability to disease. only time will tell if the un, as flagbearer for international cooperation, will belatedly embrace this concept as a result of its experiences in haiti, along with the related commitments to open communication and evidence-based approaches to disease that have formed part of international health law, particularly in relation to cholera, for well over a century. (2015). 116 fernando et al. (2016) and juliao et al. (2013) . 117 houston and houston (2015) .two centuries after the first pandemic kicked off the globalisation of cholera, it remains both a threat to those who lack access to clean water and sanitation and an important topic under international law. in 2017, controversy over sharing information about cholera erupted within the race for the directorship-general of the who, although allegations that he had covered up cholera outbreaks while serving as ethiopia's minister of health were not enough to derail the eventual winner, tedros adhanom ghebreyesus. 118 at the same time, cholera continues to claim victims around the world, including the massive epidemic in conflict-ridden yemen that the un under-secretary-general for humanitarian affairs has referred to as a "man-made catastrophe" and whose toll could soon eclipse that in haiti. 119 and in haiti itself, a once novel disease threatens to become endemic in the absence of concerted action.as noted at the beginning of this chapter, un responsibility for the haitian cholera epidemic touches on a wide range of international law issues. at its core, however, it is a problem that would have been avoided if the un had only taken steps to adhere to the oldest principle of international health law. with a history stretching back over 160 years, including over a century of binding multilateral obligations, it is evident that preventing the international spread of cholera is a robust and longstanding international legal principle. it is also clear that the un violated it. it is less clear what the practical implications of this principle and its violation are for the people of haiti going forward. the term "cholera forcing" was pejoratively coined to refer to the idea that "cholera epidemics, both in the nineteenth century and today, were and can be the key stimulus for procurement of safe water and sanitation." 120 this has not been the experience in haiti, where the introduction of this previously unknown disease has only exacerbated serious pre-existing problems with access to water and sanitation. as of the time of this writing, a series of plans to address cholera has come and gone, with none of them ever raising even close to the funds required to carry them out. 121 the more recent package accompanying secretary-general ban ki-moon's apology in december of 2016 remains drastically underfunded. 122 furthermore, despite the increased prominence of the issue as a result of the epidemic, the precise boundaries between operationally necessary immunity and harmful impunity for the united nations have still not been delineated; this leaves no legal stick to enforce unfulfilled promises. and while the un has taken some steps to prevent a similar public health disaster from occurring in the future, it is not yet clear if these steps will be sufficient, or indeed whether they are being taken in practice as well as on paper. by contrast, the west african ebola outbreak, which claimed a similar number of lives but garnered considerably more media coverage, has attracted not only vastly greater sums of money but also drawn far more international attention to failures to implement the ihrs, as well as broader questions about the capacity of the who, and the wider international community, to effectively tackle the international spread of disease. 123 the difference in attitude towards the two diseases was hammered home in the midst of the ebola outbreak, when the un was quick to suspend the rotation of peacekeepers from the affected countries to minustah in haiti. 124 ebola, perceived as a danger by wealthy and influential countries that have not felt threatened by cholera for decades, may yet direct the course of changes of international law around the transmission of disease. for haiti, however, a tragic first encounter with cholera, occurring a century and a half after it served as the initial catalyst for states to come together to establish legal measures to prevent the international spread of disease, has resulted in much legal debate but little justice.from this moment until that in which the enemy shall have been driven from the soil of the republic, all frenchmen are in permanent requisition for the service of the armies. the young men shall go to battle; the married men shall forge arms and transport provisions; the women shall make tents and clothing and shall serve in the hospitals; the children shall turn old linen into lint; the aged shall betake themselves to the public places in order to arouse the courage of the warriors and preach the hatred of kings and the unity of the republic. (halsall 2020) this call for mass conscription (literally, a 'mass uprising') would transform the french military, replacing the professional army within the year with a vast, national army of 800,000 trained soldiers made up of citizens. but the levée meant more than the creation of a mass army, being built on two key ideas. the first was a new relationship to the state, with an implicit post-revolutionary compact whereby all those united and protected as citizens owed a similar duty of protection to the state: from now on, the body of the citizen was intimately tied to the survival of the body politic. the second, following from this, was that the entire society would be mobilized to support the military. as ernst junger notes here, 'the image of war as armed combat merges into the more extended image of a gigantic labour process': now the military army is joined by-and to-'the modern armies' of commerce, transport, foodstuff and munitions, until 'there is no longer any movement whatsoever-be it that of the homeworker at her sewing machine-without at least indirect use for the battlefield' (junger 1991, 126) .the levée-en-masse transformed warfare, with conscription and mass armies becoming common and, during conflict, states increasingly transforming themselves into war-time economies, diverting huge resources to military service. wwi saw the fruition of these processes, with the mass mobilization of populations for mass warfare, supported by the mass mobilization of home industries. for some, this mobilization was insufficient. in his 1930 essay 'total mobilization', ernst junger complained of germany's only 'partial' mobilization (1991, 125) . for revolutionary conservatives like junger, true greatness required a 'total mobilization' with its 'unlimited marshalling of potential energies', a mobilization 'that requires extension to the deepest marrow ' (1991, 126) . this mobilization was itself a reflection of the kinetic rhythms of the machine age:it suffices simply to consider our daily life, with its inexorability and merciless discipline, its smoking, glowing districts, the physics and metaphysics of its commerce, its motors, airplanes, and burgeoning cities. with a pleasure-tinged horror, we sense that here, not a single atom is not in motion-that we are profoundly inscribed in this raging process. total mobilization is far less consummated than it consummates itself; in war and peace, it expresses the secret and inexorable claim to which our life in the age of masses and machines subjects us. (1991, 128) the totally mobilized peace of modernity, therefore, prefigured and produced the total mobilization of modern war. junger's hopes for a new german youth who would throw themselves into this project of renewal-through-mobilization soon found its expression in nazism's blitzkrieg and the 'total mobilization' of wwii that definitively erased the difference between civilian life and military action.though conscription continued in the west in the postwar period, gradually the experience of war changed for its populations, becoming more remote from everyday life. by the time of the 1991 gulf war, smaller, professional armies dominated again, defined now by their total mobilization not of men, but of technologies. by then, war itself was in crisis in the west, with questions being asked as to whether western societies could sustain casualties and still support military action. the solution was a new phase in the history of mobilization. with the military and media collaborating in the gulf to produce and disseminate the global spectacle, domestic populations would now be mobilized as its audience. in this new levée-en-masse-medias, the public's role was to watch television: to consume the war, to follow the press briefings, marvel at the 'smart-bomb' footage and 'clean war' and applaud the military operation.in this new imploded home front, 'war' now meant enjoying the scopic pleasures of a video-game war (taylor 1998, 75; knightley 2000, 483) , with little risk for western combatants and none at all for its viewers. a steve bell cartoon of the time showed a penguin grandfather replying to his grandchild's question of what he did in the war with, 'me? i watched television and i'm proud of it!' (merrin 2019, 24) . it was a model of war and mass-media mobilization that would dominate in the west in the following decades, through kosovo in 1999 , afghanistan in 2001 and iraq in 2003 , albeit one increasingly left behind as the 'war on terror' developed. with the move to unseen drone strikes and special-forces operations, it was better if no-one knew what was happening; hence, the public were effectively stood down. that demobilization would last until the 2020 covid-19 lockdown which inaugurated a new era of total demobilization.when the 2020 coronavirus pandemic broke, political leaders immediately reached for military metaphors. xi jinping vowed to wage a 'people's war' on the virus; in a speech on 16 march, emmanuel macron repeatedly declared france was 'at war'; on 17 march, italy's special commissioner for the coronavirus emergency called for a 'war-time economy'; on 18 march, donald trump presented himself as a 'wartime president'; in his 23 march address to the nation, uk pm boris johnson told the public this was 'a fight' in which 'every one of us is directly enlisted', whilst on 6 april, the us surgeon general warned of the 'pearl harbour moment' coming for this generation (see serhan 2020; momtaz 2020; woodward 2020). of course, as many equally quickly pointed out, 'war' metaphors were neither accurate or helpful, as war is a purely human phenomenon, representing a clash of wills, to which a human solution is always possible, whilst the victims' deaths did not represent a personal failure to fight (serhan 2020 ). freedman notes all this but nevertheless suggests 'there are similarities between pandemics and war, especially if a realistic view of modern war is adopted' in terms of effects and governmental responses (freedman 2020) . but perhaps we can go even further? perhaps our concept of 'war' itself needs redefining: perhaps, biologically, this is a war?in 2000, the atmospheric chemist paul crutzen declared 'we are in the anthropocene' (ellis 2018, 1)-a proposed, new era marking the impact of humanity on the world, distinguished from the holocene by the record of human activity in the geological strata. we have long known that humans have transformed the world and have done so since huntergathering times, but recent decades have seen a growing awareness that the scale and speed of human transformation has exponentially increased. though the concept of the anthropocene remains controversial, with disagreements as to what geological records to accept and when the anthropocene began (with the mid-twentieth century being seen by many as a key moment), the broader trends it identifies in climate change, systemic pollution, the transformation of habitats and ecosystems and the loss of biodiversity are beyond dispute.there is, of course, a long history of pandemics and plagues, stretching from the earliest time, through outbreaks like leprosy in eleventh-century europe, the black death in mid-fourteenth-century europe, the first of seven cholera pandemics in 1817, the chinese plague from 1855, the 1875 fiji measles pandemic, the 1889 russian flu, the 1918 spanish flu, the 1957 asian flu, aids/hiv after 1981, through to contemporary outbreaks such as sars. many were spread by human activity and can thus be seen to have an anthropogenic element. perhaps the most famous example here is the fifteenth-sixteenth-century 'columbian exchange' which included the transferral of small pox and other diseases to the americas, killing up to 56 m people and eradicating entire civilizations (ellis 2018, 95-96) .the global risk of a new pandemic had been known for decades, even appearing in popular culture. the first episode of the bbc's (1975) show survivors opened with a flu virus escaping an asian laboratory, globally spreading via air travel and ending, 50 minutes later, with 99% of the world's population dead. health organization warnings of a global influenza pandemic became common over the following decades, being reinforced by the outbreak of sars there is a very real threat of a rapidly moving, highly lethal pandemic of a respiratory pathogen killing 50-80 million people and wiping out nearly 5% of the world's economy. a global pandemic on that scale would be catastrophic, creating widespread havoc, instability and insecurity. the world is not prepared (ó mongáin 2020) meanwhile, every year the world health organization (who) has released its 'threats to global health' report, with the 'threat of a global influenza pandemic' appearing in its top-ten list in 2019 (who 2019).covid-19 proved to be an equivalent threat, launching its own microbiological assault on the human system. like many pandemics, its scale, impact and potential long-term effects eclipsed that of many 'wars'. on 5 april, the total uk hospital deaths reached 5373 (itv 2020), a figure exceeding, in just over a month, the death toll of british military servicemen across all conflicts since 1945. with the 9 april hospital toll of 980 deaths (tidman 2020) , the uk lost more lives in 1 day than servicemen killed in the near-38-year northern ireland deployment, or than were lost in the falklands war, gulf war, kosovo war, afghanistan war and iraq war put together. in the usa, on 29 april, the death toll of 58,964 exceeded within months the us death toll in the decades-long vietnam war. the deadliest day of that war, 31 january 1968, saw only 246 servicemen killed, compared to days such as 8 may when the usa reported 2746 dead (mulraney 2020). by 14 may, more americans had died from covid-19 (over 75,000) than in the vietnam, afghanistan and iraq wars put together (65,096) (bbc 2020i).where baudrillard in 1991 explained how the 'war' in the gulf was really a 'nonwar' (baudrillard 1995) , here the nonwar of covid-19 had all the appearance of a war in its casualties, impact and long-term implications as a global, biological attack on the entire species. the covid-19 pandemic is essentially anthropogenic, as a zoonotic disease most likely arising out of changes in habitat and interaction with humans. whilst the wuhan wet market is not the proven source of the outbreak, these markets are an important example of humanly created transmissible environments. though the dating of the anthropocene is still open and though earlier anthropogenic pandemics have existed, we can see that covid-19 is the first global pandemic requiring a truly global response since our recognition of the anthropocene. it is the first anthropocenic world war.covid-19 was intimately linked with globalization and the hyperconnected economy. wuhan, a city of 11 million, is a major transportation hub, a centre of manufacturing and, as part of the post-2004 rise of central china plan, a hub of hi-tech production and research. benefitting from the movement of rural workers to urban centres, the growth of cheap industrial labour, and developments in it, communications, transport and shipping, it is closely tied to the global economy and globalization (liu 2020) . even the wet market was linked to globalization in serving both the growing working population and in its trade in exotic animals for the wealthy. despite this global character, few in the west understood the risks. western exceptionalism, the belief that the virus would be contained in asia and the unthinkability of similar restrictions meant the threat was ignored.those hit first were the countries most connected to china and the most globally connected. with its spread, the global system itself went into lockdown: global travel stopped, travel restrictions and quarantine were imposed and each nation forced its populations indoors. with it came a lockdown on international relations. the us-iran hostility that, only weeks earlier, many feared would escalate into 'world war iii' (bogart 2020) was now forgotten, with trump warning against any resumption (barnes 2020) . conflict shifted instead into posturing and soft power, from trump's insistence on calling it the 'chinese virus' and attacks on the who as pro-chinese (al jazeera 2020; shear 2020), to china's post-lockdown reframing of themselves as benevolent global providers of ppe (the economist 2020).the lockdown of the international order was also a lockdown of events, at least as far as national audiences were concerned, as covid-19 crowded out all other news. the only international news of note was how other nations were coping with their own lockdowns. the global system of communications was ruptured by the virus. a system defined by motion-by the hypercirculation of goods, commodities, people, money, data and communications-was fundamentally interrupted, slowed down and even paused, forced in its extremes into idleness, into furlough, even hyperredundancy. the whole remained in motion, but with its systems disrupted-with employment and consumption locked-downit lacked both its meaning and the means to complete its circuits.the greatest symbol of this pause of the global was the fate of oil: the source of fuel for all global transport and motion. demand crashed in the global lockdown and on 20 april for the first time ever, the price of us oil went negative, falling from $18 a barrel to $38 (ambrose 2020a). crucially, the cause of that crash was not simply the lack of demand but the immobility of the oil itself, as places to store the oversupply ran out. now, tankers that a few weeks earlier were crossing the world laden with up to 2 m barrels sat motionless around the coasts of the world, full of the very means of movement itself (ambrose 2020b).war, at its heart, is motion. paul virilio, the theorist of dromocracy, is fond of quoting sun tzu's claim 'speed is the essence of war', as well as frederick the great's dictum, 'to win is to advance' (virilio 1986, 133; 55) . indeed, war's violence is, first of all, the violence of movement itselfthe speed of assault-recall, again, sun tzu: 'the onset of troops is like the rush of a torrent which will even roll stones along in its course' (sun tzu 2020, ch.5, part 12). war, therefore, is the rapid transferral of bodies and energies from one point in space and time to another point already occupied by other bodies, with the aim of displacing or destroying them. it is a kinetic phenomenon with the destructive force and character of a projectile: one that begins and ends with movement, with mobilization and demobilization.in the covid-19 world war, however, the entire war was demobilization. within each nation, the mass of the population was immediately demobilized, being asked to do nothing, to not leave the house, to not move and to remain essentially inactive. in a reversal of the levée-en-masse and of junger's call for 'total mobilization', this global, specieswide world war produced instead the total demobilization of the population. the essence of war reverses here from speed into immobility and inertia. whereas, in modern societies, junger suggests 'not a single atom is not in motion', ours immediately dedicated itself to eradicating it. if, for virilio, the speed of contemporary weapons technologies brings an advantage over the enemy, in allowing us 'to gain fractions of seconds ' (1986, 137) , this was a war that worked in the opposite direction, with demobilization hoping to gain weeks, even months, worth of advantage. whereas marinetti proclaimed that the futurists would glorify war, describing it as 'the world's only hygiene' (marinetti 2009, 22) , here the proto-fascists desire to destroy human life reversed into a new defence of the human against covid-19: for today, for the period of viral infection, hygiene became the world's only war.if this was the potential end of the species, it was a curious apocalypse, lacking, in the west at least, the pain, violence and collapse of civilization we had expected. here, for many, the end was merely an entropic sloth, anaesthetized with alcohol and marked by longer hair, weight gain and binge watching. this was the apocalypse as a dull sunday afternoon-as alan partridge's famous appeal to the heavens: 'sunday, bloody sunday!' (brand 2014) . for virilio, when wwi ended as a war of space-as a war of movement-bogged down in the stalemate of the trenches, it became instead a 'war of attrition', a war of time, where 'duration was survival ' (1986, 52-53;56) . this was our fate too. with the lockdown closing down space and movement, this world war was turned into a war of time with duration again representing survival. to live meant to bunkerdown: to cut oneself off from space and survive time. life was reduced to endurance, and especially to the endurance of oneself.with the national invasion of the virus and the lockdown of events, there emerged instead a global civil war. each infected nation withdrew, closed itself off and declared their own war on the virus. to win it, each nation had, first of all, to wage war on human life itself-on our very 'being-in-the-world'.this global, legal lockdown was historically unprecedented. whole nations immediately transformed themselves into carceral societies-or rather, in our compliance, into self-incarcerated societies. this was a self-imposed house-arrest, a concept to be understood only secondarily in its legal sense, for the word 'arrest' means, first of all, 'to cause to stop' (from the late fourteenth-century-old french, 'arester', 'to stay, stop', with its roots in the latin 'arrestare', meaning 'to stop, restrain'), and this was our primary experience. this stopping is traditionally a punishment, as the arrested person is imprisoned and refused space to move, whilst motionlessness has also been used as torture-central to the 'enhanced interrogation techniques' used against iraqi prisoners at abu ghraib, for example, were 'stress positions', handcuffing people into painful, prolonged immobility. here, therefore, we put ourselves under house arrest: we stopped ourselves, locked ourselves in and placed ourselves into stress positions, torturing the public body for weeks with enforced immobility. or perhaps this was more medieval in tone-responding to the plague-like, miasmic threat with a self-siege warfare, with each individual retreating behind their walls to hold out with their stores?this atmospheric element is important. sloterdijk's 2002 book terror from the air explores the movement in the twentieth century from targeting the body to targeting the environment and the new 'military climatology' that resulted (sloterdijk 2009, 19) . following heidegger, he emphasizes how our 'being-in-the-world' was always a 'being-in-the-air or more exactly a being-in-the-breathable' (2009, 48) , tracing how chemical warfare, nazi gas chambers and nuclear weapons created an 'unliveable milieu ' (2009, 16) , devastating the 'life world ' (2009, 55) . for virilio, similarly, the 'new climactic reality' of environmental warfare and bombardment in wwii led, in response, to the discovery of the 'bunker form'-our new 'survival machines' (virilio 1994, 39) . 'just as there are two times, the time of peace and the time of declared war', virilio argues, 'there are two atmospheres and not just one': those we can breathe in and those which kill us (1994, 42) . hence, bunkers became 'a shelter for man in this critical period, the place where he buries himself to subsist ' (1994, 46) . so, in this lockdown, the terror from the air became a terror of the air, and military bunker architecture was democratized and generalized to all, as we locked ourselves in our 'casement' (literally, a 'stronghouse') (1994, 46) . being-in-the-world became being-inthe-bunker, with sloterdijk's claim that 'we are condemned to being-in …' describing now not only the fatality of phenomenological reality, but the fate of the body within an unbreathable world.there was something dystopian about the resulting exodus from public space, echoing science-fiction warnings of abandoned landscapes, from the domed, bunker cities of logan's run and blake's 7 set on a ruined earth, to the environmental catastrophes of ballard's the drowned world and the drought, to the emptied urban landscapes of the twilight zone's 'where is everybody?', wyndham's the day of the triffids, i am legend and the walking dead. but this was a dream our military had long planned for us. during the cold war, samuel cohen helped invent the neutron bomb, an 'enhanced radiation weapon' (erw), which he claimed was more humane in killing fewer humans and leaving buildings intact (strauss 2014 ). covid-19 had a curiously similar effect: the explosion of this enhanced biological weapon and our desperate bunkerization showing us a world without us in it. stories spread of the environment's recovery-the reduction in industrial emissions (regan 2020) and animals reclaiming the world-and a new photographic-essay genre emerged of covid-19-emptied cities (liubchenkova 2020; manning 2020 ; the guardian 2020). these realized for us an impossible vision: a post-human sublime of our own perfectly preserved and lost civilization; a pompeii-of-the-present we could appreciate online from within the self-buried safety of our survival machines.it was a self-burial anticipated in e.m. forster's 1909 novella 'the machine stops' which tells the dystopian tale of a future humanity, locked into vast, underground, honeycomb tiers of individual, hexagonal 'cells', cut off from the real world, with fully automated services and tubes and screens bringing everything to the immobilized individual, under the aegis of a single, networked 'machine' (forster 2013, 5; 15; 43; 47) . here, there is a 'terror' of physical contact, human proximity and real-world experience (2013, 12;15) , hence vashti's horror at the idea of meeting her son, as 'people never touched one another. the custom having become obsolete owing to the machine' (2013, 18) . it is a world where travel outside is illegal, where the greatest threat is 'homelessness'-being forced outside-and where muscles are discouraged (2013, (21) (22) (23) . instead, each individual self-isolates, connected through the machine to all they need, busying themselves consuming content and producing their own for their 'several thousand' friends (2013, 50) . it is a world that is instantly recognizable. this is the world too of virilio's 'terminal citizen' (virilio 1997, 21) . we pass, virilio says, from a society of speed to a society of immobility and inertia (1997, 20) , moving with the 'transmission revolution' to the final human vehicle, the 'static' audio-visual vehicle: 'the body terminal of that interactive being who is both transmitter and receiver ' (1997, 21; 11) for virilio, this immobilized, 'generalized interactivity' (1997, 21) is a threat to our experience:paul klee hit the nail on the head: 'to define the present in isolation is to kill it'. this is what the teletechnologies of real-time are doing: they are killing 'present' time by isolating it from its here and now, in favour of a commutative elsewhere that no longer has anything to do with our 'concrete presence' in the world, but is the elsewhere of a 'discreet telepresence' that remains a complete mystery. (1997, (10) (11) it is hard to read this without thinking of our lockdown in an isolated, hyperextended present, disconnected from the real experience of time and space and engaging through real-time interfaces. for virilio, this loss of the terrestrial body has another, theological meaning: as the loss of motion ('anima'-the root of 'animation') is also the loss of our soul (latin: 'anima') (1997, 25) . hence, the body terminal, in only being 'mobile on the spot ' (1997, 20) , is fundamentally a terminal body.in committing us to this condition, therefore, the lockdown saved lives by killing life. our 'survival machines' became our sarcophagi, ultimately threatening to be more dangerous than going out. as virilio says, 'stasis is death ' (1986, 67) .the key battleground in this war against covid-19 was the reversed home front of everyday life. where previously the 'front line' was the battlefield, supported by logistics and medical aid, with the 'home front' far removed, now the home-front was the battlefield, with the front line even reversing behind this to encompass the medical and logistical workers (the health and care staff and gig-economy workers) who risked their lives to keep the home front alive. in recognition of this service, uk tabloid the sun began a campaign to award the george cross media for gallantry to the nhs itself (fairbairn 2020) .'everyday life' had long been theorized by post-war western marxists as a key site of ideological contestation and a space requiring liberation (lefebvre 2014 (lefebvre , 2016 vaneigem 1994) . marx, in the german ideology, famously ruminated on the future eradication of the division of labour for a life allowing one to hunt, fish, rear-cattle and criticize as one wished, 'without ever becoming hunter, fisherman, herdsman or critic' (marx 2020) , whilst the situationists dreamed of a liberation from drudgery and the opportunity for selfrealization. as raoul vaneigem convincingly explains:in an industrial society which confuses work and productivity, the necessity of producing has always been an enemy of the desire to create. what spark of humanity, of possible creativity, can remain alive in a being dragged out of sleep at six every morning, jolted about in suburban trains, deafened by the racket of machinery, bleached and steamed by meaningless sounds and gestures, spun dry by statistical controls, and tossed out at the end of the day into the entrance halls of railway stations, those cathedrals of departure for the hell of weekdays and the nugatory paradise of weekends where the crowd communes in a brutish weariness? from adolescence to retirement each twenty-four hour cycle repeats the same shattering bombardment … (vaneigem 1994, 52) against this bombardment, vaneigem hymned the 'rage to live', but covid-19 perhaps exposed these dreams. though some spent their time refining their craft skills, for most the experience of liberation from both the division of labour and consumerist leisure owed more to blaise pascal's 1670 claim that 'all of humanity's problems stem from man's inability to sit quietly in a room alone' (pascal 1995, 37) . with selfisolation, sartre's 'hell is … other people!' reversed itself upon ourselves (sartre 2000, 223) .what saved us from the entropic death of bunkerized terminal boredom was our activity: our participation in this civil war. this was a complex, intra-state conflict defined not only by the fight of the human body and the body politic with the virus, but also by the division within the population between those promoting demobilization and those resisting it. unlike in 1991 where the gulf war levée-en-masse-medias mobilized the far-removed western public as audiences, in this imploded home-front-line the web 2.0 revolution transformed us into active participants in the war: into vital keyboard warriors whose primary targets were not the virus but each other. in the uk, this meant the devotion of the public to the creation of both feel-good and disciplinary propaganda.here, the uk public joined the government and media in producing and sharing heart-warming, humorous and human-interest stories, as well as memes, gifs, inspirational quotes and videos to raise war-time morale. hence, the endless media and social media paid attention to pensioners walking up stairs to raise money, 'captain tom' walking round his garden, care-home residents singing and public applause for health workers (young 2020; bbc 2020a; kiddey 2020; robertson 2020). in this war-time lockdown, a simulacral 'blitz-spirit' dominated uk sentiment, celebrating public resilience and 'suffering' and treating events such as boris johnson's recovery and the birth of his child as rousing victories. the 8 may 75th anniversary of ve day seemed to implode time itself, with the street parties, singalongs, johnson's simulated churchillianism and the queen's speech seeming to convince people it was 1945 and that they personally had done their duty and achieved something great. one family even retreated into 1945, banning technology, wearing period costume and running nighttime air-raid drills (johnston 2020) .the bbc played a key role here. just as the british broadcasting company, afraid of losing its licence in 1926, took the opportunity of the general strike to secure its future by turning itself into a compliant government mouthpiece (williams 1998, 98-101) , so too, in 2020, did a bbc that only weeks earlier was facing an 'existential threat' to its service and funding (barker and di stefano 2020) take the opportunity of covid-19 to demonstrate its value as a national unifier and feel-good, war-time propagandist. whilst 60% of the population thought it was doing a good job (fletcher et al. 2020) , on key issues such as austerity-era underfunding, lack of pandemic preparedness, testing, ppe stocks and the care-home death toll the government received only light-touch questioning from the bbc, whose bulletins favoured instead sentimental, diversionary human-interest stories and charity efforts. their interest in 'captain tom' transformed the national shame of needing a 99-year-old to walk round his garden to fund basic ppe for nhs staff into the feel-good media event of the lockdown (bbc 2020b).the participant-warrior's role, however, was not just to produce positive propaganda. they also devoted themselves to public-policing, denouncing any activity departing from the legal code of the lockdown (uk government 2020a), discovering the 'enemy within' in anyone abusing the 'permitted exercise' or 'reasonable excuse' to leave the house. social media feeds, twitter, community facebook groups and messaging apps burned with outrage at the 'covidiots', social-shaming food waste, poor social distancing, poor queuing, unnecessary shopping, park sunbathing and ball-games (see carr 2020; layton 2020; noor 2020). and opposed to this were all those determined to resist the code and its policing, those determined to travel and exercise, those unhappy at the new police state and those annoyed by the social-shamers. across the whole range of social media, covid etiquette and shaming flame wars played out in real time, all accompanied by photographs of offenders. just as virilio claims that today 'arms of communication' prevail over 'arms of destruction ' (2002, 113-114) so, in this lockdown, we were simultaneously the demobilized, telespectators of this war against the human body and the active, hypermobilized, telepresent producer of our own informational civil war, deploying our personal arms of communication against the covidiot enemy.this informational civil war included the online battle against conspiracy theories. the us and european far-right, especially, promoted disinformation and the scapegoating of particular groups (doward 2020; parveen 2020; wilson 2020) , whilst others promoted anti-5g claims (tempterton 2020) , leading to phone masts being vandalized and phone workers abused (waterson and hern 2020) . coronavirus 'deniers' spread their message around facebook, youtube, instagram and whatsapp (randall 2020) , prompting takedown actions and anti-fake news responses by platforms and governments (carrie wong 2020a; chadwick 2020a, b; hern 2020; pa media 2020; bbc 2020c). but the civil war also had an important, on-the-ground reality. virilio's theory of 'dromocracy' (of governments of speed) suggests different speed classes-different 'orders of speed' (1986, 119)exist: hence, the lockdown class division between those who did not have to move and those who did: the health and care workers, delivery drivers, and warehouse and retail workers who faced the risk of exposure and death; and hence, the division too between those for whom money continued to move into their accounts and those for whom it stopped.then, there were the other inequalities in the civil war, with higher death rates for those in poorer areas, for black and asian minority ethnic people, and for men, the elderly and those with existing medical conditions (bbc 2020d; siddique and marsh 2020; duncan 2020). the uk government especially waged a war on the vulnerable, preparing for the expected surge in hospital demand by mass evacuating the ill and weak back into their homes with little or no care, or into care homes, which became centres of infection. for weeks, the protection of care workers and rising number of care-home deaths were ignored, with the latter left out of official hospital-death figures (bbc 2020e). add to this, the problems of the elderly, ill or vulnerable getting supplies; the rise in mental-health problems including self-harm and suicide (mills 2020; mohdin 2020) ; families going hungry (iqbal 2020); a rise in domestic violence (graham-harrison et al. 2020) ; lockdown murders; the digital divide of those without adequate internet access (kelly 2020) ; the rise in problem-drinking (campbell 2020); a rise in online child exploitation and child abuse imagery (solon 2020) ; increased online videos of abuse and nonconsensual sex (grant 2020) ; and an increase in cybercrime with new, covid-19-related scams (uk government 2020b). we had long got used to the idea of civilian 'collateral damage' in the wars we watched on television, but in this imploded home-front-line, the collateral damage was us.in the west, the usa experienced the most intense covid-19 civil war. instead of unifying the country, trump, more concerned with his polls and re-election, seemed determined to exculpate himself, blame others and push political and cultural divisions. having failed to act for 6 weeks, leading to the world's highest death toll (pilkington and mccarthy 2020) , trump used his press conferences to attack political opponents and journalists (spocchia 2020; reuters 2020; smith 2020b) , to play his own 'propaganda video', praising himself (c-span 2020) and to divert anger towards china and the who (bbc 2020g; smith 2020a; bbc 2020h). one report, on 27 april, calculated he had spent 27 times longer in his press conferences attacking his personal enemies than expressing sympathy for the bereaved (spocchia 2020). the need for a scientifically based response was especially problematic for an administration built on anti-scientific and proconspiracy credentials (pilkington 2020) , and trump seemed determine to troll his own advisors, praising the virus as 'a genius' (cockburn 2020) , pushing his 'hunches' about drugs (carrie-wong 2020b) and speculating about injecting disinfectant (bbc 2020f). throughout the crisis, trump also pursued direct conflict with state governors regarding policy decisions and equipment availability (mccarthy 2020a; naughtie 2020; wallace wells 2020).trump's posturing increasingly risked an actual civil war, with his tweets calling for people to 'liberate' minnesota, michigan and virginia, his support for far-right linked anti-lockdown protests (smith 2020c) and his claim that his presidential authority over state lockdown rules was 'total' (mccarthy 2020a, b) . in an echo of his comments on charlottesville's 'very fine people' (klein 2018) , trump tweeted his support for the hundreds of 'very good people', some heavily armed, who massed at the michigan state capitol on 30 april (beckett 2020; liptak 2020) . ongoing antilockdown protests, encouraged by trump, were increasingly dominated by far-right militia groups and conspiracists, prompting fears of serious political violence (perkins 2020) . whilst trump's critics saw his handling of the crisis as a disaster, in fact he was playing to his strengths. what trump achieved was to transform the covid-19 civil war into an extension of his already successful political and cultural civil war against the american people and its democratic institutions. this was politics as a continuation of civil war by identical means.in his 1990 essay, 'postscript on the societies of control', gilles deleuze argues we have left behind the nineteenthcentury foucauldian 'disciplinary societies' and moved to new 'societies of control' (deleuze 1992, 3-4) . we have passed from societies defined by concentration, enclosure and the disciplinary power of incarceration-to new computer (1992, 6) and code-based (1992, 5) technologies and systems whose 'modulation' (1992, 4) allows 'continuous forms of control ' (1992, 7) . his example of this in practice is guattari's suggestion of 'a control mechanism' able to track an individual around a city in real time, with electronic systems modulating behaviour by giving or withdrawing access (1992, 7) . in the space of months, we repeated this historical trajectory, turning first back into societies of incarceration, before our gradual remobilization-passing back out into the world through the continuous controls of digital surveillance.this was not easy. recent years had seen the systematic pathologization of the internet, as the optimism of web 2.0's participative society gave way to an antipathy to public over-participation and fear of manipulation. by the time covid-19 hit, the internet was seen as an out-of-control 'toxic' realm of trolling, abuse, death threats, hate speech, political extremism, populism, russian hacking, information warfare and disinformation, 'fake news', electoral manipulation by paid, targeted advertising, cybercrime, government surveillance and mass-harvested personal data with few privacy protections. almost overnight, this reversed again, with the real world and human relations becoming toxic and the internet being transformed into our saviour, allowing safe work, education, entertainment and communication. within weeks, we became, like the cell-bound inhabitants of forster's tale, afraid of human contact. the outside world was no longer a site of possible risk, but instead was absolutely impure. 'the sacred', caillois writes, 'is always more or less "what one cannot approach without dying" ' (2001, 21) , and this was how we now treated life. the arbitrary 2 m distancing was treated as a meeting point between the safe, profane and the sacred world of contagion, impurity and death: to get close to another was not simply a risk, it was a passage between orders of being.hence, remobilization was more difficult and anxious than demobilization. in the uk, the relaxation of restrictions was confusing and the suggestion that some could return to work emphasized the reality of speed classes, with middle classes more able to remain at home, teleworking, whilst the working classes had to take their chances with public transport and work (jones 2020) . despite the most effective model of remobilization being the labour-intensive process of mass testing, contact tracing and isolation, many nations preferred technological solutionism, embracing the continuous controls of digital surveillance, with electronic tagging replacing house arrest. china pioneered this approach, as a logical extension of their massive, near-ubiquitous surveillance system deployed against the uighurs in xinjiang (wall street journal 2017; byler 2019) and the 'social credit' systems and facial-recognition cameras used against their domestic populations (mistreanu 2018; dudley 2020) . here, cctv facial recognition, drones, qr codes, location tracking by telecoms and technology companies and voluntary or mandatory apps formed a network of sensors enmeshing individuals in exactly that city-wide 'control-mechanism' guattari foresaw. the same systems were widely adopted beyond china, highlighting an underlying trend within global political systems: the movement of all governments towards informational totalitarianism.we are still too bewitched by twentieth-century totalitarianism-distracted by the spectacle, uniforms, speeches and rallies, the symbolism, and the public terror. nazi germany, stalinist ussr, maoist china were all hypervisible, aesthetically organized states aiming to abolish the separation of public and private life, to lay everything open to its eye-especially by force-and fulfil mussolini's dreams of 'totalitario': 'all within the state, nothing outside the state, none against the state'. now, at a historical distance from its political theatrics, the essence of totalitarianism is finally revealed: it is about the right of the state to penetrate-to oversee-the totality of life within it. this is, clearly, an informational project. stripped of its politico-aesthetics and aided by the rise of digital technology, it reverses now from spectacle to secrecy and from public to private, to silently access, monitor and evaluate every aspect of personal interiority and singularity.hence, totalitarianism quietly fulfils itself today as an ideology of transparency: of absolute recording, access and exposure. it is freed here not only from the burden of terror, the manpower of policing and the cost of costumery, but, most importantly, from ties to any political system or ideology, existing simply as the technocratic aim and result of digital systems. today, therefore, even western liberal democracies are informationally totalitarian, in their mass surveillance, their treatment of personal data and their systems of monitoring and control, in their desire-no different to that of authoritarian regimes-to access everything and their absolute conviction that they have the right to do so. once again, this is for our benefit-what was once for our 'security' is now for 'public health'-but it nevertheless remains an internal attack on the data integrity of the state's own citizens. the us and uk governments had joked about this, archly naming two of their spy programmes, 'bullrun' and 'edgehill', after civil war battles (ball et al. 2013) . that data civil war against private data has continued without a pause since snowden's revelations, and it is likely that the advances allowed by the covid-19 crisis will never be rolled back.the heart of the post-covid-19 'new normal', therefore, will not be the physical regimes of cleanliness and distancing but the new data regime. we thought this had already been accomplished in the existing system of 'surveillance capitalism' (zuboff 2019) , but covid-19 will supercharge this process, representing the moment when our public and private spaces and lives imploded, opening up previously limited areas for total data colonization. as naomi klein argues, 'the future that is being rushed into being as the bodies still pile up treats our past weeks of physical isolation not as a painful necessity to save lives, but as a living laboratory for a permanent-and highly profitable-no-touch future'. it is a future 'in which our homes are never again exclusively personal spaces, but are also, via high-speed digital connectivity, our schools, our doctor's offices, our gyms, and, if determined by the state, our jails' (klein 2020) . it is the future of the bunkerized terminal citizen, with an increasing reliance on internet and phone infrastructures and remotely delivered services and systems, delivering ever-greater quantities of personal data to private companies and states.the work of remobilization will be one of the great state projects of our lifetime. the movement of bodies out of homes, of labour into the work place, of the market back to life and the recirculation of capital will require great effort. the cardiac-arrest of capitalism-saved in the uk only through the effective nationalization of the economy and a simulacral-communist state responsibility for the economic and physical welfare of the population-will require a massive defibrillation of the economy to shock it back to life, but there are doubts as to how fast this can be achieved. the imf has warned that the world faces the worst recession since the great depression (bbc 2020j), or, for the uk, for '300 years' (morris 2020) , whilst the who warns that covid-19 'may never go away' (bbc 2020k) . with this economic 'slowdown', the covid-19 civil wars will continue to be fought within each nation for years to come.the remobilization of the world order will also be difficult. on 7 may, trump commented that impact of the coronavirus on the usa was 'worse than pearl harbor … worse than the world trade center' (bbc 2020l) . judged by casualties, this is certainly true (the 73,573 coronavirus deaths by 7 may far eclipsed the 2403 deaths at pearl harbor or 2977 killed in 9/11), but the meaning of those events really lay in their political significance and impact on the world order. if we consider the global scale of this pandemic, the global lockdown of populations, the global death toll, the halt to economic and international relations and the differential and ongoing impact of the virus, we can see that covid-19 may prove an event of equally, or potentially, greater historical significance. there was pre-covid-19, and there was the time after its first great wave.the hyperconnected world of global travel and contact will take a long time to recover and as with domestic life, much that can be transferred online will be. international conflict will not end but one possibility is nations will be more inward looking and less interested in others. on 12 may, it was revealed, for example, that the uk's national security council had not met since january, with the government focused on covid-19 (sabbagh 2020) . military action may be more difficult with the expected slashing of military budgets and a possible mindset that might resent spending on international action or aid when the domestic economy remains to be fixed (warrell 2020) . the emphasis may shift, therefore, to strengthening the national and civilian infrastructure in anticipation of future human, or human-created threats. military action is also physically difficult right now, with the need for social distancing impacting on military bases, ships and submarines, on training and exercises, and parades and future operations.but that is why we can expect an acceleration of one particular trend in warfare. since the 1991 gulf war, with the allied air supremacy that allowed them to bomb with utter impunity, through the zero-casualty aerial 1999 nato kosovo war, to the development of drones, the usa has led the way in socially-distanced warfare. we can expect to see the post-covid-19 explosion, therefore, of drones, surrogate robotics and autonomous systems, all controlled from remote shipping containers or box-room bunkers. this will be a new phase of clean war, defined now not by the absence of civilian casualties but by the hand sanitizer available for the next shift of pilots and the plastic screen between them and the camera and weapons operators. here, the act of washing one's hands before taking over the controls will take on a macabre moral dimension.there are other reasons why conflict may have an expanded future. in a world where international powers are more reluctant to intervene, regional powers will have far more leeway to pursue their aims. china's ongoing actions in the south china sea (nicol 2020 ) and imposition of new security laws in hong kong (kuo and davidson 2020) are one example of this, but others have seen the opportunity. data analytics company babel street recorded an apparent increase in military activity in may by iran. despite being badly hit by covid-19, iran's support for offensive cyberoperations and for proxy forces in yemen and iraq rose in the previous 2 weeks (tucker 2020a) .international conflict has continued online during the pandemic. already poor us-chinese relations have worsened, as trump tries to direct domestic anger towards china and as china tries to divert international attention from the virus's origins and their poor handling of medical reports. this has all the making of a new, viral, respiratory cold war. as the us cybersecurity and infrastructure security agency noted, 'china and other authoritarian governments have promoted false claims about the origins of the virus in an attempt to shift blame overseas and divide free societies against themselves', using tactics such as 'censoring news, injecting false narratives onto social media platforms and promoting slick government-produced videos' (baksh 2020 (timsit 2020) . this was not traditional state propaganda. designed as viral, sharable social media content, this was troll-warfare. instead of a hot war, china had launched a burn war against the usa. it did not matter that its own claims were false, here you win with the lulz.beyond china, russia and iran were also using the opportunity to extend their online disinformation campaigns against the west (beaumont et al. 2020; tucker 2020b) . even cyberwar was changing, with espionage now targeting not military, political or economic secrets, but research into the coronavirus and vaccines, as reports emerged of china, russia and iran hacking western laboratories (cole 2020a, b; davidson 2020) . overall, we can expect computer network exploitation (cne), disinformation, propaganda and trolling to continue with, perhaps, greater impact.the post-covid-19 era has the potential for considerable national economic, political and social instability, including backlashes against governments and their responses, the scapegoating of particular groups, unrest at the economic impact so soon after the 2008 crash and its enforced 'austerity', and a more nationalist, isolationist, anti-globalitarian mood. the uk lockdown, for example, prompted a surge in hate crimes against asian communities (grierson 2020) , and continuing anger, hostility and fear seem likely to be one inheritance of this crisis. the entire post-covid-19 world will be more unpredictable and more volatile. the virus did not affect each nation the same, and within each country, the responses of governments and populations will be different. globally, an already fragile world order-still recovering from the 2008 crash, suffering the after-effects of the 'war on terror', facing the reassertion of russian power and the rise of china and india, hit by the retreat of liberal democracy, the success of populist strongmen leaders and ethnonationalist movements, and struggling with long-term civil wars, refugees and immigration flows, climate change and a us president pursuing an unpredictable, random and oftendangerous foreign policy-will only become more unstable. if the seismic political shift of the fall of communism in 1991 led many to speculate about a possible 'new world order', the seismic political shift of covid-19 brings the possibility of an epoch-defining new world disorder.the war of the world h. g. wells' 1897 novel the war of the worlds told the story of the martian invasion of earth and the alien's eventual defeat, not by human hands, but 'by the putrefactive and disease bacteria against which their systems were unprepared' (wells 2019) . the book was an attack on hubris, using 'invasion literature' to question both evolutionary theory and imperialism and the idea that humanity in general, and victorian, colonial britain in particular, were superior to all others: for how superior were we if we had to be saved by 'the humblest things that god, in his wisdom, has put upon this earth'? actually, bacteria were not the smallest things-it would take years before the much smaller viruses were discovered-but wells was correct about our hubris. although in his 'scientific romance' these bacteria were our 'microscopic allies', we failed, in the subsequent years, to take seriously the threat of these microbial forces. covid-19 was a reminder of the power of the world and our place within it. with this anthropogenic pandemic, the war of the worlds gave way to its inevitable sequel: the war of the world.why the battle against covid-19 and the concept of anthropocenic war are important is because they help us recognize that, from now on, human conflict will be increasingly accompanied by, exacerbated or even sparked by anthropogenic environmental factors. environmental change or phenomena will increasingly impact upon human societies, destabilizing them, creating poverty and increasing political violence and competition. hence, the anthropocene has definitively announced itself as the final global superpower, replacing the limited realms of human state power with its own, singular, environmental force. the aftershocks of covid-19 will be serious, as it spreads through the global south, as it pits nations into competition, as it introduces new pressures into areas already riven by natural disasters, civil war, or political extremism, as it impacts domestically on each nation's economy, politics and world view and as it destabilizes the international order.given the likelihood of more pandemics to come and the growing impact of anthropogenic environmental problems, the first anthropocenic war will not be the last. the war of the world will continue.coronavirus disease 2019 (covid-19) continues to spread globally, outpacing the capacity and resources of health systems worldwide a therapeutic vaccine is not yet on the rise, and preventive measures are the current approach to restraint the transmission of cases as the virus is highly contagious via respiratory route (droplets from infected persons, widely spread by coughing or sneezing) and via contact with contaminated surfaces, community transmission and spread can be decreased through the practice of regular and diligent hand hygiene frequent hand washing implies a prolonged exposure to water and other chemical or physical agents and may induce several pathophysiologic changes, such as epidermal barrier disruption, impairment of keratinocytes, the subsequent release of proinflammatory cytokines, activation of the skin immune system, and delayed-type hypersensitivity reactions adverse dermatologic effects, such as excessive skin dryness or even contact dermatitis (particularly the irritant subtype and, to a lesser extent, the allergic subtype), can occur, especially in individuals with a history of atopic dermatitis these skin conditions are perfectly manageable, and applying a moisturizer immediately after washing hands or after using a portable hand sanitizer is the cornerstone in preventing the development of eczematous changes in the hands in the current global context, the potential occurrence of these dermatological adverse events should in no way cause people to deviate from strict hand hygiene rulesfrequent hand washing for covid-19 prevention can cause hand dermatitis: management tipscovid-19 stands for "coronavirus disease 2019," and it refers to an outbreak of acute respiratory infection caused by a novel coronavirus. the specific coronavirus strain was initially referred to as 2019-ncov (2019 novel coronavirus) and finally designated as sars-cov-2 (severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2). it was first identified in late 2019 in the city of wuhan, hubei province of china, and it rapidly spread throughout other eastern countries (e.g. south korea, japan, iran) as well as europe and the united states [1] . on march 2020, the who (world health organization) declared the covid-19 outbreak a global pandemic and all countries were urged to undertake effective measures for reducing transmission [2] .vaccines active against covid-19 are not available, and ongoing prospects in formulating and developing preventive or therapeutic vaccines against sars-cov-2 are limited [3] . in this context, public health actions to prevent transmission are crucial in slowing the spread of the pandemic. one of the essential recommendations that the who has issued for the populous is to wash their hands frequently and correctly. in the process, intensified hand washing may generate various changes in skin texture and even hand dermatitis.this article aims to review the potential dermatological adverse effects that may arise due to frequent hand washing, as well as practical tips for preventing these uncomfortable skin reactions. all clinical images included in the review section of the article were taken in the department of oncologic dermatology of emergency university hospital "elias" in bucharest, using a digital camera (nikon d3300; nikon corporation, tokyo, japan).frequent hygienization of hands may generate various changes in skin texture, ranging from the development of cutaneous xerosis (dryness of the skin) up to irritant contact dermatitis (icd) or, rarely, even allergic contact dermatitis (acd). overall, these skin disorders are induced by various physical, chemical, and immunological mechanisms. when measures of diligent hand hygiene are implemented, these mechanisms may be activated mainly by the following circumstances.1. prolonged skin exposure to water and humid environment: it creates extensive swelling of stratum corneum (the skin's outermost layer) and disruption in the ultrastructure of intercellular lipids, and heightens the skin's permeability and sensitivity to physical or chemical irritants [4] . in addition, prolonged wearing of protective gloves can generate excessive sweating and increased humidity, thus further increasing the inflammatory response elicited towards irritants.2. repeated use of soaps, surfactants, detergents, or solvents: these substances used for domestic cleaning are weak irritants and are usually very well tolerated. nevertheless, repeated exposure to these substances can lead to chronic cumulative icd (figure 1) , mainly due to their capacity to remove skin surface lipids, damage skin proteins, denature epidermal keratin, and even induce alteration of the cell membrane of keratinocytes [5] . furthermore, patients with a personal or family history of atopic dermatitis have a chronically dysfunctional cutaneous barrier that increases their sensitivity to skin irritants ( figure 2 ) [6] . rarely, some individuals may even develop acd (figure 3) , a t-cell-mediated, delayed-type hypersensitivity reaction, to an ingredient in a hand hygiene-related product, such as soaps or detergents [7] . the patient initiated preventive hand washing measures two months ago, without hydrating the hands afterward and developed severe skin dryness, fissuring (white arrow), and scaling. also the irritant-induced changes have progressed to hyperkeratosis and acanthosis (black arrows), highlighting the cumulative exposure.confluent, erythematous, scaly itchy patches, with small vesicles (highlighted in the white circles), on the hands of a patient with allergic reaction induced by chemicals in detergents and soaps.3. repeated use of alcohol-based hand sanitizer: the who states that using hand rubs that contain at least 60% alcohol is a reasonable alternative if water and soap are not available, and as long as the hands are not visibly dirty [8] . frequent use of these products can also result in skin dryness and irritation. on the other hand, allergy against alcohol itself is unknown and acd attributable to other compounds added to alcoholic hand gels is extremely rare. this was illustrated by the experience of a large hospital in switzerland where health workers routinely used a commercial alcohol-based hand sanitizer for 10 years, without reporting any allergic reactions to the product [9] .in these times, it is very important to adapt our hand washing habits to ensure efficient protection against the spread of covid-19 while lowering the risk of skin adverse reactions. in this respect, we find very useful the adoption of the following protective measures.1. as the who recommends, hands should be washed thoroughly (including fingernails, interdigital web spaces, wrists) for at least 20 seconds, using lukewarm water and soap, particularly after being in public areas, before meals, after coughing or sneezing, after using the toilet, and whenever the hands are dirty.2. after washing, we advise rinsing the hands by using gentle maneuvers, without causing a physical irritation to the skin.3. applying moisturizing skin care products after hand cleansing is the essential step in keeping the skin hydrated and preventing further abnormal skin reactions. these hydrating products should be liberally applied, multiple times per day, particularly immediately after hand washing.4. there are several subtypes of moisturizers but to efficiently improve the quality of the skin barrier it is largely indicated to combine humectants with occlusive emollients. humectants (e.g., topical urea, propylene glycol) are capable of attracting water to the stratum corneum from the environment and from the deeper layers of the skin. occlusive emollients (e.g., petrolatum-based products, lanolin, mineral and vegetable oils, waxes) prevent water loss and alleviate irritation. a combination of the two is useful for attracting and sealing water at the level of the corneum layer and soothing the skin.5. thick greasy creams and ointments (e.g., petroleum jelly) provide higher protection against xerosis than lotions. to reduce the risk of contact sensitization, it is highly recommended to use fragrance-free and hypoallergenic products.6. when soap and water are not available, the cdc advises that the use of alcohol-based hand sanitizers (that contain at least 60% alcohol), is an effective alternative in destroying the virus. since these can be irritating, it is important to hydrate the skin immediately after. applying a moisturizing cream afterward does not interfere in any way with the properties and efficiency of this type of sanitizers.7. for individuals working with protective gloves, it is highly recommended to wash hands and apply moisturizer whenever gloves are taken off. also, to lower the humidity, they should be changed systematically and applied only on dry hands.8. for people with highly sensitive skin, which easily develop disturbing forms of dermatitis, short courses of topical corticosteroids may be used to reduce the signs and symptoms of inflammation.tainted hand sanitizer leads to outbreak of methanol toxicity during sars-cov-2 pandemicto the editor, we feel it is timely to notify the membership of an emerging public health crisis which parallels the ongoing fight against the sars-cov-2 virus. the coronavirus pandemic has resulted in a severe supply-demand mismatch of many products, particularly personal protective equipment and sanitization products. consumers and healthcare entities alike are turning to alternative sources including the online marketplace to purchase products for workplace and personal safety. instances of misrepresented materials purchased by governments and healthcare systems have become frequent in the news. the most recent example in the american southwest is an outbreak of methanol poisonings from tainted hand sanitizer products.hand sanitizers typically containing high concentrations of ethanol or isopropanol have become increasingly recognized as a substance of abuse due to low cost and availability relative to conventional drinking alcohols. 1 hand sanitizer products have recently been indicated in methanol poisonings causing blindness in two and death in seven new mexicans. although methanol outbreaks are historically well-established, associations to hand sanitizer consumption have been poorly reported in the peer-reviewed literature. outbreaks tend to occur when access to alcohol is limited as seen in the prohibition-era and in resource-poor populations turning to alternative alcohol sources. 2 the food and drug administration issued an advisory on 6/19/2020 to notify the public about the dangers of nine formulations of hand sanitizers marketed by a manufacturer in mexico. these products were found to contain up to 81% methanol, which was not listed as an ingredient. 3 at the time of letter submission, our cases appear to align with hand sanitizer consumption, but not to products specifically identified thus far by the food and drug administration. 4 as such, non-commercial sources of hand sanitizer and drinking alcohol are also being considered.emergency physicians must have a heightened awareness for methanol toxicity in at-risk populations given the possibility of this outbreak to spread geographically in this time of the online marketplace and heightened product demand. methanol toxicity has been observed in doses as small as 15 ml and may lead to blindness and death if not promptly treated. since methanol is less lipophilic than ethanol, toxicity can present without the typical intoxicating features of ethanol. an anion gap metabolic acidosis is commonly seen in large ingestions, but like serum osmolar gap, does not rule out toxic alcohol poisoning. 5 as soon as the diagnosis is suspected, treatment with fomepizole in tandem with poison center consultation is imperative. ethanol is second-line for treatment when fomepizole is unavailable and has been shown to improve prehospital outcomes with hemodialysis often necessary for toxin elimination. 2, 5 beth ann hackett, dnp, aprn-bc, crn providing high quality patient care requires that procedures and tests be medically appropriate, are executed safely and meet the patients' goals for care. patients must be fully involved in the decision-making process prior to any procedure being performed. [1] prior to a patient undergoing any procedure informed consent must be obtained from the patient. the process of informed consent should include (1) describing the proposed intervention, (2) emphasizing the patient's role in decision-making, (3) discussing alternatives to the proposed intervention, (4) discussing the risks of the proposed intervention and (5) eliciting the patient's preference (usually by signature). [2] during this process, the patient must be educated on the risks, benefits, and alternatives of any given procedure or intervention and understand the information put forth. it is important that the patient understand the consequences of not undergoing the procedure to include no relief of pain and potential worsening of their disease. obtaining informed consent is both an ethical and legal obligation of any medical practitioners in the united states and originates from the patient's right to direct what happens to his/her body. [2] in general, patients that are more susceptible to the covid-19 (coronavirus) according to the american society of regional anesthesia and pain medicine (asra) and european society of regional anesthesia and pain therapy (esra) include:• chronic pain patients • elderly patients and those with multiple comorbidities • patients that use chronic opioid therapy which may cause immune suppression • patients injected with steroids during interventional pain procedures [3] therefore, there is an understandable risk for patients undergoing procedures that involve the injection of steroids. typically steroid injections are used for a diagnosis of osteoarthritis, gout, bursitis, tendinitis, joint pain, plantar fasciitis, sciatica, or chronic low back pain. prednisone/corticosteroid injections can offer fast-acting relief of inflamed muscles, joints, tendons, and bursa, which leads to a decrease in pain. in radiology, patients with chronic pain frequently undergo procedures which include the injection of prednisone/corticosteroids (such as methylprednisolone or triamcinolone). prednisone/corticosteroids are anti-inflammatory agents that slow down the accumulation of cells responsible for producing inflammation. steroids are frequently injected during pain procedures with the intention of easing pain, increasing a patient's mobility and quality of life. procedures that require the injection of prednisone/corticosteroids which are performed in radiology, orthopedic practices, pain management as well as other practices, may include joint injections of the shoulder, knee, hip, elbow, epidural steroid injection of the cervical or lumbar spine.in the present covid environment, patients must be informed of the potential side effects of the injection of prednisone/corticosteroids prior to undergoing a procedure. prednisone/corticosteroids have been shown to cause a variable degree of adrenal suppression for at least a few weeks as well as an altered immune response making them more susceptible to infection. there is a possible reduction in the immune response for up to a few weeks following the procedure. each case is unique, and no management will cover all possibilities. caution should be used when assessing patients for prednisone/corticosteroids injections balancing the severity of their underlying disease/comorbidities, the potential benefit and the risks including immunocompromise, and the additional risk should the patient have or become infected in the period after injection when there is likely to be an ongoing effect on the immunological system. patients should be fully aware of the potential increased risk, the lack of clear evidence and be engaged in decision making. likewise, practitioners should consider the risk benefits balance of such injections and under which circumstances they will continue to provide the injections in the current environment.there is a sequence of steps that must be followed to provide high quality care for these patients. first and foremost, any patient considered a candidate to undergo a procedure must be screened for any signs and symptoms that may indicate the presence of covid-19 or having had a recent close personal contact with a patient with suspected or confirmed covid-19. we must inform our patients of the potential risks of undergoing the procedure. patients must be informed of the additional risks in the current environment due to the immunosuppression caused by the injection of steroids and the increased risk for infection. after screening for covid-19 the next most important step is assisting the patient in making an informed consent to undergo the procedure by providing this information.at orthopedic associates of middletown, we developed a separate consent form and spend additional time preceding the procedures to review information with patients regarding the immunosuppressant effect of undergoing of steroid/corticosteroids injections. included is a discussion of the risk of contracting the covid-19 versus the benefit of undergoing the steroid injection, a decrease in their pain level. additionally, there is a discussion concerning how they can be proactive in preventing contracting the virus post procedure by following the centers for disease control and prevention (cdc) guidelines put forth to prevent this which include:• avoiding close contact with people who are sick.• sneezing and coughing into the fold of your elbow • avoiding touching your eyes, nose, and mouth with unwashed hands.• avoid touching people who may be ill • disinfect/sanitize surfaces regularly • wash your hands often with soap and water for at least 20 seconds. use an alcohol-based hand sanitizer that contains at least 60% alcohol if soap and water are not available. we as an organization feel strongly that it is our responsibility as health care professionals to inform our patients of all aspects of the care we provide to include the risk, and avoidance of developing the coronavirus in the present environment. we aim to provide informative quality care to our patients and assist them in making an informed decision to undergo these procedures. please see attached our consent form.the primary role of an infection control program is to reduce the incidence of hospital-acquired infections (hais) by patients, staff, and visitors to a small animal hospital. infection control programs in veterinary hospitals have largely evolved from evidence and protocols from the human health care setting, together with our understanding of transmission pathways for veterinary pathogens. in recent years, several factors have led to an increased rate of adoption of infection control programs by veterinary hospitals, such as an increased prevalence of multidrug-resistant bacterial infections among small animal patients, the appearance of more studies that support the common occurrence of transmission of hospital-associated and zoonotic pathogens in the veterinary setting, the requirement for an infection control program in veterinary teaching hospitals for accreditation purposes, and increased scrutiny of hospital-associated and zoonotic infections to protect hospitals against litigation.every small animal hospital should have an infection control program. at a minimum, this should consist of an infectious disease control officer, a written infection control protocol, regular training of staff, and documents that record all training and surveillance efforts. in large hospitals, formation of an infectious disease control committee may be required. in this situation, the infectious disease control committee could consist of an internist or criticalist with an interest or training in infectious diseases, a veterinary clinical microbiologist, a nursing supervisor, a safety officer, the hospital administrator, and the hospital director. there should be adequate personnel and communication so that proper coverage is maintained when one individual is absent or unavailable. all personnel who work in a veterinary hospital, as well as visitors, should be familiar with the infectious disease control personnel as well as procedures and policies listed in the infection control protocol. documentation of training should be maintained for all hospital personnel.the objective of a hospital infection control protocol is to provide a standard procedure for the control of infectious diseases in the hospital, in order to minimize animal-to-animal, animal-to-human, and human-to-animal transmission of pathogens. adherence to the infection control protocol can also reduce transmission of infectious agents between personnel through increased hand washing and reduction of fomite contamination. the infection control protocol is a legal document and should be regularly updated by a designated hospital infection control officer or committee. each hospital should develop a protocol that is tailored to address specific practice requirements and the hospital design, purpose, and equipment used. additional special precautions may need to be described for hospitals that see avian and exotic pet animal species, and in geographic locations where serious zoonotic diseases such as rabies and plague are endemic (see chapters 13 and 55chapter 13chapter 55).the infection control protocol details practices that optimize hygiene such as hand washing, the use of protective clothing, cleaning and disinfection, and appropriate disposal of infectious agents. specific infectious disease control procedures to be followed in different areas of the hospital (radiology, surgery, the intensive care unit, isolation, wards) can be included, as well as policies on antimicrobial use. the protocol can also be used to educate staff about routes of transmission, the potential for zoonotic transmission, specific transmission precautions for infectious diseases that are seen within the practice, and immunization requirements, such as those for rabies (see chapter 13).frequent and proper hand and wrist washing to remove transient flora on the hands has been proven as the most important component for prevention of the spread of infectious diseases in human hospitals.1 signs that outline proper hand-washing technique, including the use of paper towels to turn off the faucet, posted adjacent to basins around the hospital can improve compliance among staff. online videos that demonstrate proper hand-washing technique are available for educational purposes.2 guidelines for hand washing are shown in box 11-1 . antibacterial soap should be used, and all surfaces of the hands should be rubbed together, which should include the backs of the hands, between the fingers, and under the fingernails, for a total hand-washing time of at least 20 seconds. in order to prevent chapped skin, which can harbor bacteria, water used for hand washing should not be too hot, and hand lotion should be applied regularly. behaviors such as keeping fingernails short, avoidance of artificial and/or polished fingernails or hand jewelry, or wearing jewelry on a chain around the neck instead of on the hand can be encouraged. meticulous hand hygiene is particularly important for personnel who work frequently with immunocompromised animals, such as emergency and critical care personnel. the use of touch-free taps and paper towel dispensers can also reduce transmission of bacteria during hand washing.box 11-1guidelines for hand washing and the wearing of disposable glovessituations that require hand washing immediately before handling a patientimmediately after handling a patientimmediately before and after procedures that involve nonintact skinbefore and after gloves are worn for proceduresafter blood, body fluids, secretions, excretions, or contaminated items are touchedafter cages are cleanedbefore and after eating, smoking, or leaving the hospitalafter going to the restroom situations when disposable gloves should be worn contact with broken skin and bodily fluids (blood, urine, and feces)handling of disinfectantshandling of animals with suspected or known infectious diseaseshandling of all animals for immunocompromised people  alcohol-based hand sanitizers are a more convenient form of sanitization. these can be provided in multiple locations around a hospital, or travel-sized bottles can be carried in a coat pocket. at least one to two full pumps or a 3-cm diameter pool of the product should be dispensed onto one palm. all surfaces of the hands and wrists should be rubbed with the product until it has dried. use of soap and water, rather than hand sanitizer, is recommended when there is gross contamination with organic matter, or when exposure to alcohol-resistant pathogens such as clostridium spp. spores or parvovirus might have occurred. however, the availability of hand sanitizers improves compliance in busy hospital situations, is associated with lower rates of dermatitis than medicated soaps, and is recommended for routine hand sanitation in human health care settings by the centers for disease control and prevention (cdc) and the world health organization (who).3., 4. the use of gloves prevents contamination of the hands with microorganisms, prevents exposure to bloodborne pathogens, and reduces the risk of transmission of microorganisms from personnel to animals. however, gloves are not a substitute for proper hand hygiene. guidelines for wearing disposable gloves are shown in box 11-1. gloves should be promptly removed after use, before other surfaces are touched, and hands should then be washed. if a glove is torn or punctured, it should be removed and replaced as soon as possible.staff should be encouraged to wear dedicated hospital attire that is not worn elsewhere, so that hospital pathogens are not transported to and from locations outside the hospital. at the minimum, protective clothing such as clean laboratory coats or hospital scrubs and closed-toe shoes must be worn in nonsurgical areas. sleeves must be short enough or rolled up to expose the wrists, and laboratory coats changed whenever gross soiling occurs. in the absence of gross soiling, coats should be changed daily. if neckties are worn, they must be secured in place by an outer layer of clothing or a tie pin so that they cannot be contaminated as a result of contact with patients or environmental surfaces and act as fomites, as has been shown to occur in human hospital environments.5 long hair must be tied back so that it does not drape on animals and hospital surfaces. face shields and a clean gown should be worn during procedures that are likely to generate splashes or sprays of blood and body fluids. gowns must be made of impervious material and tied on securely and correctly. soiled gowns must be removed as soon as they are no longer required and face shields cleaned.dedicated operating room attire should be worn in surgical areas and should be changed after gross soilage and when leaving the operating room for the day. caps and masks should be worn and hands thoroughly washed on entry to the operating room. there is no evidence that dedicated footwear or foot protection should be worn for prevention of surgical site infections in human patients, and major human guidelines do not advocate that footwear be addressed.6 protective wear should be removed whenever staff members leave the operating room. traffic in and out of the operating room should be limited to the minimum required for patient care.all animals seen at a veterinary hospital should undergo a history and physical examination by a veterinarian to determine the likelihood and nature of any transmissible infections that might be present. ideally, client beds, blankets, collars, and leashes should not be brought into the hospital, where they could become contaminated. animals should always be placed in cages that have been cleaned and disinfected appropriately. disposable thermometer sleeves should always be used on thermometers. equipment should not be shared between animals unless it has been cleaned and disinfected. diets that contain raw meat and bones should not be fed or stored in the hospital, because they commonly contain and can potentially transmit foodborne gastrointestinal pathogens.7 the handling of sick animals should be minimized, unless required for patient care.because some infections can be transmitted through bites and scratches, staff should be educated on bite and scratch avoidance, such as the use of restraint devices, protective gloves, and warning signage on cages and medical records. should bites or scratches occur, they should be vigorously flushed and immediately washed with water and chlorhexidine or a dilute iodophor solution, and the bite reported to appropriate officials as necessary. deep wounds could be irrigated with pressure using a syringe without an attached needle. if a bite occurs, medical attention should be sought as soon as possible. all bites or scratches must be documented and consideration be given as to why the injury occurred, so that procedures or training to prevent future injuries can be implemented if necessary.consumption of food and drink should be limited to parts of a hospital where patient care and the handling of biologic specimens and medications do not occur. food and beverages should not be left out open on benches for long periods. microwaves used for animal care purposes should not be used to heat food intended for people.transmission-based precautions are instituted for selected patients that are confirmed to be or suspected to be infected or colonized with important transmissible pathogens. transmission-based precautions are used in combination with standard precautions. in the human hospital setting, three types of transmission-based precautions have been developed—airborne, droplet, and contact precautions (table 11-1 ).8 airborne precautions are used to prevent the transmission of diseases by droplet nuclei (particles <5 µm). transmission by droplet nuclei occurs with diseases such as measles, varicella, and pulmonary tuberculosis. the precautions for human patients involve isolation in a single-bed, negative-pressure room and the wearing of high-density respirator (n95) masks. these resemble surgical masks but filter 1-µm particles with an efficiency of at least 95% and must be properly fitted. airborne contact precautions are rarely necessary in hospitals that treat only dogs and cats, but could be considered when animals suspected to have pneumonic plague, tularemia, or mycobacterium tuberculosis infection. droplet precautions are used to prevent transmission by large-particle aerosols and do not require a negative-pressure room. droplet precautions apply to dogs and cats with transmissible respiratory disease. contact precautions are indicated for animals with infections that can be transmitted by direct contact with the patient or through fomite contact.if it is known in advance that an animal with a suspected or known transmissible disease is to be seen at the hospital, arrangements should be made to have the pet owner take the animal from the parking area directly to an examination room, so that the animal does not contaminate the waiting area. after the animal has been examined, appropriate signage should be placed on the door of the examination room to prevent use until it has been properly cleaned and disinfected.if hospitalization is required, animals with known or suspected transmissible disease must be admitted either to an isolation ward or to regular hospital cages with handling precautions, based on the pathogen suspected. immediately after hospitalization, the name of the suspected or known pathogen should be posted on the cage or run, together with a handling precautions notice. animals that require contact precautions should be placed in cages away from other animals in the ward and should not be moved from one cage to another, unless there is a medical need. animals with transmissible respiratory disease should be placed in isolation and separated both horizontally and vertically from other patients by at least 4 feet. gloves and a gown should be put on before the patient is handled, and then removed and disposed of immediately afterward. hands should be washed after the gloves are removed. additional items of personal protective equipment (masks, gowns, gloves, booties) may be required in some circumstances. soiled linen and equipment should be handled, transported, and processed in a manner that prevents skin and mucous membrane exposures and contamination of clothing and that avoids transfer of microorganisms to other patients and environments. all equipment that contacts the patient (scales, examination tables, stethoscope heads, floor) should be cleaned and disinfected immediately after use. medications and fluids from these patients should not be returned to the hospital pharmacy. when possible, personnel who handle these animals should not work with other immunosuppressed animals in the hospital, or they should work with the infectious disease cases last. if animals with contact precautions must be moved within the hospital, personnel should ensure that precautions are maintained throughout and that equipment and environmental surfaces that come into contact with the patient are properly disinfected and/or disposed of. the cleaning and bandaging of wounds infected with multidrug-resistant bacteria should be conducted in low-traffic areas that can be properly cleaned and disinfected.the owners of dogs and cats that have transmissible diseases should be provided with general information regarding the risk of disease transmission to in-contact animals and people that includes the mode of transmission, duration of organism shedding, and if there are special implications for young children or other immunosuppressed individuals. if dogs and cats are diagnosed with a zoonotic disease, the owners should be notified without delay. the owners should be told to see their physicians if they become unwell or, in some circumstances, immediately, and to advise a physician of the potential exposure.in contrast to human hospitals where patients can be more readily isolated in single-bed rooms or cubicles, isolation of veterinary patients can be more difficult because of the close proximity of one animal to another. floor contamination with secretions and excretions can also occur more readily. isolation rooms are available in many veterinary hospitals, but they may be poorly visible and/or accessible and may not provide access to an oxygen source or be amenable to intensive monitoring and care. for some animals (especially puppies and kittens) suspected to have a transmissible disease, housing in a general ward or icu area with as much physical and procedural separation as possible, and with strict infection control practices, may be acceptable (if perhaps not optimal). once a diagnosis is confirmed, the animal should be moved immediately to isolation whenever possible. patients chosen for strict isolation vary based on the specific situation and facilities available, but suggestions are provided in box 11-2 .box 11-2examples of infectious agents of dogs and cats for which strict isolation is indicated  salmonella spp. francisella tularensis  yersinia pestis  mycobacterium tuberculosis or mycobacterium bovis  microsporum canis rabies virusenteric viruses, such as parvovirusescanine transmissible respiratory disease pathogens (bordetella, canine distemper virus, influenza viruses, canine respiratory coronavirus, canine adenovirus, canine parainfluenza virus)feline upper respiratory tract disease pathogens (feline herpesvirus-1, feline calicivirus, influenza virus, chlamydia) only the individuals directly involved in the care of the patient should enter isolation. pet owners should not be allowed into the isolation ward. no equipment used outside isolation (pens, thermometers, stethoscopes, cell phones) should be brought into isolation. laboratory coats should be removed, and personnel must put on protective wear such as a disposable gown, gloves, and booties when entering the isolation ward. face protection may also be required, depending on the situation. a notice that outlines the required precautions should be posted on the door of isolation. protective clothing should be removed before leaving isolation, and hands should be washed. once a patient has been discharged, the room should be properly disinfected.sharps handling practices receive considerable attention in human medicine because of the risk of transmission of various bloodborne pathogens. although the risks are less in veterinary medicine, significant injury or illness can follow sharps injuries, such as transmission of infectious agents from the patient, allergic or inflammatory reactions from exposure to medication, and inoculation of opportunistic pathogens from the injured person’s own skin microflora. care should be taken to prevent injuries when needles, scalpels, and other sharp instruments are used, cleaned, or disposed of. used needles should never be recapped, and they should not be removed from the barrel of a disposable syringe. personnel should be instructed not to walk with uncapped needles and not to hold syringe or needle caps in the mouth. used needles should not be carried in a pocket. animals suspected of having an infectious disease that could be transmitted to humans through a needle-stick injury should be sedated before skin masses or peripheral lymph nodes are aspirated or venipuncture is performed. contaminated sharps (slides, scalpel blades, broken glass, needles with attached syringes) must immediately be placed into an approved puncture-resistant sharps disposal biohazard container. personnel who perform necropsy examinations should take care to use sharp knives in the proper manner and to avoid rushed situations. if a contaminated sharps injury occurs, medical attention should be sought immediately if necessary. sterilization refers to complete elimination of all microbes, including bacterial spores, and is accomplished in hospital settings using processes such as pressurized steam, dry heat, ethylene oxide gas, or liquid chemicals. disinfection is the process that eliminates many or all microbes from inanimate objects, but not bacterial spores. factors that influence the efficacy of disinfection include the type of microorganism present, their number, the amount and type of organic matter present, the presence of biofilms, and the porosity of the surface to be disinfected. some disinfectants kill spores at high concentrations and with prolonged exposure times. these are known as chemical sterilants. at low concentrations and short contact times, chemical sterilants inactivate all microbes except large numbers of bacterial spores and are known as high-level disinfectants. low-level disinfectants inactivate most vegetative bacteria, some fungi, and enveloped viruses, but not bacterial spores. intermediate-level disinfectants inactivate mycobacteria, vegetative bacteria, most viruses, and most fungi (table 11-2, table 11-3 ). antisepsis is the process that reduces the number of microbes from living tissue and skin. disinfectants are rarely used for skin antisepsis because they can injure tissues and skin. sanitation is the reduction in the number of microorganisms on a surface to a safe level. germicides are agents that inactivate microorganisms and include disinfectants, antiseptics, and sanitizers.  cleaning involves the removal of all visible organic and inorganic material from objects and surfaces through the use of manual or mechanical processes and detergent or enzymatic solutions.according to the spaulding method of classification, items to be sterilized or disinfected can be grouped into critical, semicritical, and noncritical items.9 critical items enter tissue or the vascular system, or devices through which blood flows. critical items require sterilization before they can be used. semicritical items are items that contact mucous membranes or nonintact skin and include endoscopes and balloon dilation catheters. these generally require high-level disinfection. noncritical items are items that contact intact skin. noncritical items generally require low-level or intermediate-level disinfection and contact times of 1 to 10 minutes.9 all personnel should be educated regarding the standard hospital germicides used for disinfection and antisepsis, how they should be diluted and applied, and the hazards associated with their use. gloves and eye protection should be worn when disinfectant solutions are handled or mixed. in large hospitals, posters on hospital walls can be used to guide selection of appropriate germicides for different situations. disinfectant solution should be readily accessible throughout the hospital. because mops can spread infection, cotton mops should be laundered daily, or mops with detachable microfiber heads should be used. microfiber heads absorb a large amount of water and are not returned to the mop bucket after use. they can be laundered and reused the following day.steam sterilization involves the use of saturated steam under pressure in an autoclave to achieve sterilization. this is the most effective form of sterilization, is nontoxic and inexpensive, and as a result is the most widely used as well. the use of steam under pressure allows lower temperatures to be used for shorter periods of time when compared with dry heat sterilization (table 11-4 ). the most common temperatures used for steam sterilization are 121°c (250°f) and 132°c (270°f). cycle times vary depending on the autoclave used and whether items are wrapped or unwrapped, but are generally less than 30 minutes (see table 11-4). there are two basic types of autoclaves: gravity displacement autoclaves, and high-speed prevacuum sterilizers. gravity displacement autoclaves admit steam at the top or sides of the autoclave, which displaces air through a drain vent at the bottom of the chamber (figure 11-1 ). high-speed prevacuum sterilizers rapidly pump air out of the sterilizer before steam is admitted. this leads to rapid penetration of steam into all surfaces. as a result, cycle times can be reduced to less than 15 minutes. drying times are also reduced with prevacuum sterilizers.sterilizers should be located away from potential sources of contamination, such as sinks, trash disposal, or high-traffic areas. before steam sterilization is performed, instruments should be cleaned thoroughly to remove organic and inorganic material, and then dried. all jointed items should be opened or unlocked, and items should not be crowded in the autoclave, so that steam can circulate freely. at least 3 inches should be left between the autoclave wall and items to be sterilized. the manufacturer’s instructions for autoclave operation should be followed.the efficacy of autoclaving must be tested for every autoclaved item, with additional quality control performed on a periodic basis. autoclave indicator tape is routinely used; although this only indicates conditions on the outside of the package. steam indicator strips should be included in each surgical pack and evaluated by the person opening the pack. biological indicators provide a more definitive assessment of autoclave efficacy and should be used periodically (e.g., weekly) and the results documented. these consist of a standardized population of bacterial spores, usually on a filter paper strip or contained within a vial. the strip is then sent to the microbiology laboratory for culture, or cultured in-house, to ensure that the spores have been completely inactivated by the sterilization process. any indicator failure should result in immediate inspection of the autoclave. sterilization indicators should never be used as a substitute for proper autoclave operation and careful preparation, packing, and loading of equipment to be sterilized.after steam sterilization, instruments should be allowed to dry before they are removed, which typically takes an additional 30 minutes. items should then be stored in a location and manner that prevents further contamination.flash sterilization refers to the rapid sterilization of unwrapped instruments and is usually performed as an emergency procedure in an operating room setting when time is insufficient to perform the preferred sterilization of wrapped items. in general it is performed for 3 minutes at 270°f and 27 to 28 lb/in2. each instrument must be carefully protected to ensure it does not become recontaminated during transport back to the operating room, usually in a “flash pan.” flash sterilization has occasionally been associated with intraoperative infections and should not be used for routine disinfection purposes. gas sterilization is used for sterilization of heat- and moisture-sensitive instruments but can have significant toxicity. gases that can be used for sterilization include formaldehyde, ethylene oxide (eto), hydrogen peroxide vapor, and ozone gases. the most commonly used gas in veterinary medicine, eto, has strong alkylating properties and causes protein coagulation, enzyme inactivation, and damage to nucleic acid. when compared with heat sterilization, eto sterilization takes longer (24 hours or more including the time required to allow eto to diffuse out of packages at the end of sterilization) and is more expensive. in addition, it only achieves surface sterilization and requires sophisticated equipment and trained staff. the gas is extremely flammable, irritates the eyes and mucous membranes, is mutagenic and carcinogenic, and has a misleadingly pleasant smell.gamma irradiation uses a cobalt-60 radiation source to destroy microorganisms through generation of high-energy photons. health care product manufacturers use gamma irradiation to sterilize disposable medical supplies, such as catheters, gloves, syringes, and pharmaceuticals.chemical sterilants are used when heat or eto gas sterilization is not available or would otherwise damage instruments, such as endoscopes or laparoscopes. disinfectants that act as sterilants when they are used at high concentrations and for adequate contact periods include certain solutions that contain glutaraldehyde (e.g., >2.4% glutaraldehyde solutions, 0.95% glutaraldehyde with 1.64% phenol/phenate), 0.55% ortho-phthalaldehyde (opa), 7.5% hydrogen peroxide, or greater than or equal to 0.2% peracetic acid (see section on disinfectants following). chemical sterilants must be rinsed repeatedly with sterile water and dried once sterilization is complete. chemical sterilants must be used with the proper contact times and at the right concentration. solutions may lose efficacy, become diluted, or become contaminated with bacteria over time. they should be replaced frequently according to the manufacturer’s recommendations, and they should never be used in procedures that involve sterile body sites unless there is no other sterilizing option.glutaraldehyde is a saturated dialdehyde. glutaraldehyde solutions are relatively inexpensive, are noncorrosive, and can be used to disinfect rubber, plastics, and endoscopic equipment. aqueous solutions require activation by alkalinization to a ph of 7.5 to 8.5 for sporicidal activity to occur. when alkalinized glutaraldehyde is used at a concentration of 2.4% for adequate periods of time, either chemical sterilization or high-level disinfection occurs, depending on the contact time (e.g., cidex). contact times of at least 20 minutes (at or above 20°c) are effective for high-level disinfection. sterilization requires a 10-hour contact time and higher concentrations of glutaraldehyde (e.g., cidex plus, which contains 3.4% glutaraldehyde), or formulations that combine glutaraldehyde with another disinfectant.once activated, 2.4% glutaraldehyde solution retains activity for 14 days, provided inadvertent dilution does not occur. the solution is active in the presence of 2% organic matter. inadvertent dilution can occur when endoscopes that contain fluid within their channels are immersed in the solution. test strips are available from the manufacturer to monitor the activity of the solution, but should not be used to extend the solution’s expiration date. they indicate inactivity when the concentration drops below 1.5%, the minimum concentration required for activity. glutaraldehyde irritates mucous membranes of the respiratory and gastrointestinal tracts, and so endoscopes must be rinsed properly after disinfection. it can also cause allergic contact dermatitis, but it is not mutagenic or carcinogenic. the wearing of nitrile rubber or butyl rubber gloves is recommended. because of its relative expense and toxicity, it is not used to disinfect noncritical surfaces.opa (e.g., cidex opa) is favored over glutaraldehyde for high-level disinfection in the united states, because it does not require activation, is stable over a wide ph range, does not cause irritation of mucous membranes, and it has a barely perceptible odor. its activity is greater than that of glutaraldehyde, and high-level disinfection is achieved with a contact time of 12 minutes at or above 20°c.10., 11. the primary disadvantage of opa is that it stains tissues and mucous membranes gray. protective equipment must be worn when handling the solution, and it must be rinsed thoroughly from items after treatment. irritation can occur with eye contact. opa is also more expensive than glutaraldehyde.12 solutions can be reused for a maximum of 14 days.hydrogen peroxide (h2o2) is a potent oxidizer. hydrogen peroxide solutions are widely available, are inexpensive, and can enhance removal of organic matter. when used at concentrations of 7.5% for contact periods of at least 6 hours, hydrogen peroxide is a chemical sterilant (e.g., sporox). high-level disinfection can be achieved with contact times of 12 to 30 minutes. unfortunately 7.5% hydrogen peroxide causes discoloration and functional changes within endoscopes and so is not suitable for endoscope reprocessing. although nonirritating to mucous membranes, serious ocular damage can occur with eye contact. accelerated hydrogen peroxide (ahp) is a patented hydrogen peroxide solution that contains surfactants, an acid, and hydrogen peroxide. use of a 4.5% ahp gel with contact times of 10 minutes can inactivate bacterial spores.13 even 0.5% solutions have some sporicidal activity and can inactivate non-enveloped viruses such as canine parvovirus.14., 15. ahp has gained popularity as a disinfectant among health care institutions because it is odorless, does not generate volatile gas, is nonirritating, and is noncorrosive at dilutions used in health care settings.peracetic acid belongs to the peroxygen family of compounds. when used at 50°c to 56°c in a specific peracetic acid reprocessing system (steris system 1, steris), 0.2% solutions achieve sterilization in very short time periods (30 to 45 minutes). peracetic acid is active in the presence of organic matter and may actually enhance its removal. nevertheless endoscopes must still be thoroughly cleaned before sterilization to avoid fixation of blood onto the instrument. after sterilization, the processor rinses the instrument thoroughly. peracetic acid is stable but can be corrosive and causes discoloration of endoscopes over time. it is more expensive than other chemical sterilants. peracetic acid concentrates can cause irritation to mucous membranes and are corrosive to the eye and skin, but 0.2% solutions are generally nonirritating.like peracetic acid, potassium peroxymonosulfate is an oxidizing agent, and 1% solutions are high-level disinfectants that are capable of inactivation of non-enveloped viruses when contact times of 10 minutes are used.16 thus it is suitable for inactivation of canine parvovirus and feline calicivirus. potassium peroxymonosulfate retains some activity in the presence of organic matter. solutions are prepared from powder and remain active for 7 days. the powder is corrosive and can cause serious skin and ocular burns, but the solution is nonirritating and less corrosive than bleach. the solution stains fabric and may damage surfaces, particularly metal, over time if rinsing is not performed.household bleach, which contains 5.25% to 6.15% sodium hypochlorite, is widely available, inexpensive, and active in the presence of hard water. when used at a 1:10 dilution for a 10-minute contact time, household bleach is sporicidal but is irritating and can be highly corrosive to metal surfaces. this 1:10 dilution is used to control outbreaks of clostridial diarrhea. for most hospital situations, 1:30 to 1:50 dilutions of household bleach provide more than 1000 ppm available chlorine and are effective for intermediate-level disinfection. noncritical surfaces can be disinfected with 1:500 dilutions of household bleach (>100 ppm available chlorine), with contact times of at least 1 minute. sodium hypochlorite is inactivated by organic matter, so cleaning is required before disinfection is performed. solutions lose 50% of their activity over a 1-month period unless they are stored in closed brown bottles. other disadvantages of bleach solutions are bleaching of colored fabric and the release of toxic chlorine gas when they are combined with other disinfectants such as quaternary ammonium compounds (quats).quats are often used as low-level disinfectants for noncritical surfaces in health care facilities. although they are generally fungicidal, bactericidal, and virucidal for enveloped viruses, some bacteria resist and even grow within quats, and such contamination has resulted in hais.17 contact times vary by product so manufacturer recommendations should be followed; however, 10-minute contact times are often used. advantages of quats include their low cost, high stability, and low toxicity. quats are inactivated by hard water, organic materials, soaps, and detergents.phenolics are one of the oldest known disinfectant classes. phenol derivatives that are available for hospital disinfection include ortho-phenylphenol and ortho-benzyl-para-chlorophenol (e.g., qualitrol, vetnex). effective contact times vary with the product. they are active against enveloped viruses and bacteria, but they are not sporicidal and have limited activity against fungi and non-enveloped viruses. phenol derivatives are active in the presence of organic matter and hard water, are stable, and are noncorrosive. they irritate skin and mucous membranes, and have the potential to be highly toxic if ingested by cats. because of these limitations and the availability of other effective disinfectants, phenolics are rarely used in veterinary hospitals.ethyl alcohol and isopropyl alcohol are bactericidal, virucidal (for enveloped viruses), and variably fungicidal. the optimum bactericidal concentration is 60% to 90% in water (volume/volume). they do not destroy bacterial spores or penetrate proteinaceous material and so are not recommended for high-level disinfection. they can be used to disinfect noncritical items such as hospital fomites and have very low toxicity, so they are often included in waterless hand sanitizer products together with emollients to prevent drying of the skin. they are flammable and dry quickly, so it can be difficult to achieve adequate contact times (≥1 minute). as a result, alcohol should not be used for routine environmental disinfection.iodine solutions are primarily used as skin antiseptics. formulations for disinfection are also available, which contain higher concentrations of free iodine than antiseptic preparations. an iodophor is a combination of iodine and a solubilizing agent (e.g., polyvinylpyrrolidone in povidone-iodine), which serves to provide a sustained-release form of iodine. dilutions of iodophors are more active against microbes than concentrated povidone-iodine, so iodophores must be diluted correctly. iodophors are bactericidal and virucidal. their antibacterial activity does not persist for long periods on skin or in tissues, so frequent reapplication is required. iodophors are relatively nontoxic and nonirritating. they are stable in solution but are inactivated by organic material and they can stain plastics and, to some extent, tissues.chlorhexidine is a cationic bisbiguanide that disrupts microbial cell membranes and precipitates cell contents. it is used widely for skin antisepsis in veterinary medicine. chlorhexidine has persistent activity on the skin, is nonirritating, is active in the presence of body fluids, and has rapid bactericidal activity. like iodophors, chlorhexidine has limited activity against fungi and mycobacteria. a 2% chlorhexidine solution is preferred over 70% alcohol or povidone-iodine for skin preparation of central venous catheter sites in human patients18 and is the skin antiseptic of choice for collection of blood for blood cultures. chlorhexidine may have slightly lower activity against gram-negative bacteria and fungi than povidone-iodine, and both chlorhexidine and iodophors have a slower antimicrobial activity than 60% to 90% alcohol solutions.standard operating procedures that describe preparation and application of disinfectants for all surfaces and objects used in a veterinary hospital, as well as waste management, should be developed, and staff and visitors should receive education about the location of protocols and their use. wards and procedure and examination rooms should remain uncluttered in order to facilitate effective cleaning. because organic matter can inactivate disinfectants, all visible debris should be removed before disinfection. disinfectants are only active when applied to clean, nonporous surfaces. porous surfaces such as dirt and wood cannot be effectively disinfected using routine procedures. hard porous surfaces should be scrubbed with disinfectant using brushes, and then rinsed with water after the contact time has elapsed.when hospital surfaces are cleaned, attention should be paid to corners, under cabinets, chairs, the bases of examination tables, door handles, elevator buttons, shelves, sinks, faucets, and other surfaces that might otherwise be ignored. personal items such as cell phones and stethoscope heads should be regularly disinfected with disinfectant wipes. cell phones should be disinfected at least daily, and stethoscope heads wiped between patients. stethoscope tubing should be cleaned regularly with soap and water. disinfection of other fomites should be performed on a regular (at least daily) basis. these include digital thermometers, computer keyboards and mice, land-line telephones, calculators, microscopes, otoscopes, and blood pressure cuffs.cleaning staff should wear gloves when general hospital disinfection is performed. this may not be necessary for spot cleaning of areas such as examination room tables or fomites. depending on the disinfectant, additional protective attire, such as a gown, boots, or face mask, may be required if there is a probability of significant splashing during the disinfection process. after disinfection is complete, protective clothing should be removed and handwashing performed. the individuals responsible for cleaning and disinfection at each time point, situation, and location in the hospital should be clearly identified. a plan for the cleaning of outdoor areas that become contaminated with excretions or other biohazardous material should be outlined.when disinfection of cages or runs is performed, animals should be removed and placed in a clean holding cage or run, away from other patients. solid waste and soiled laundry or paper should be removed and placed directly in waste or laundry containers, taking care to avoid dripping onto the floor. if laundry is contaminated with potentially infectious material, it must be bagged and labeled with the contents and suspected infectious agent. proper contact times should be used after application of disinfectant solution. runs and cages should be allowed to dry completely before a new patient is introduced.people are considered immunocompromised if they (1) have various comorbidities such as diabetes mellitus, chronic kidney failure, leukopenia, immune-mediated disease, hiv/aids, congenital immunodeficiencies, hepatic cirrhosis, cancer, or splenectomy; (2) are being treated with immunosuppressive drugs or chemotherapeutics; (3) are very young (5 and under) or very old; or (4) are pregnant, although the immunosuppressive effects of pregnancy are considerably lower than those of the preceding disorders.immunocompromised staff members who work in small animal hospitals should discuss any necessary work restrictions and precautions in light of their specific condition with their physician or an infectious disease doctor. the risks for a diabetic, for example, may be significantly different from those for a transplant recipient. in general, immunosuppressed individuals who work in small animal hospitals should avoid handling patients with suspected or known infectious diseases. gloves should always be worn when handling animals and animal fluids or excreta, and strict attention to general hand hygiene and any bites, scratches, or sharps injuries is critical. children 5 years of age or younger should be kept out of patient care areas. strict attention to hygiene and protective apparel is necessary when handling soiled cat litter or animal feces, because of the risk for transmission of enteropathogens. the reader is referred to other chapters in this book for public health implications of specific infectious diseases that may be encountered in small animal hospitals. if possible, small animal clinics should establish a relationship with a doctor who is prepared to consult on zoonotic exposures with staff members.a transmissible disease surveillance program allows collection of baseline data that establishes the prevalence of certain infectious diseases, so that possible outbreak situations can be readily identified. it can also provide background prevalence information on antimicrobial drug susceptibility patterns, which can assist in the initial selection of antibacterial drugs for individual animal patients while culture and susceptibility test results are in progress. information is generally collected for multidrug-resistant bacterial infections, zoonotic diseases, highly contagious diseases, pathogens that are difficult to inactivate with disinfectants, or agents of regulatory concern. although surveillance may seem like a difficult, time-consuming, and expensive measure, in reality, it can be easy and cost-effective and can provide important information.there are two main forms of infection control surveillance applicable to veterinary hospitals: active and passive. active surveillance involves collection of data specifically for infection control purposes. this can provide the highest quality and most relevant information, but it can be expensive and time consuming. examples of this would be collection of swab specimens to screen for infection with methicillin-resistant staphylococcus pseudintermedius (mrsp) from dogs before surgery as part of mrsp outbreak investigation. active surveillance is a core component of infection control in most human hospitals, but it is only sporadically used in veterinary medicine and is rarely needed in most veterinary clinics. it is typically reserved for large facilities with increased infection control risks and personnel available to direct such testing, or as a part of outbreak control.in contrast, passive surveillance is a practical, easy, and cost-effective surveillance approach that can and should be performed in every veterinary clinic. it involves the use of data that are already available, such as information about surgical site infections collected during routine follow-up or culture results from clinical testing. the quality of passive surveillance data can be limited by poor or incomplete record keeping or sporadic use of appropriate diagnostic tests, but if properly collected and if potential biases are understood, passive surveillance data can provide important insight into aspects such as endemic disease rates, common pathogens, and antimicrobial susceptibility trends. to facilitate passive surveillance, clinicians should be encouraged to use appropriate diagnostic testing to determine the etiology of nosocomial infections, even if the clinical consequences are not severe. they also should be encouraged to confirm a diagnosis in animals with suspected transmissible disease. this allows clients to protect their other animals and their families and friends who might be in contact with the pet, and it benefits the hospital.another form of surveillance that is easy to perform and potentially very useful is syndromic surveillance. this involves surveillance for readily identifiable syndromes (i.e., diarrhea, cough) instead of specific diagnoses. although syndromes do not indicate a specific disease, they can indicate an increased risk of infectious disease. syndromic surveillance is an initial screening tool that can be used by all personnel, including lay personnel, to flag potentially high-risk cases and allow for early implementation of enhanced infection control practices. all clinic personnel should be made aware of certain syndromes that indicate the need either for isolation or for further investigation, such as diarrhea, fever of unknown origin, acute neurologic disease, wound infections, and acute respiratory tract disease. protocols to deal with these animals on arrival should be developed. as an example, a dog with an acute onset of cough should be considered potentially infectious, and if front office personnel note this syndrome at the time the appointment is made, the dog can be handled appropriately on arrival (e.g., admitted directly to isolation or an examination room, with personnel wearing enhanced barrier precautions from the onset). the role of lay staff (i.e., front office stall) is critical, as these people are the ones who are most able to identify such cases before they enter the clinic and ensure that they are properly handled to prevent nosocomial or zoonotic transmission.environmental cultures are rarely informative and so are not considered a useful routine infection control tool. they may be used to detect a specific pathogen if an outbreak of an hai is suspected when there is suspicion that the environment is a source of exposure. however, it is often difficult to distinguish cause from effect (i.e., environmental contamination that leads to transmission vs. environmental contamination that occurs as a result of contamination from a patient in the absence of a risk of transmission).although surveillance programs require time, effort, and expense, in the long term they may save morbidity and mortality and reduce costs that relate to control of large outbreak situations or the legal ramifications of hais.when zoonotic diseases are identified, all in-contact individuals and, if necessary, public health authorities should be notified in the appropriate manner. the specific diseases that must be reported to authorities vary among geographic locations. examples of diseases that may be of interest to public health authorities are listed in box 11-3 .box 11-3infectious diseases of dogs and cats that are reportable or potentially reportable to public health agencies amebiasisgranulocytic anaplasmosisbrucellosiscampylobacteriosiscoccidioidomycosis cryptococcus gattii infectioncryptosporidiosisgiardiasisleishmaniosisleptospirosislyme diseaseq feverrabiessalmonellosistularemiatuberculosismrsa (not mrsp)novel h1n1 influenza virus infectionswest nile virus infection yersinia infections the patient’s endogenous microflora is an important source of pathogens that cause ssis. careful preparation of the patient, therefore, can help reduce contamination of the surgical site during surgery. the goal of preoperative surgical site management is to eliminate potential pathogens while not creating a physical environment that is more conducive to bacterial colonization or infection postoperatively. bathing of the patient preoperatively is reasonable if there is significant contamination of the haircoat19 and if the patient’s coat can be dried by the time of surgery. in most situations, bathing is not required. rather, careful hair removal and skin antisepsis are the main measures. the goals of surgical scrubbing of patients are to reduce bacterial counts, reduce debris, and facilitate later antisepsis. scrubbing should be done as atraumatically as possible. minimizing skin damage during clipping and scrubbing is essential, because skin damage from excessive attempts to clip all remaining pieces of hair or from forceful scrubbing of the surgical site can create an environment that is more amenable to bacterial growth. this predisposes to infection rather than reducing the risk. clipping should be performed after anesthesia, to reduce the risk of trauma associated with a struggling patient and to minimize the time between clipping and surgery. clipping should be done outside the operating environment. there is currently no information that relates to optimal methods of cleaning and disinfecting clippers. repeated use of clipper blades without sterilization not surprisingly results in higher levels of bacterial contamination of blades20; however, the clinical relevance of this is unclear, because the surgical site is cleaned and disinfected after clipping. regular cleaning and disinfection of clippers are probably useful, and they should be thoroughly cleaned and disinfected after use on an animal with a potentially transmissible infection (e.g., an animal with diarrhea), on an area where the skin is broken, or on any area where the skin or hair is significantly contaminated with feces, urine, blood, or other body fluids.after hair removal, various approaches for skin antisepsis can be used. there is little outcome-based evidence of the relative efficacy of different approaches in the human literature. typically, a three-step process is used, with initial scrubbing of the site with biocidal (i.e., chlorhexidine, povidone-iodine) soap, followed by application of alcohol for biocidal effects and to remove oils, and a final application of a biocidal solution with residual activity (e.g., chlorhexidine).the surgeon’s body and clothing are potential sources of ssi pathogens, and standard practices have been developed to reduce the risk of contamination of the surgical site. one aspect is the use of proper protective clothing. every person in the operating environment should wear clean surgical scrubs. these scrubs should be dedicated for use only in the operating room or should be covered with a clean laboratory coat whenever the individual is outside of the operating room.surgical hand antisepsis is critical because of the close contact of the hands with the surgical site and the relatively high incidence of grossly evident breaks or micro-breaks in gloves. surgical hand antisepsis is designed to greatly reduce bacterial burdens on the hands, particularly the abundant transient microflora that contains most of the relevant pathogens that cause ssis. surgical antisepsis must find a balance between effective elimination of pathogens, minimization of trauma to the skin (because skin irritation facilitates bacterial growth), and time constraints. the traditional approach to surgical hand antisepsis has involved structured scrubbing of the hands for a predetermined time. recommended scrub times vary between products but are typically 2 to 4 minutes.application of alcohol-chlorhexidine combinations has been evaluated as a replacement for surgical scrubbing and has been shown to be more effective than standard surgical scrub methods.21., 22. specific manufacturer instructions should be followed, and hands and arms must be dry before application of gloves. the use of alcohol-based surgical hand antisepsis products is encouraged as a replacement for traditional scrubbing.regardless of the method used, a thorough handwash with careful cleaning under the fingernails must be performed at the beginning of each day.23 long (>1艠4-inch) and artificial nails are prohibited in many human health care facilities and some veterinary hospitals because they harbor pathogenic bacteria24 and are associated with surgical glove tears.a cap and mask must be worn during hand antisepsis, and sterile gown and gloves must then be donned using appropriate technique.the use of antimicrobial drugs contributes to the selection for antimicrobial-resistant bacteria. inclusion of a policy on antimicrobial drug use in the infection control protocol may help to reduce the prevalence of multidrug-resistant hais. on their own, fever and leukocytosis are not justification for antimicrobial drug treatment. whenever possible, when infection is suspected, attempts to obtain material for culture and susceptibility testing should be made before antimicrobial drug treatment is initiated. when secondary bacterial infection is likely, attempts to identify and treat the underlying cause should be made. in an effort to minimize the emergence of resistance in bacterial flora of animals in the hospital and decrease the risk of resistant hais, the use of several antimicrobials (e.g., certain parenteral third-generation cephalosporins, vancomycin, linezolid, and carbapenems such as imipenem and meropenem) may be restricted unless criteria must be met (box 11-4 ).box 11-4example of criteria specified within a hospital for use of restricted antimicrobial drugs •infection must be documented based on clinical abnormalities and culture.•subclinical infections should not be treated with these antibiotics. these antibiotics should be reserved for infections that are life threatening.•resistance to all other reasonable options and susceptibility to the chosen antimicrobial must be documented.•the infection must be potentially treatable.•the clinician should contact the infectious disease control officer or a clinical microbiology faculty member by email or telephone to discuss antimicrobial susceptibility test results, determine whether there are any other viable options, and confirm that a restricted antimicrobial is necessary. attention to hand hygiene and proper disinfection of fomites and the environment as outlined for hospitals can also be used to reduce transmission of infectious pathogens in shelters and in breeding and boarding facilities (box 11-5 ). disinfectants with activity against parvoviruses and feline calicivirus should be used routinely, such as a 1:30 dilution of household bleach, potassium peroxymonosulfate, or accelerated hydrogen peroxide solutions. removal of organic matter, the use of surfaces that can be adequately disinfected, and proper contact times are essential.box 11-5factors that should be considered for the reduction of infectious disease transmission in animal housing facilities adequate ventilation and air qualityadequate temperatureadequate lighting conditions (including provision of darkness at night)population density/space per animaldaily removal of fecal and urine contamination and disinfectionadequate drainageseparate housing areas for dogs and catsisolation for sick animalsseparate housing areas for young and adult animalsindividual housing or small groups of two to four compatible animalsseparation of elimination, feeding, and resting areaselevated resting areaselevated cages for catsprovision of hiding areassound controluse of surfaces that can be readily disinfectedproper use of appropriate disinfectantshand hygiene and protective clothingfomite controluse of appropriate vaccination protocolsorder of care (young animals, healthy adults, and then sick animals)proper nutritionpain managementfree access to clean waterrodent and pest controlparasite controldaily monitoring by properly trained individualsproper diagnosis of disease outbreaks factors that increase stress should also be minimized, such as high population densities, the grouping of animals, and poor nutrition. cats and dogs should be separated from one another. in cats, the use of methods that reduce stress, such as provision of a low-stress cage environment, can dramatically reduce the frequency of upper respiratory tract disease. compartmentalized housing allows animals to urinate and defecate away from areas where they rest and eat, and provision of a hiding area so that animals can retreat from visual stimulation can also reduce stress. a total of 10 to 20 air changes per hour is often recommended for animal housing, but higher levels of ventilation may be needed with increased population density and concentration of airborne contaminants. cages should be cleaned and disinfected at least daily. the use of compartmentalized housing areas also facilitates cleaning and disinfection without requiring an animal to be removed from the housing area. isolation areas for sick animals should be present and these should have separate airflow from areas that house healthy animals. mass treatment of dogs and cats with upper respiratory tract disease with antimicrobials without attention to the underlying causes only results in selection for antimicrobial drug resistant organisms and is not recommended. detailed information on the control of infectious diseases in shelter environments is beyond the scope of this book but can be found elsewhere.25 the american association of shelter veterinarians and the humane society of the united states have published guidelines for operation of animal shelters.26., 27. william a. rutala each year in the united states there are approximately 53 million outpatient surgical procedures and 46 million inpatient surgical procedures. 1 for example, there are at least 10 million gastrointestinal endoscopies per year. 2 each of these procedures involves contact by a medical device or surgical instrument with a patient's sterile tissue or mucous membranes. a major risk of all such procedures is the introduction of infection. failure to properly disinfect or sterilize equipment carries not only the risk associated with breach of the host barriers but also the additional risk for person-to-person transmission (e.g., hepatitis b virus) and transmission of environmental pathogens (e.g., clostridium difficile).achieving disinfection and sterilization through the use of disinfectants and sterilization practices is essential for ensuring that medical and surgical instruments do not transmit infectious pathogens to patients. because it is unnecessary to sterilize all patient care items, health care policies must identify whether cleaning, disinfection, or sterilization is indicated based primarily on the item's intended use.multiple studies in many countries have documented lack of compliance with established guidelines for disinfection and sterilization. 3, 4 failure to comply with scientifically based guidelines has led to numerous outbreaks of infectious diseases. 2, [4] [5] [6] [7] [8] in this chapter, which is an update of previous chapters, [9] [10] [11] [12] [13] a pragmatic approach to the judicious selection and proper use of disinfection and sterilization processes is presented, based on well-designed studies assessing the efficacy (via laboratory investigations) and effectiveness (via clinical studies) of disinfection and sterilization procedures. in addition, we briefly review the management of medical waste in health care facilities.sterilization is the complete elimination or destruction of all forms of microbial life and is accomplished in health care facilities by either physical or chemical processes. steam under pressure, dry heat, ethylene oxide (eto) gas, hydrogen peroxide gas plasma, vaporized hydrogen peroxide, and liquid chemicals are the principal sterilizing agents used in health care facilities. sterilization is intended to convey an absolute meaning, not a relative one. unfortunately, some health care professionals as well as the technical and commercial literature refer to "disinfection" as "sterilization" and items as "partially sterile. " when chemicals are used for the purposes of destroying all forms of microbiologic life, including fungal and bacterial spores, they may be called chemical sterilants. these same germicides used for shorter exposure periods may also be part of the disinfection process (i.e., high-level disinfection).disinfection describes a process that eliminates many or all pathogenic microorganisms on inanimate objects, with the exception of bacterial spores. disinfection is usually accomplished by the use of liquid chemicals or wet pasteurization in health care settings. the efficacy of disinfection is affected by a number of factors, each of which may nullify or limit the efficacy of the process. some of the factors that affect both disinfection and sterilization efficacy are the prior cleaning of the object; the organic and inorganic load present; the type and level of microbial contamination; the concentration of and exposure time to the germicide; the nature of the object (e.g., crevices, hinges, and lumens); the presence of biofilms; the temperature and ph of the disinfection process; and, in some cases, the relative humidity of the sterilization process (e.g., with eto).by definition then, disinfection differs from sterilization by its lack of sporicidal property, but this is an oversimplification. a few disinfectants will kill spores with prolonged exposure times (e.g., 3 to 12 hours) and are called chemical sterilants. at similar concentrations but with shorter exposure periods (e.g., 12 minutes for 0.55% orthophthalaldehyde) these same disinfectants will kill all microorganisms with the exception of large numbers of bacterial spores and are called high-level disinfectants. low-level disinfectants may kill most vegetative bacteria, some fungi, and some viruses in a practical period of time (≤10 minutes), whereas intermediate-level disinfectants may be cidal for mycobacteria, vegetative bacteria, most viruses, and most fungi but do not necessarily kill bacterial spores. the germicides differ markedly among themselves primarily in their antimicrobial spectrum and rapidity of action.cleaning, on the other hand, is the removal of visible soil (e.g., organic and inorganic material) from objects and surfaces, and it normally is accomplished by manual or mechanical means using water with detergents or enzymatic products. thorough cleaning is essential before high-level disinfection and sterilization because inorganic and organic materials that remain on the surfaces of instruments interfere with the effectiveness of these processes. also, if the soiled materials become dried or baked onto the instruments, the removal process becomes more difficult and the disinfection or sterilization process less effective or ineffective. surgical instruments should be presoaked or rinsed to prevent drying of blood and to soften or remove blood from the instruments. decontamination is a procedure that removes pathogenic microorganisms from objects so they are safe to handle, use, or discard.terms with a suffix "-cide" or "-cidal" for killing action also are commonly used. for example, a germicide is an agent that can kill microorganisms, particularly pathogenic organisms ("germs"). the term germicide includes both antiseptics and disinfectants. antiseptics are germicides applied to living tissue and skin, whereas disinfectants are antimicrobial agents applied only to inanimate objects. preservatives are agents that inhibit the growth of microorganisms capable of causing biologic deterioration of substances/materials. in general, antiseptics are only used on the skin and not for surface disinfection and disinfectants are rarely used for skin antisepsis because they may cause injury to skin and other tissues. other words with the suffix "-cide" (e.g., virucide, fungicide, bactericide, sporicide, and tuberculocide) can kill the type of microorganism identified by the prefix. for example, a bactericide is an agent that kills bacteria. [14] [15] [16] [17] [18] [19] rational approach to disinfection and sterilization about 45 years ago, earle h. spaulding 15 devised a rational approach to disinfection and sterilization of patient care items or equipment. this classification scheme is so clear and logical that it has been retained, refined, and successfully used by infection control professionals and others when planning methods for disinfection or sterilization.* spaulding believed that the nature of disinfection could be understood more readily if instruments and items for patient care were divided into three categories based on the degree of risk for infection involved in the use of the items. although the scheme remains valid, some examples of disinfection studies with viruses, mycobacteria, and protozoa challenge the current definitions and expectations of highand low-level disinfection. 22 the three categories spaulding described were critical, semicritical, and noncritical.critical items are so called because of the high risk for infection if microorganisms, although small numbers of bacterial spores may be present. intact mucous membranes, such as those of the lungs or the gastrointestinal tract, generally are resistant to infection by common bacterial spores but susceptible to other organisms such as bacteria, mycobacteria, and viruses. semicritical items minimally require highlevel disinfection using chemical disinfectants. glutaraldehyde, hydrogen peroxide, ortho-phthalaldehyde, peracetic acid, and peracetic acid with hydrogen peroxide are cleared by the u.s. food and drug administration (fda) and are dependable high-level disinfectants provided the factors influencing germicidal procedures are met (see tables 301-1 and . when a disinfectant is selected for use with certain patient care items, the chemical compatibility after extended use with the items to be disinfected also must be considered.the complete elimination of all microorganisms in or on an instrument, with the exception of small numbers of bacterial spores, is the traditional definition of high-level disinfection. the fda's definition of high-level disinfection is a sterilant used for a shorter contact time to achieve at least a 6-log 10 kill of an appropriate mycobacterium species. cleaning followed by high-level disinfection should eliminate sufficient pathogens to prevent transmission of infection. 30, 31 semicritical items should be rinsed with sterile water after highlevel disinfection to prevent their contamination with organisms that may be present in tap water, such as nontuberculous mycobacteria, 8, 32 legionella, 33, 34 or gram-negative bacilli such as pseudomonas. 18, 20, [35] [36] [37] in circumstances where rinsing with sterile water rinse is not feasible, a tap water or filtered water (0.2-µm filter) rinse should be followed by an alcohol rinse and forced air drying. 9, [37] [38] [39] forced-air drying markedly reduces bacterial contamination of stored endoscopes, most likely by removing the wet environment favorable for bacterial growth. 38 after rinsing, items should be dried and stored (e.g., packaged) in a manner that protects them from recontamination. bacterial spores. thus, it is critical that objects that enter sterile tissue or the vascular system be sterile because any microbial contamination could result in disease transmission. this category includes surgical instruments, cardiac and urinary catheters, implants, arthroscopes, laparoscopes, and ultrasound probes used in sterile body cavities .  most of the items in this category should be purchased in sterile form  or be sterilized by steam sterilization if possible. if heat sensitive, the  object may be treated with eto, hydrogen peroxide gas plasma, hydrogen peroxide vapor, or liquid chemical sterilants if other methods are  unsuitable. tables 301-1 and 301-2 list several germicides categorized as chemical sterilants and high-level disinfectants. these include 2.4% or greater glutaraldehyde-based formulations, hypochlorous acid/ hypochlorite 650 to 675 ppm free chlorine, 1.12% glutaraldehyde with 1.93% phenol/phenate, 3.4% glutaraldehyde with 26% isopropanol, 23 7.5% stabilized hydrogen peroxide, 2.0% hydrogen peroxide, 7.35% hydrogen peroxide with 0.23% peracetic acid, 8.3% hydrogen peroxide with 7.0% peracetic acid, 0.2% peracetic acid, 0.55% or greater orthophthalaldehyde, and 0.08% peracetic acid with 1.0% hydrogen peroxide. 24 liquid chemical sterilants can be relied on to produce sterility only if cleaning (to eliminate organic and inorganic material) precedes treatment and if proper use as to concentration, contact time, temperature, and ph is met. 25 semicritical items are those that come in contact with mucous membranes or nonintact skin. respiratory therapy and anesthesia equipment, some endoscopes, laryngoscope blades and handles, 26 esophageal manometry probes, endocavitary probes, 26 nasopharyngoscopes, prostate biopsy probes, 27 infrared coagulation device, 28 anorectal manometry catheters, cystoscopes, 29 and diaphragm fitting rings are included in this category. 26 these medical devices should be free of all b. ethylene oxide gas (see manufacturer's recommendations, generally 2 to 6 hours processing time plus aeration time of 8 to 12 hours at 50° to 60° c). c. hydrogen peroxide gas plasma (see manufacturer's recommendations for internal diameter and length restrictions, processing time between 24 to 47 minutes) and vaporized hydrogen peroxide (see manufacturer's recommendations for internal diameter and length restrictions).d. glutaraldehyde-based formulations: ≥2% glutaraldehyde (caution should be exercised with all glutaraldehyde formulations when further in-use dilution is anticipated); glutaraldehyde (1.12%) with 1.93% phenol/phenate; and glutaraldehyde (3.4%) with isopropanol (26%). one glutaraldehyde-based product has a high-level disinfection claim of 5 minutes at 35° c.e. ortho-phthalaldehyde (opa) 0.55%. f. hydrogen peroxide, standard 7.5% (will corrode copper, zinc, and brass). g. peracetic acid, concentration variable but ≥0.2% is sporicidal. a 0.2% peracetic acid immersion reprocessor operates at 50° to 56° c. per guidance from the fda, most hospitals use the 0.2% peracetic acid reprocessor for reprocessing semicritical items that require high-level disinfection. thus, as a general rule, the reprocessor will not be used to reprocess critical items because critical items should be sterile and with the reprocessor using 0.2% peracetic acid the final processed device cannot be assured to be sterile. thus, heat-sensitive critical devices should be sterilized by other validated, fda-cleared, sterilization processes such as hydrogen peroxide gas plasma, ethylene oxide, and vaporized hydrogen peroxide. if a heat-sensitive critical device truly cannot be processed by any other modality than the reprocessor using 0.2% peracetic acid, then the decision is between not using the device at all or reprocessing it in the 0.2% peracetic acid reprocessor (at 50° to 56° c). the decision to use the 0.2% peracetic acid reprocessor at 50° to 56° c for a heat-sensitive critical item that cannot be processed by an alternative sterilization process should be made on a case-by-case basis.h. hydrogen peroxide (7.35%) with 0.23% peracetic acid; hydrogen peroxide 1% with peracetic acid 0.08%; 8.3% hydrogen peroxide with 7.0% peracetic acid (will corrode metal instruments).i. wet pasteurization at 70°c for 30 minutes with detergent cleaning. j. hypochlorite, single-use chlorine generated on site by electrolyzing saline containing >400 to 675 active free chlorine (will corrode metal instruments). k. improved hydrogen peroxide ≥2%. l. sodium hypochlorite (5.25% to 6.15% household bleach diluted 1 : 500 provides >100 ppm available chlorine). m. phenolic germicidal detergent solution (follow product label for use-dilution). n. iodophor germicidal detergent solution (follow product label for use-dilution). o. quaternary ammonium germicidal detergent solution (follow product label for use-dilution). p. ethyl and isopropyl alcohol 60% to 95%. q. improved hydrogen peroxide 0.5% and 1.4%. 1 see text for discussion of hydrotherapy. 2 the longer the exposure to a disinfectant, the more likely it is that all microorganisms will be eliminated. twenty-minute exposure at 20° c is the minimum time needed to reliably kill mycobacterium tuberculosis and nontuberculous mycobacteria with 2% glutaraldehyde. with the exception of >2% glutaraldehyde (see text), follow the fda-cleared high-level disinfection claim. some high-level disinfectants have a reduced exposure time (e.g., opa at 12 minutes at 20° c) because of their rapid activity against mycobacteria or reduced exposure time due to increased mycobactericidal activity at elevated temperature (e.g., 2.5% glutaraldehyde at 5 minutes at 35° c, 0.55% opa at 5 minutes at 25° c in automated endoscope reprocessor). 3 tubing must be completely filled for high-level disinfection and liquid chemical sterilization; care must be taken to avoid entrapment of air bubbles during immersion. 4 material compatibility should be investigated when appropriate. 5 a concentration of 1000 ppm available chlorine should be considered where cultures or concentrated preparations of microorganisms have spilled (5.25% to 6.15% household bleach diluted 1 : 50 provides >1000 ppm available chlorine). this solution may corrode some surfaces. 6 pasteurization (washer-disinfector) of respiratory therapy or anesthesia equipment is a recognized alternative to high-level disinfection. some data challenge the efficacy of some pasteurization units. 7 thermostability should be investigated when appropriate. 8 do not mix rectal and oral thermometers at any stage of handling or processing. 9 by law, all applicable label instructions on epa-registered products must be followed. if the user selects exposure conditions that differ from those on the epa-registered products label, the user assumes liability from any injuries resulting from off-label use and is potentially subject to enforcement action under the federal insecticide, fungicide, and rodenticide act.epa, u.s. environmental protection agency; fda, u.s. food and drug administration; mr, manufacturer's recommendations; na, not applicable. note: the selection and use of disinfectants in the health care field is dynamic, and products may become available that are not in existence when this chapter was written. as newer disinfectants become available, persons or committees responsible for selecting disinfectants and sterilization processes should be guided by products cleared by the fda and the epa as well as by information in the scientific literature and manufacturer recommendations.modified from the works of rutala and simmons and their colleagues. 9 36 when they are used as noncritical items and do not contact nonintact skin or mucous membranes. however, these items (e.g., bedside tables, bed rails) could potentially contribute to secondary transmission by contaminating hands of health care workers or by contact with medical equipment that will subsequently come in contact with patients. 14, [42] [43] [44] [45] [42] [43] [44] [45] [46] [47] [48] [49] [50] [51] [52] [53] [54] [55] [56] [57] [58] thus, it is acceptable to disinfect noncritical medical equipment (e.g., blood pressure cuff) and noncritical surfaces (e.g., bedside table) with an epa-registered disinfectant or disinfectant/detergent at the proper use-dilution and a contact time of at least 1 minute. 9,59 because the typical drying time for a germicide on a surface is 1 to 3 minutes (unless the product contains some items that may come in contact with nonintact skin for a brief period of time (i.e., hydrotherapy tanks, bed side rails) are usually considered noncritical surfaces and are disinfected with low-or intermediate-level disinfectants (i.e., phenolic, iodophor, alcohol, chlorine). 40 because hydrotherapy tanks have been associated with spread of infection, some facilities have chosen to disinfect them with recommended levels of chlorine. 40 noncritical items are those that come in contact with intact skin but not mucous membranes. intact skin acts as an effective barrier to most microorganisms; therefore, the sterility of items that come in contact with intact skin is "not critical. " examples of noncritical items are bedpans, blood pressure cuffs, crutches, bed rails, bedside tables, patient furniture, and floors. the five most commonly touched noncritical items in the patient environment have been quantitatively shown to be bed rails, bed surface, supply cart, overbed table, and intravenous-line pump. 41 in contrast to critical and some semicritical items, most noncritical reusable items may be decontaminated where they are used and do not need to be transported to a central processing area. there is virtually no documented risk of transmitting infectious note: all products effective in presence of organic soil, relatively easy to use, and have a broad spectrum of antimicrobial activity (bacteria, fungi, viruses, spores, and mycobacteria). the above characteristics are documented in the literature; contact the manufacturer of the instrument and sterilant for additional information.modified from references 13, 93, 278, and 304. underrated: ethyl alcohol and isopropyl alcohol. 70 these alcohols are rapidly bactericidal rather than bacteriostatic against vegetative forms of bacteria; they also are tuberculocidal, fungicidal, and virucidal but do not destroy bacterial spores. their cidal activity drops sharply when diluted below 50% concentration, and the optimal bactericidal concentration is in the range of 60% to 90% solutions in water (volume/ volume). 71, 72 alcohols are not recommended for sterilizing medical and surgical materials, principally because of their lack of sporicidal action and their inability to penetrate protein-rich materials. fatal postoperative wound infections with clostridium have occurred when alcohols were used to sterilize surgical instruments contaminated with bacterial spores. 73 alcohols have been used effectively to disinfect oral and rectal thermometers, computers, 60 hospital pagers, scissors, cardiopulmonary resuscitation (cpr) manikins, applanation tonometers, 74 external surfaces of equipment (e.g., ventilators), and stethoscopes. 75 alcohol towelettes have been used for years to disinfect small surfaces such as rubber stoppers of multiple-dose medication vials or vaccine bottles.alcohols are flammable and consequently must be stored in a cool, well-ventilated area. they also evaporate rapidly, and this makes extended exposure time difficult to achieve unless the items are immersed.hypochlorites are the most widely used of the chlorine disinfectants and are available in liquid (e.g., sodium hypochlorite) or solid (e.g., calcium hypochlorite) forms. the most prevalent chlorine products in the united states are aqueous solutions of 5.25% to 6.15% sodium hypochlorite, which usually are called household bleach. they have a broad spectrum of antimicrobial activity (i.e., bactericidal, virucidal, fungicidal, mycobactericidal, sporicidal), do not leave toxic residues, are unaffected by water hardness, are inexpensive and fast acting, 74, 76 remove dried or fixed organisms and biofilms from surfaces, 77 and have a low incidence of serious toxicity. 78, 79 sodium hypochlorite at the concentration used in domestic bleach (5.25% to 6.15%) may produce ocular irritation or oropharyngeal, esophageal, and gastric burns. 69, 80, 81 other disadvantages of hypochlorites include corrosiveness to metals in high concentrations (>500 ppm), inactivation by organic matter, discoloring or "bleaching" of fabrics, release of toxic chlorine gas when mixed with ammonia or acid (e.g., household cleaning agents), 82 and relative stability. 83 reports have examined the microbicidal activity of a new disinfectant, "superoxidized water. " the concept of electrolyzing saline to create a disinfectant or antiseptic is appealing because the basic materials of saline and electricity are inexpensive and the end product (i.e., water) is not damaging to the environment. the main products of this "water" are hypochlorous acid (e.g., at a concentration of about 144 mg/l) and chlorine. this is also known as electrolyzed water; and, as with any germicide, the antimicrobial activity of superoxidized water is strongly affected by the concentration of the active ingredient (available free chlorine). 84 the free available chlorine concentrations of different superoxidized solutions reported in the literature range from 7 to 180 ppm. 84 data have shown that freshly generated superoxidized water is rapidly effective (<2 minutes) in achieving a 5-log 10 reduction of pathogenic microorganisms (i.e., m. tuberculosis, mycobacterium chelonae, poliovirus, human immunodeficiency virus (hiv), mrsa, e. coli, candida albicans, enterococcus faecalis, pseudomonas aeruginosa) in the absence of organic loading. however, the biocidal activity of this disinfectant was substantially reduced in the presence of organic material (5% horse serum). 85, 86 hypochlorites are widely used in health care facilities in a variety of settings. 76 inorganic chlorine solution is used to disinfect tonometer heads 87 and for disinfection of noncritical surfaces and equipment. a 1 : 10 to 1 : 100 dilution of 5.25% to 6.15% sodium hypochlorite (i.e., household bleach) [88] [89] [90] [91] or an epa-registered tuberculocidal disinfectant 18 has been recommended for decontaminating blood spills. for small spills of blood (i.e., drops of blood) on noncritical surfaces, the area can be disinfected with a 1 : 100 dilution of 5.25% to 6.15% sodium hypochlorite or an epa-registered tuberculocidal disinfectant. because hypochlorites and other germicides are substantially inactivated in the alcohol [e.g., a 60% to 70% alcohol will dry in about 30 seconds]) (n. omidbakhsh, written communication), one application of the germicide on all hand contact surfaces to be disinfected is recommended.mops (microfiber and cotton string), reusable cleaning cloths, and disposable wipes are regularly used to achieve low-level disinfection. 60, 61 microfiber mops have demonstrated superior microbial removal compared with cotton string mops when used with detergent cleaner (95% vs. 68%, respectively). use of a disinfectant did significantly improve microbial removal when a cotton string mop was used. 61 mops (especially cotton-string mops) are commonly not kept adequately cleaned and disinfected, and if the water-disinfectant mixture is not changed regularly (e.g., after every 3 to 4 rooms, no longer than 60-minute intervals), the mopping procedure may actually spread heavy microbial contamination throughout the health care facility. 62 in one study, standard laundering provided acceptable decontamination of heavily contaminated mop heads but chemical disinfection with a phenolic was less effective. 62 the frequent laundering of cotton-string mops (e.g., daily) is, therefore, recommended.hospital cleanliness continues to attract patient attention and in the united states it is still primarily assessed via visual appearance, which is not a reliable indicator of surface cleanliness. 63 three other methods have been offered for monitoring patient room hygiene and they include adenosine triphosphate (atp) bioluminescence, 64,65 fluorescent markers, 66, 67 and microbiologic sampling. 65 studies have demonstrated suboptimal cleaning by aerobic colony counts as well as the use of the atp bioluminescence and fluorescent markers. 64,66 atp bioluminescence and fluorescent markers are preferred to aerobic plate counts because they provide an immediate assessment of cleaning effectiveness.a great number of disinfectants are used alone or in combinations (e.g., hydrogen peroxide and peracetic acid) in the health care setting. these include alcohols, chlorine and chlorine compounds, formaldehyde, glutaraldehyde, ortho-phthalaldehyde, standard and improved hydrogen peroxide, iodophors, peracetic acid, phenolics, and quaternary ammonium compounds. with some exceptions (e.g., ethanol or bleach), commercial formulations based on these chemicals are considered unique products and must be registered with the epa or cleared by the fda. in most instances, a given product is designed for a specific purpose and is to be used in a certain manner. therefore, the label should be read carefully to ensure that the right product is selected for the intended use and applied in an efficient manner. additionally, caution must be exercised to avoid hazards with the use of cleaners and disinfectants on electronic medical equipment. problems associated with the inappropriate use of liquids on electronic medical equipment have included equipment fires, equipment malfunctions, and health care worker burns. 68 disinfectants are not interchangeable and an overview of the performance characteristics of each is provided in the next section so the user has sufficient information to select an appropriate disinfectant for any item and use it in the most efficient way. it should be recognized that excessive costs may be attributed to incorrect concentrations and inappropriate disinfectants. finally, occupational diseases among cleaning personnel have been associated with the use of several disinfectants, such as formaldehyde, glutaraldehyde, and chlorine, and precautions (e.g., gloves, proper ventilation) should be used to minimize exposure. 69 asthma and reactive airway disease may occur in sensitized individuals exposed to any airborne chemical, including germicides. clinically important asthma may occur at levels below ceiling levels regulated by the occupational and safety health administration (osha) or recommended by the national institute for occupational safety and health. the preferred method of control is to eliminate the chemical (via engineering controls, or substitution) or relocate the worker.in the health care setting, "alcohol" refers to two water-soluble chemical compounds, the germicidal characteristics of which are generally bacillus, 105, 106 and this includes the hypervirulent binary toxin strains of c. difficile spores (w.a. rutala, unpublished data, december 2012). there have been reports of microorganisms with relative resistance to glutaraldehyde, including some mycobacteria (m. chelonae, mycobacterium avium-intracellulare, mycobacterium xenopi), [107] [108] [109] methylobacterium mesophilicum, 110 trichosporon, fungal ascospores (e.g., microascus cinereus, chaetomium globosum), and cryptosporidium. 111 m. chelonae persisted in a 0.2% glutaraldehyde solution used to store porcine prosthetic heart valves, 112 and a large outbreak of mycobacterium massiliense infections in brazil after videolaparoscopy equipment used for different elective cosmetic procedures (e.g., liposuction) was highly tolerant to 2% glutaraldehyde. 113 porins may have a role in the resistance of mycobacteria to glutaraldehyde and ortho-phthalaldehyde. 114 dilution of glutaraldehyde during use commonly occurs, and studies show a glutaraldehyde concentration decline after a few days of use in an automatic endoscope washer. 115 this decline occurs because instruments are not thoroughly dried and water is carried in with the instrument, which increases the solution's volume and dilutes its effective concentration. this emphasizes the need to ensure that semicritical equipment is disinfected with an acceptable concentration of glutaraldehyde. data suggest that 1.0% to 1.5% glutaraldehyde is the minimal effective concentration (mec) for 2% or greater glutaraldehyde solutions when used as a high-level disinfectant. [115] [116] [117] chemical test strips or liquid chemical monitors are available for determining whether an effective concentration of glutaraldehyde is present despite repeated use and dilution. the frequency of testing should be based on how frequently the solutions are used (e.g., used daily, test daily; used weekly, test before use), but the strips should not be used to extend the use life beyond the expiration date. data suggest the chemicals in the test strip deteriorate with time, 118 and a manufacturer's expiration date should be placed on the bottles. the bottle of test strips should be dated when opened and used for the period of time indicated on the bottle (e.g., 120 days). the results of test strip monitoring should be documented. the glutaraldehyde test kits have been preliminarily evaluated for accuracy and range, 118 but their reliability has been questioned. 119 the concentration should be considered unacceptable or unsafe when the test indicates a dilution below the product's mec (generally to 1.0% to 1.5% glutaraldehyde or lower) by the indicator not changing color.glutaraldehyde is used most commonly as a high-level disinfectant for medical equipment such as endoscopes, 93 endocavitary probes, spirometry tubing, dialyzers, transducers, anesthesia and respiratory therapy equipment, hemodialysis proportioning and dialysate delivery systems, and reuse of laparoscopic disposable plastic trocars. 75 glutaraldehyde is noncorrosive to metal and does not damage lensed instruments, rubber, or plastics. the fda-cleared labels for high-level disinfection with 2% or greater glutaraldehyde at 25° c range from 20 to 90 minutes depending on the product. however, multiple scientific studies and professional organizations support the efficacy of 2% or greater glutaraldehyde for 20 minutes at 20° c. 9, 18, 37 minimally, this latter recommendation should be followed. glutaraldehyde should not be used for cleaning noncritical surfaces because it is too toxic and expensive.colitis believed to be due to glutaraldehyde exposure from residual disinfecting solution in the endoscope solution channels has been reported and is preventable by careful endoscope rinsing. 69 one study found that residual glutaraldehyde levels were higher and more variable after manual disinfection (<0.2 to 159.5 mg/l) than after automatic disinfection (0.2 to 6.3 mg/l). 120 similarly, keratopathy and corneal damage were caused by ophthalmic instruments that were inadequately rinsed after soaking in 2% glutaraldehyde. 121 glutaraldehyde exposure should be monitored to ensure a safe work environment. in the absence of an osha permissible exposure limit, if the glutaraldehyde level is higher than the american conference of industrial hygienists ceiling limit of 0.05 ppm, it would be prudent to take corrective action and repeat monitoring. 122the literature contains several accounts of the properties, germicidal effectiveness, and potential uses for stabilized hydrogen peroxide in the health care setting. published reports ascribe good germicidal activity presence of blood, 54,92 large spills of blood require that the surface be cleaned before an epa-registered disinfectant or a 1 : 10 (final concentration) solution of household bleach is applied. if there is a possibility of a sharps injury, there should be an initial decontamination, 69, 93 followed by cleaning and terminal disinfection (1 : 10 final concentration). 54 extreme care should always be used to prevent percutaneous injury. at least 500 ppm available chlorine for 10 minutes is recommended for decontamination of cpr training manikins. other uses in health care include as an irrigating agent in endodontic treatment and to disinfect laundry, dental appliances, hydrotherapy tanks, 40 regulated medical waste before disposal, 76 applanation tonometers, 74 and the water distribution system in hemodialysis centers and hemodialysis machines. 9,75 disinfection with a 1 : 10 dilution of concentrated sodium hypochlorite (i.e., bleach) has been shown to be effective in reducing environmental contamination in patient rooms and in reducing c. difficile infection rates in hospital units where there is a high endemic c. difficile infection rates or in an outbreak setting. 9, [94] [95] [96] 97, 98 at our institution, we use a sporicidal solution (5000 ppm chlorine) in all c. difficile-infected patient rooms for routine daily and terminal cleaning. this is done by one application of the sporicide covering all hand contact surfaces to allow sufficient wetness for a greater than 1-minute contact time.chlorine has long been favored as the preferred disinfectant in water treatment. hyperchlorination of a legionella-contaminated hospital water system 40 resulted in a dramatic decrease (30% to 1.5%) in the isolation of legionella pneumophila from water outlets and a cessation of health care-associated legionnaires' disease in the affected unit. 99, 100 chloramine t and hypochlorites have been used in disinfecting hydrotherapy equipment. 75 hypochlorite solutions in tap water at a ph greater than 8 stored at room temperature (23° c) in closed, opaque plastic containers may lose up to 40% to 50% of their free available chlorine level over a period of 1 month. thus, if a user wished to have a solution containing 500 ppm of available chlorine at day 30, a solution containing 1000 ppm of chlorine should be prepared at time 0. there is no decomposition of sodium hypochlorite solution after 30 days when stored in a closed brown bottle. 83glutaraldehyde is a saturated dialdehyde that has gained wide acceptance as a high-level disinfectant and chemical sterilant. 101 aqueous solutions of glutaraldehyde are acidic and generally in this state are not sporicidal. only when the solution is "activated" (made alkaline) by use of alkalinizing agents to ph 7.5 to 8.5 does the solution become sporicidal. once "activated" these solutions have a shelf life of minimally 14 days because of the polymerization of the glutaraldehyde molecules at alkaline ph levels. this polymerization blocks the active sites (aldehyde groups) of the glutaraldehyde molecules that are responsible for its biocidal activity.novel glutaraldehyde formulations (e.g., glutaraldehyde-phenolsodium phenate, potentiated acid glutaraldehyde, stabilized alkaline glutaraldehyde) produced in the past 40 years have overcome the problem of rapid loss of activity (e.g., now use life of 28 to 30 days) while generally maintaining excellent microbicidal activity. 74, 75, 102, 103 however, it should be recognized that antimicrobial activity is dependent not only on age but also on use conditions such as dilution and organic stress. the use of glutaraldehyde-based solutions in health care facilities is common because of their advantages, which include excellent biocidal properties; activity in the presence of organic matter (20% bovine serum); and noncorrosive action to endoscopic equipment, thermometers, rubber, or plastic equipment. the advantages, disadvantages, and characteristics of glutaraldehyde are listed in table 301 -2.the in vitro inactivation of microorganisms by glutaraldehydes has been extensively investigated and reviewed. 104 several investigators showed that 2% or greater aqueous solutions of glutaraldehyde, buffered to ph 7.5 to 8.5 with sodium bicarbonate, were effective in killing vegetative bacteria in less than 2 minutes; m. tuberculosis, fungi, and viruses in less than 10 minutes; and spores of bacillus and clostridium species in 3 hours. 104 spores of c. difficile are more rapidly killed by 2% glutaraldehyde than are spores of other species of clostridium and is a combination of iodine and a solubilizing agent or carrier; the resulting complex provides a sustained-release reservoir of iodine and releases small amounts of free iodine in aqueous solution. the best known and most widely used iodophor is povidone-iodine, a compound of polyvinylpyrrolidone with iodine. this product and other iodophors retain the germicidal efficacy of iodine but, unlike iodine, are generally nonstaining and are relatively free of toxicity and irritancy. 137 there are several reports that documented intrinsic microbial contamination of antiseptic formulations of povidone-iodine and poloxamer-iodine. [138] [139] [140] it was found that "free" iodine (i 2 ) contributes to the bactericidal activity of iodophors and dilutions of iodophors demonstrate more rapid bactericidal action than does a full-strength povidone-iodine solution. therefore, iodophors must be diluted according to the manufacturers' directions to achieve antimicrobial activity.published reports on the in vitro antimicrobial efficacy of iodophors demonstrate that iodophors are bactericidal, mycobactericidal, and virucidal but may require prolonged contact times to kill certain fungi and bacterial spores. 15, [141] [142] [143] [144] besides their use as an antiseptic, iodophors have been used for the disinfection of blood culture bottles and medical equipment such as hydrotherapy tanks and thermometers. antiseptic iodophors are not suitable for use as hard-surface disinfectants because of concentration differences. iodophors formulated as antiseptics contain less free iodine than those formulated as disinfectants. 145 iodine or iodinebased antiseptics should not be used on silicone catheters because the silicone tubing may be adversely affected. 146ortho-phthalaldehyde (opa) is a high-level disinfectant that received fda clearance in october 1999. it contains at least 0.55% 1,2benzenedicarboxaldehyde or opa, and it has supplanted glutaraldehyde as the most commonly used "aldehyde" for high-level disinfection in the united states. opa solution is a clear, pale-blue liquid with a ph of 7.5. the advantages, disadvantages, and characteristics of opa are listed in table 301-2. studies have demonstrated excellent microbicidal activity in in vitro studies, 74, 75, 93, 111, [147] [148] [149] [150] [151] [152] including superior mycobactericidal activity (5-log 10 reduction in 5 minutes) compared with glutaraldehyde. walsh and colleagues also found opa effective (>5-log 10 reduction) against a wide range of microorganisms, including glutaraldehyde-resistant mycobacteria and bacillus atrophaeus spores. 150 opa has several potential advantages compared with glutaraldehyde. it has excellent stability over a wide ph range (ph 3 to 9), is not a known irritant to the eyes and nasal passages, does not require exposure monitoring, has a barely perceptible odor, and requires no activation. opa, like glutaraldehyde, has excellent material compatibility. a potential disadvantage of opa is that it stains proteins gray (including unprotected skin) and thus must be handled with caution. 93 however, skin staining would indicate improper handling that requires additional training and/or personal protective equipment (gloves, eye and mouth protection, fluid-resistant gowns). opa residues remaining on inadequately water-rinsed transesophageal echocardiographic probes may leave stains on the patient's mouth. meticulous cleaning, use of the correct opa exposure time (e.g., 12 minutes), and copious rinsing of the probe with water should eliminate this problem. because opa has been associated with several episodes of anaphylaxis after cystoscopy, 153 the manufacturer has modified its instructions for use of opa and contraindicates the use of opa as a disinfectant for reprocessing all urologic instrumentation for patients with a history of bladder cancer. personal protective equipment should be worn when handling contaminated instruments, equipment, and chemicals. 148 in addition, equipment must be thoroughly rinsed to prevent discoloration of a patient's skin or mucous membrane. the mec of opa is 0.3%, and that concentration is monitored by test strips designed specifically for the opa solution. opa exposure level monitoring found that the concentration during the disinfection process was significantly higher in the manual group (median, 1.43 ppb) than in the automatic group (median, 0.35 ppb). these findings corroborate other findings that show it is desirable to introduce automatic endoscope reprocessors to to hydrogen peroxide and attest to its bactericidal, virucidal, sporicidal, and fungicidal properties. [123] [124] [125] [126] [127] some other studies have shown limited bactericidal and virucidal activity of standard 3% hydrogen peroxide. 58, 74 the advantages, disadvantages, and characteristics of hydrogen peroxide are listed in table 301 -2. as with other chemical sterilants, dilution of the hydrogen peroxide must be monitored by regularly testing the mec (i.e., 7.5 to 6.0%). compatibility testing by olympus america of the 7.5% hydrogen peroxide found both cosmetic changes (e.g., discoloration of black anodized metal finishes) 93 and functional changes with the tested endoscopes (olympus, october 15, 1999, written communication) .commercially available 3% hydrogen peroxide is a stable and effective disinfectant when used on inanimate surfaces. it has been used in concentrations from 3% to 6% for the disinfection of soft contact lenses (e.g., 3% for 2 to 3 hours), 123, 128 tonometer biprisms, ventilators, fabrics, 129 and endoscopes. 130 hydrogen peroxide was effective in spotdisinfecting fabrics in patients' rooms. 129 corneal damage from a hydrogen peroxide-soaked tonometer tip that was not properly rinsed has been reported. 131an improved hydrogen peroxide-based technology has been introduced into health care for disinfection of noncritical environmental surfaces and patient equipment 132 and high-level disinfection of semicritical equipment such as endoscopes. [133] [134] [135] improved hydrogen peroxide contains very low levels of anionic or nonionic surfactants or both in an acidic product that act with hydrogen peroxide to produce microbicidal activity. this combination of ingredients speeds the antimicrobial activity of hydrogen peroxide and cleaning efficiency. 134, 135 improved hydrogen peroxide is considered safe for humans and equipment and benign for the environment. in fact, improved hydrogen peroxide has the lowest epa toxicity category (i.e., category iv) based on its oral, inhalation, and dermal toxicity, which means it is practically nontoxic and not an irritant. 132, 134, 136 it is prepared and marketed by several companies in various concentrations (e.g., 0.5% to 7%), and different products may use different terminology for these products, such as "accelerated" or "activated. " lower concentrations (i.e., 0.5%,1.4%) are designed for the low-level disinfection of noncritical environmental surfaces and patient care objects, whereas the higher concentrations can be used as high-level disinfectants for semicritical medical devices (e.g., endoscopes).a recent study compared the bactericidal activity of a quaternary ammonium compound with two new improved hydrogen peroxide products. the improved hydrogen peroxide products were superior or similar to the quaternary ammonium compound tested. when the two improved hydrogen peroxide products were compared with standard 0.5%, 1.4%, and 3% hydrogen peroxide formulations, the improved hydrogen peroxide-based environmental surface disinfectants proved to be more effective (>6-log 10 reduction) and fast-acting (30-60 seconds) microbicides in the presence of a soil load (to simulate the presence of body fluids) than commercially available hydrogen peroxide. only 30-to 60-second contact time was studied because longer contact times (e.g., 10 minutes) are not achievable in clinical practice. additionally, the improved hydrogen peroxide products have an eparegistered contact time that is substantially less (e.g., 30 seconds, 1 minute for bacteria) than most epa-registered low-level disinfectants. 58 we have also recently shown that the 1.4% activated hydrogen peroxide is very effective in reducing microbial contamination of hospital privacy curtains. in our study, the activated hydrogen peroxide completely eliminated contamination with mrsa and vre and resulted in a 98.5% reduction in microbes (only bacillus spp. recoverable). thus, at our institution, privacy curtains are being disinfected at the grab area by spraying the grab area of the curtain three times with activated hydrogen peroxide at discharge cleaning.iodine solutions or tinctures have long been used by health care professionals, primarily as antiseptics on skin or tissue. the fda has not cleared any liquid chemical sterilant/high level disinfectants with iodophors as the main active ingredient. however, iodophors have been used both as antiseptics and disinfectants. an iodophor functional group (e.g., alkyl, phenyl, benzyl, halogen) replaces one of the hydrogen atoms on the aromatic ring. two phenol derivatives commonly found as constituents of hospital disinfectants are orthophenylphenol and ortho-benzyl-para-chlorophenol.published reports on the antimicrobial efficacy of commonly used phenolics showed that they were bactericidal, fungicidal, virucidal, and tuberculocidal. 15, 53, 75, 141, [174] [175] [176] [177] [178] many phenolic germicides are epa registered as disinfectants for use on environmental surfaces (e.g., bedside tables, bedrails, laboratory surfaces) and noncritical medical devices. phenolics are not fda cleared as high-level disinfectants for use with semicritical items but could be used to preclean or decontaminate critical and semicritical devices before terminal sterilization or high-level disinfection.the use of phenolics in nurseries has been questioned because of the occurrence of hyperbilirubinemia in infants placed in bassinets in which phenolic detergents were used. 179 in addition, doan and co-workers demonstrated bilirubin level increases in phenolic-exposed infants compared with nonphenolic-exposed infants when the phenolic was prepared according to the manufacturers' recommended dilution. 180 if phenolics (or other disinfectants) are used to clean nursery floors, they must be diluted according to the recommendation on the product label. phenolics (and other disinfectants) should not be used to clean infant bassinets and incubators while occupied. if phenolics are used to terminally clean infant bassinets and incubators, the surfaces should be rinsed thoroughly with water and dried before the infant bassinets and incubators are reused. 18the quaternary ammonium compounds are widely used as surface disinfectants. there have been some reports of health care-associated infections associated with contaminated quaternary ammonium compounds used to disinfect patient care supplies or equipment such as cystoscopes or cardiac catheters. 181, 182 as with several other disinfectants (e.g., phenolics, iodophors), gram-negative bacteria have been found to survive or grow in them. 140 results from manufacturers' data sheets and from published scientific literature indicate that the quaternaries sold as hospital disinfectants are generally fungicidal, bactericidal, and virucidal against lipophilic (enveloped) viruses; they are not sporicidal and generally not tuberculocidal or virucidal against hydrophilic (nonenveloped) viruses. † poor mycobactericidal activities of quaternary ammonium compounds have been reported. 49, 141 the quaternaries are commonly used in ordinary environmental sanitation of noncritical surfaces such as floors, furniture, and walls. epa-registered quaternary ammonium compounds are appropriate to use when disinfecting medical equipment that comes into contact with intact skin (e.g., blood pressure cuffs).pasteurization is not a sterilization process; its purpose is to destroy all pathogenic microorganisms with the exception of bacterial spores. the time-temperature relation for hot-water pasteurization is generally greater than 70° c (158° f) for 30 minutes. the water temperature and time should be monitored as part of a quality assurance program. 186 pasteurization of respiratory therapy 187, 188 and anesthesia equipment 189 is a recognized alternative to chemical disinfection.ultraviolet (uv) light has been recognized as an effective method for killing microorganisms. it has been suggested for use in health care for several purposes, including air disinfection, room decontamination (see "room decontamination, " later), surface disinfection, biofilm disinfection, 190 and ultrasound probe disinfection. 191 contaminated ultrasound probes can potentially transmit pathogens. when the probe is only in contact with the patient's skin there is a low risk for infection and low-level disinfection is recommended; however, a higher level of disinfection is recommended when the probe contacts mucous membranes or nonintact skin. an evaluation of a new disinfection procedure for ultrasound probes using uv light demonstrated the median decrease disinfectant exposure levels among scope reprocessing technicians. 154peracetic, or peroxyacetic acid, is characterized by a very rapid action against all microorganisms. a special advantage of peracetic acid is its lack of harmful decomposition products (i.e., acetic acid, water, oxygen, hydrogen peroxide); it enhances removal of organic material 155 and leaves no residue. it remains effective in the presence of organic matter and is sporicidal even at low temperatures. peracetic acid can corrode copper, brass, bronze, plain steel, and galvanized iron, but these effects can be reduced by additives and ph modifications. the advantages, disadvantages, and characteristics of peracetic acid are listed in table 301-2. peracetic acid will inactivate gram-positive and gram-negative bacteria, fungi, and yeasts in less than 5 minutes at less than 100 ppm. in the presence of organic matter, 200 to 500 ppm is required. for viruses the dosage range is wide (12 to 2250 ppm), with poliovirus inactivated in yeast extract in 15 minutes with 1500 to 2250 ppm. a processing system using peracetic acid at a temperature of 50° c to 56° c can be used for processing heat-sensitive semicritical and critical devices that are compatible with the peracetic acid and processing system and cannot be sterilized by other legally marketed traditional sterilization methods validated for that type of device (e.g., steam, hydrogen peroxide gas plasma, vaporized hydrogen peroxide). after processing, the devices should be used immediately or stored in a manner similar to that of a high-level disinfected endoscope. [156] [157] [158] the sterilant, 35% peracetic acid, is diluted to 0.2% with tap water that has been filtered and exposed to ultraviolet light. simulated-use trials with the earlier version of this processing system have demonstrated excellent microbicidal activity, 74, [158] [159] [160] [161] 162 and three clinical trials have demonstrated both excellent microbial killing and no clinical failures leading to infection. [163] [164] [165] three clusters of infection using the earlier version of the peracetic acid automated endoscope reprocessor were linked to inadequately processed bronchoscopes when inappropriate channel connectors were used with the system. 166, 167 these clusters highlight the importance of training, proper model-specific endoscope connector systems, and quality control procedures to ensure compliance with endoscope manufacturer's recommendations and professional organization guidelines. an alternative high-level disinfectant available in the united kingdom contains 0.35% peracetic acid. although this product is rapidly effective against a broad range of microorganisms, 168, 169 it tarnishes the metal of endoscopes and is unstable, resulting in only a 24-hour use life. 169three chemical sterilants are fda-cleared that contain peracetic acid plus hydrogen peroxide (0.08% peracetic acid plus 1.0% hydrogen peroxide, 0.23% peracetic acid plus 7.35% hydrogen peroxide, and 8.3% hydrogen peroxide plus 7.0% peracetic acid). the advantages, disadvantages, and characteristics of peracetic acid with hydrogen peroxide are listed in table 301 the bactericidal properties of peracetic acid plus hydrogen peroxide have been demonstrated. 170 manufacturer's data demonstrated that this combination of peracetic acid plus hydrogen peroxide inactivated all microorganisms with the exception of bacterial spores within 20 minutes. the 0.08% peracetic acid plus 1.0% hydrogen peroxide product was effective in inactivating a glutaraldehyde-resistant mycobacteria. 171 the combination of peracetic acid and hydrogen peroxide has been used for disinfecting hemodialyzers. 172 the percentage of dialysis centers using a peracetic acid with hydrogen peroxide-based disinfectant for reprocessing dialyzers increased from 5% in 1983 to 72% in 1997. 173 phenol has occupied a prominent place in the field of hospital disinfection since its initial use as a germicide by lister in his pioneering work on antiseptic surgery. in the past 40 years, however, work has been concentrated on the numerous phenol derivatives or phenolics and their antimicrobial properties. phenol derivatives originate when a microbial reduction for uv light was 100%, 87.5% for antiseptic wiping, and 88% for dry wiping. 191 surface disinfection with uv light (100-280 nm) has been evaluated with three hospital-related surfaces, namely, aluminum (bed railings), stainless steel (operating tables), and scrubs (laboratory coats). acinetobacter baumannii were inoculated on small coupons (10 3 or 10 5 /coupon) and exposed to 90 j/m 2 . this exposure was effective in the inactivation of acinetobacter from the metal coupon surfaces but ineffective in the decontamination of scrubs. 192 a hand-held room decontamination technology that utilizes far-uv radiation (185 to 230 nm) to kill pathogens was evaluated and found that it rapidly kills c. difficile spores and other health care-associated pathogens on surfaces. however, the presence of organic matter reduces the efficacy of far-uv radiation, possibly explaining the more modest results observed on surfaces in hospital rooms that were not precleaned. 193 most medical and surgical devices used in health care facilities are made of materials that are heat stable and thus are sterilized by heat, primarily steam sterilization. however, since 1950, there has been an increase in medical devices and instruments made of materials (e.g., plastics) that require low-temperature sterilization. eto has been used since the 1950s for heat-and moisture-sensitive medical devices. within the past 15 years, a number of new, low-temperature sterilization systems (e.g., hydrogen peroxide gas plasma, vaporized hydrogen peroxide) have been developed and are being used to sterilize medical devices. this section reviews sterilization technologies used in health care and makes recommendations for their optimum performance in the processing of medical devices. 9, 194 sterilization destroys all microorganisms on the surface of an object or in a fluid to prevent disease transmission associated with the use of that item. although the use of inadequately sterilized critical items represents a high risk for transmitting pathogens, documented transmission of pathogens associated with an inadequately sterilized critical item is exceedingly rare. [195] [196] [197] this is likely due to the wide margin of safety associated with the sterilization processes used in health care facilities. the concept of what constitutes "sterile" is measured as a probability of sterility for each item to be sterilized. this probability is commonly referred to as the sterility assurance level (sal) of the product and is defined as the probability of a single viable microorganism occurring on a product after sterilization. sal is normally expressed as 10 −n . for example, if the probability of a spore surviving were one in 1 million, the sal would be 10 −6 . 198, 199 dual sals (e.g., 10 −3 sal for blood culture tubes, drainage bags; 10 −6 sal for scalpels, implants) have been used in the united states for many years, and the choice of a 10 −6 sal was strictly arbitrary and not associated with any adverse outcomes (e.g., patient infections). 198 medical devices that have contact with sterile body tissues or fluids are considered critical items. these items should be sterile when used because any microbial contamination could result in disease transmission. such items include surgical instruments, biopsy forceps, and implanted medical devices. if these items are heat resistant, the recommended sterilization process is steam sterilization, because it has the largest margin of safety due to its reliability, consistency, lethality, and least effect from organic/inorganic soils. however, reprocessing heatand moisture-sensitive items requires use of a low-temperature sterilization technology (e.g., eto, hydrogen peroxide gas plasma, vaporized hydrogen peroxide). 200 a summary of the advantages and disadvantages for commonly used sterilization technologies is presented in table 301 -3.of all the methods available for sterilization, moist heat in the form of saturated steam under pressure is the most widely used and the most dependable. steam sterilization is nontoxic, inexpensive, 201 rapidly microbicidal, and sporicidal and rapidly heats and penetrates fabrics (see table 301 -3). 202 like all sterilization processes, steam sterilization has some deleterious effects on some materials, including corrosion is defined as the shortest possible time between a sterilized item's removal from the sterilizer and its aseptic transfer to the sterile field. this implies that the sterilized item is used during the procedure for which it was sterilized and in a manner that minimizes its exposure to air and other environmental contaminants. the same critical reprocessing steps (e.g., cleaning, decontamination, rinsing, and aseptic transfer from the sterilizer to the point of use) must be followed. immediate-use steam sterilization should not be used for convenience, as an alternative to purchasing sufficient instrument sets, or as a time saver. 209, 210 ethylene oxide "gas" sterilization eto is a colorless gas that is flammable and explosive. the four essential parameters (operational ranges) are gas concentration (450 to 1200 mg/l); temperature (37° c to 63° c); relative humidity (40% to 80%; water molecules carry eto to reactive sites); and exposure time (1 to 6 hours). these parameters influence the effectiveness of eto sterilization. [211] [212] [213] [214] within certain limitations, an increase in gas concentration and temperature may shorten the time necessary for achieving sterilization.the main disadvantages associated with eto are the lengthy cycle time and its potential hazards to patients and staff; the main advantages are that it is highly penetrating and can sterilize occluded locations in medical items and can sterilize heat-or moisture-sensitive medical equipment without deleterious effects on the material used in the medical devices (see table 301 -3). 212 acute exposure to eto may result in irritation (e.g., to skin, eyes, or gastrointestinal or respiratory tracts) and central nervous system depression. 69 chronic inhalation has been linked to the formation of cataracts, cognitive impairment, neurologic dysfunction, and disabling polyneuropathies. 69 occupational exposure in health care facilities has been linked to hematologic changes and an increased risk for spontaneous abortions and various cancers. 69 eto should be considered a known human carcinogen. 215 the use of eto evolved when few alternatives existed for sterilizing heat-and moisture-sensitive medical devices; however, favorable properties (see table 301 -3) account for its continued widespread use. 216 two eto gas mixtures are available to replace eto-chlorofluorocarbon (cfc) mixtures for large capacity, tank-supplied sterilizers. the etocarbon dioxide (co 2 ) mixture consists of 8.5% eto and 91.5% co 2 . this mixture has limited use in u.s. health care facilities but is sometimes used in hospitals in india and china. it is less expensive than eto-hydrochlorofluorocarbons (hcfc), but a disadvantage is the need for pressure vessels rated for steam sterilization, because higher pressures (28-psi gauge) are required. the other mixture, which is a drop-in cfc replacement, is eto mixed with hcfc. hcfcs are approximately 50-fold less damaging to the earth's ozone layer than are cfcs. the epa will begin regulation of hcfc in the year 2015 and will terminate production in the year 2030. the eto-hcfc mixtures have been provided by companies as a drop-in replacement for cfc-12 (one mixture consists of 8.6% eto and 91.4% hcfc, and the other mixture is composed of 10% eto and 90% hcfc) but will be phased out by the end of 2013. 216 an alternative to the pressurized mixed-gas eto systems is 100% eto. partly because of the events just described, the 100% eto sterilizers that use unit-dose cartridges will become the systems for eto use in u.s. health care facilities.the excellent microbicidal activity of eto has been demonstrated in several studies 25, 161, 162, [217] [218] [219] and summarized in published reports. 220 eto inactivates all microorganisms, although bacterial spores (especially b. atrophaeus) are more resistant than other microorganisms. for this reason, b. atrophaeus is the recommended biologic indicator organism.like all sterilization processes, the effectiveness of eto sterilization can be altered by lumen length, lumen diameter, inorganic salts, and organic materials. ‡ for example, although eto is not used commonly for reprocessing endoscopes, 39 several studies have shown failure of eto in inactivating contaminating spores in endoscope channels 221 or lumen test units. 25, 161, 218 residual eto levels averaging 66.2 ppm have been found even after the standard degassing time. 130 failure of eto also has been observed when dental handpieces were contaminated and combustion of lubricants associated with dental handpieces, 203 reduction in ability to transmit light associated with laryngoscopes, 204 and increased hardening time (fivefold to sixfold) with plaster cast. 205 the basic principle of steam sterilization, as accomplished in an autoclave, is to expose each item to direct steam contact at the required temperature and pressure for the specified time. thus, there are four parameters of steam sterilization: steam, pressure, temperature, and time. the ideal steam for sterilization is dry saturated steam and entrained water (dryness fraction ≥97%). 194 pressure serves as a means to obtain the high temperatures necessary to quickly kill microorganisms. specific temperatures must be obtained to ensure the microbicidal activity. the two common steam sterilizing temperatures are 121° c (250° f) and 132° c (270° f). these temperatures (and other high temperatures) must be maintained for a minimal time to kill microorganisms. recognized minimum exposure periods for sterilization of wrapped health care supplies are 30 minutes at 121° c in a gravity displacement sterilizer or 4 minutes at 132° c in a prevacuum sterilizer. at constant temperatures, sterilization times vary depending on the type of item (e.g., metal versus rubber, plastic, items with lumens), whether the item is wrapped or unwrapped, and the sterilizer type.the two basic types of steam sterilizers (autoclaves) are the gravity displacement autoclave and the high-speed prevacuum sterilizer. in the former, steam is admitted at the top or the sides of the sterilizing chamber and, because the steam is lighter than air, forces air out the bottom of the chamber through the drain vent. the gravity displacement autoclaves are primarily used to process laboratory media, water, pharmaceutical products, regulated medical waste, and nonporous articles whose surfaces have direct steam contact. with gravity displacement sterilizers the penetration time into porous items is prolonged because of incomplete air elimination. the high-speed prevacuum sterilizers are similar to the gravity displacement sterilizers except they are fitted with a vacuum pump (or ejector) to ensure air removal from the sterilizing chamber and load before the steam is admitted. the advantage of a vacuum pump is that there is nearly instantaneous steam penetration even into porous loads.like other sterilization systems, the steam cycle is monitored by physical, chemical, and biological monitors. steam sterilizers usually are monitored using a printout (or graphically) by measuring temperature, the time at the temperature, and pressure. typically, chemical indicators are affixed to the outside and incorporated into the pack to monitor the temperature or time and temperature. the effectiveness of steam sterilization is monitored with a biological indicator containing spores of geobacillus stearothermophilus (formerly bacillus stearothermophilus). positive spore test results are a relatively rare event and can be attributed to operator error, inadequate steam delivery, 206 or equipment malfunction.portable steam sterilizers are used in outpatient, dental, and rural clinics. these sterilizers are designed for small instruments, such as hypodermic syringes and needles and dental instruments. the ability of the sterilizer to reach physical parameters necessary to achieve sterilization should be monitored by physical, chemical, and biologic indicators.steam sterilization should be used whenever possible on all critical and semicritical items that are heat and moisture resistant (e.g., steam sterilizable respiratory therapy and anesthesia equipment), even when not essential to prevent pathogen transmission. steam sterilizers also are used in health care facilities to decontaminate microbiologic waste and sharps containers, 207 but additional exposure time is required in the gravity displacement sterilizer for these items."flash" steam sterilization was originally defined by underwood and perkins as sterilization of an unwrapped object at 132° c for 3 minutes at 27 to 28 pounds of pressure in a gravity displacement sterilizer. 208 it was intended for instruments (e.g., dropped instruments) when there is insufficient time to sterilize an item by the preferred package method. the term "flash" arose out of the abbreviated time of exposure of the unwrapped instrument. flash sterilization is an antiquated term that does not fully describe the various steam sterilization cycles now used to process items not intended to be stored for later use. immediate use guidelines on reprocessing, [236] [237] [238] [239] and outbreaks of infection continue to occur. 240, 241 to ensure that reprocessing personnel are properly trained, there should be initial and annual competency testing for each individual who is involved in reprocessing endoscopic instruments. 9, 38, 167, 234 in general, endoscope disinfection or sterilization with a liquid chemical sterilant or high-level disinfectant involves five steps after leak testing: 1. clean-mechanically clean internal and external surfaces, including brushing internal channels and flushing each internal channel with water and a enzymatic cleaner. 2. disinfect-immerse endoscope in high-level disinfectant (or chemical sterilant) and perfuse (eliminates air pockets and ensures contact of the germicide with the internal channels) disinfectant into all accessible channels such as the suction/biopsy channel and air/ water channel and expose for a time recommended for specific products. 3. rinse-rinse the endoscope and all channels with sterile water, filtered water (commonly used with automated endoscope reprocessors), or tap water. 4. dry-rinse the insertion tube and inner channels with alcohol and dry with forced air after disinfection and before storage. 5. store-store the endoscope in a way that prevents recontamination and promotes drying (e.g., hung vertically). unfortunately, there is poor compliance with the recommendations for reprocessing endoscopes, which may result in patient exposure to bloodborne pathogens. 242 in addition, there are rare instances in which the scientific literature and recommendations from professional organizations regarding the use of disinfectants and sterilants may differ from the manufacturer's label claim. one example is the contact time used to achieve high-level disinfection with 2% glutaraldehyde. based on fda requirements (fda regulates liquid sterilants and high-level disinfectants used on critical and semicritical medical devices), manufacturers test the efficacy of their germicide formulations under worstcase conditions (i.e., minimum recommended concentration of the active ingredient) and in the presence of organic soil (typically 5% serum). the soil is used to represent the organic loading to which the device is exposed during actual use and that would remain on the device in the absence of cleaning. these stringent test conditions are designed to provide a margin of safety by ensuring that the contact conditions for the germicide provide complete elimination of the test bacteria (e.g., 10 5 to 10 6 m. tuberculosis in organic soil and dried on a scope) if inoculated into the most difficult areas for the disinfectant to penetrate and in the absence of cleaning. however, the scientific data demonstrate that m. tuberculosis levels can be reduced by at least 8 log 10 with cleaning (4 log 10 ) followed by chemical disinfection for 20 minutes at 20° c (4 to 6 log 10 ). 9, 37, 243 because of these data, professional organizations (at least 14 professional organizations worldwide) that have endorsed an endoscope reprocessing guideline recommend contact conditions of 20 minutes at 20° c (or <20 minutes outside the united states) with 2% glutaraldehyde to achieve high-level disinfection that differs from that of the manufacturer's label. 37, [244] [245] [246] it is important to emphasize that the fda tests do not include cleaning, a critical component of the disinfection process. therefore, when cleaning has been included in the test methodology, 2% glutaraldehyde for 20 minutes has been demonstrated to be effective in eliminating all vegetative bacteria.in december 1991 osha promulgated a standard entitled "occupational exposure to bloodborne pathogens" to eliminate or minimize occupational exposure to bloodborne pathogens. 247 one component of this requirement is that all equipment and environmental and working surfaces be cleaned and decontaminated with an appropriate disinfectant after contact with blood or other potentially infectious materials. although the osha standard does not specify the type of disinfectant or procedure, the osha original compliance document 248 suggested that a germicide must be tuberculocidal to kill hepatitis b virus (e.g., phenolic, chlorine). however, in february 1997, osha amended its policy and stated that epa-registered disinfectants that are labeled as with streptococcus mutans and exposed to eto. 222 it is recommended that dental handpieces be steam sterilized.eto is used in health care facilities to sterilize critical items (and sometimes semicritical items) that are moisture or heat sensitive and cannot be sterilized by steam sterilization.new sterilization technology based on hydrogen peroxide and plasma was patented in 1987 and marketed in the united states in 1993. gas plasmas have been referred to as the fourth state of matter (i.e., liquids, solids, gases, and gas plasmas). gas plasmas are generated in an enclosed chamber under deep vacuum using radiofrequency or microwave energy to excite the gas (i.e., hydrogen peroxide) molecules and produce charged particles, many of which are in the form of free radicals (e.g., hydroxyl and hydroperoxyl). this system works by diffusing hydrogen peroxide into the chamber and then "exciting" the hydrogen peroxide into a plasma state. the combined use of hydrogen peroxide vapor and plasma safely and rapidly sterilizes instruments without leaving toxic residues. the biologic indicator used with this system is geobacillus stearothermophilus spores.this process has the ability to inactivate a broad range of microorganisms, including resistant bacterial spores. studies have been conducted against vegetative bacteria (including mycobacteria), yeasts, fungi, viruses, and bacterial spores. 25, 161, 219, [223] [224] [225] [226] [227] [228] [229] like all sterilization processes, the effectiveness can be altered by lumen length, lumen diameter, inorganic salts, and organic materials. § materials and devices that cannot tolerate high temperatures and humidity, such as some plastics, electrical devices, and corrosionsusceptible metal alloys, can be sterilized by hydrogen peroxide gas plasma. this method has been compatible with most (>95%) medical devices and materials tested. 230, 231 vaporized hydrogen peroxide a new low temperature sterilization system uses vaporized hydrogen peroxide to sterilize reusable metal and nonmetal devices used in health care facilities. the system is compatible with a wide range of medical instruments and materials (e.g., polypropylene, brass, polyethylene). there are no toxic by-products because only water vapor and oxygen are produced. the system is not intended to process liquids, linens, powders, or any cellulose materials. the system can sterilize instruments with diffusion-restricted spaces (e.g., scissors) and medical devices with a single stainless steel lumen based on lumen internal diameter and length (e.g., an inside diameter of 1 mm or larger and a length of 125 mm or shorter; see manufacturer's recommendations). thus, gastrointestinal endoscopes and bronchoscopes cannot be sterilized in this system at the current time. although this system has not been comparatively evaluated with other sterilization processes, vaporized hydrogen peroxide has been shown to be effective in killing spores, viruses, mycobacteria, fungi, and bacteria. table 301 -3 lists the advantages and disadvantages of this and other processes.physicians use endoscopes to diagnose and treat numerous medical disorders. although endoscopes represent a valuable diagnostic and therapeutic tool in modern medicine and the incidence of infection associated with use has been reported as very low (about 1 in 1.8 million procedures), 232 more health care-associated outbreaks have been linked to contaminated endoscopes than to any other medical device. [4] [5] [6] 233 to prevent the spread of health care-associated infections, all heat-sensitive endoscopes (e.g., gastrointestinal endoscopes, bronchoscopes, nasopharyngoscopes) must be properly cleaned and at a minimum subjected to high-level disinfection after each use. highlevel disinfection can be expected to destroy all microorganisms; although when high numbers of bacterial spores are present, a few spores may survive.recommendations for the cleaning and disinfection of endoscopic equipment have been published and should be strictly followed. 9 the current recommendations consider inactivation data but also use epidemiologic studies of prion transmission, infectivity of human tissues, and the efficacy of removing proteins by cleaning. 257, 259, 260 on the basis of scientific data, only critical (e.g., surgical instruments) and semicritical devices contaminated with high-risk tissue (i.e., brain, spinal cord, and eye tissue) from high-risk patients (e.g., known or suspected infection with cjd or other prion disease) require special prion reprocessing. a moist environment after contamination reduces the attachment of both protein and prion amyloid to the stainless steel surface so moist conditions should be maintained. 261 after the device is clean, it should be sterilized by either autoclaving (i.e., steam sterilization) or using a combination of sodium hydroxide and autoclaving 262 using one of the options below 257 : option 1-autoclave at 134° c for 18 minutes in a prevacuum sterilizer option 2-autoclave at 132° c for 1 hour in a gravity displacement sterilizer 9,257,263 option 3-immerse in 1n sodium hydroxide for 1 hour; remove and rinse in water, then transfer to an open pan and autoclave (121° c gravity displacement or 134°c porous or prevacuum sterilizer) for 1 hour option 4-immerse in 1n sodium hydroxide for 1 hour and heat in a gravity displacement at 121° c for 30 minutes, then clean and subject to routine sterilization. some data suggest the temperature should not exceed 134° c because the effectiveness of autoclaving may decline as the temperature is increased (e.g., 136° c, 138° c). 264 prion-contaminated medical devices that are impossible or difficult to clean should be discarded. to minimize environmental contamination, noncritical environmental surfaces should be covered with plastic-backed paper; and when contaminated with high-risk tissues, the paper should be properly discarded. noncritical environmental surfaces (e.g., laboratory surfaces) contaminated with high-risk tissues should be cleaned and then spot decontaminated with a 1 : 10 dilution of hypochlorite solutions. 257there is excellent evidence in the scientific literature that environmental contamination plays an important role in the transmission of several key health care-associated pathogens, including mrsa, vre, acinetobacter, norovirus, and c. difficile. [265] [266] [267] [268] all these pathogens have been demonstrated to persist in the environment for days (in some cases months), frequently contaminate the environmental surfaces in rooms of colonized or infected patients, transiently colonize the hands of health care personnel, be transmitted by health care personnel, and cause outbreaks in which environmental transmission was deemed to play a role. importantly, a recent study by steifel and associates demonstrated that contact with the environment was just as likely to contaminate the hands of health care workers as was direct contact with the patient. 269 further, admission to a room in which the previous patient was colonized or infected with mrsa, vre, acinetobacter, or c. difficile has been shown to be a risk factor for the newly admitted patient to develop colonization or infection. 270, 271 it has long been recommended in the united states that environmental surfaces in patient rooms be cleaned and disinfected on a regular basis (e.g., daily or three times per week), when surfaces are visibly soiled, and after patient discharge (terminal cleaning). 9 disinfection is generally performed using an epa-registered hospital disinfectant such as a quaternary ammonium compound. recent studies have demonstrated that adequate environment cleaning is frequently lacking. for example, carling and co-workers assessed the thoroughness of terminal cleaning in the patient's immediate environment in 23 acute care hospitals (1119 patient rooms) by using a transparent, easily cleaned, stable solution that fluoresces when exposed to hand-held uv light. 272 the overall thoroughness of cleaning, expressed as a percent of surfaces evaluated, was 49% (range for all hospitals, 35% to 81%). using a similar design, carling and co-workers assessed the environmental cleaning in intensive care unit rooms in 16 hospitals (2320 objects) and demonstrated effective against hiv and hepatitis b virus would be considered as appropriate disinfectants "provided such surfaces have not become contaminated with agent(s) or volumes of or concentrations of agent(s) for which higher level disinfection is recommended. " when bloodborne pathogens other than hepatitis b virus or hiv are of concern, osha continues to require the use of epa-registered tuberculocidal disinfectants or hypochlorite solution (diluted 1 : 10 or 1 : 100 with water). 89, 249 recent studies demonstrate that, in the presence of large blood spills, a 1 : 10 final dilution of epa-registered hypochlorite solution initially should be used to inactivate bloodborne viruses 54, 250 to minimize risk for disease to the health care worker from percutaneous injury during the clean-up process.emerging pathogens, antibiotic-resistant bacteria, and bioterrorism agentsemerging pathogens are of growing concern to the general public and infection control professionals. relevant pathogens include cryptosporidium parvum, c. difficile, severe acute respiratory syndrome (sars)coronavirus, helicobacter pylori, e. coli o157:h7, hiv, hepatitis c virus (hcv), rotavirus, multidrug-resistant m. tuberculosis, human papillomavirus, norovirus, and nontuberculous mycobacteria (e.g., m. chelonae). similarly, publications have highlighted the concern about the potential for bioterrorism. 251 the centers for disease control and prevention (cdc) has categorized several agents as "high priority" because they can be easily disseminated or transmitted person to person, can cause high mortality, and are likely to cause public panic and social disruption. 252 these agents include bacillus anthracis (anthrax), yersinia pestis (plague), variola major (smallpox), francisella tularensis (tularemia), filoviruses (ebola hemorrhagic fever, marburg hemorrhagic fever); and arenaviruses (lassa [lassa fever], junin [argentine hemorrhagic fever]), and related viruses. 252 with rare exceptions, the susceptibility of each of these pathogens to chemical disinfectants/sterilants has been studied and all of these pathogens (or surrogate microbes such as feline-calicivirus for norovirus, vaccinia for variola, 142 and b. atrophaeus [formerly bacillus subtilis] for b. anthracis), are susceptible to currently available chemical disinfectants/sterilants. 9,253,254 standard sterilization and high-level disinfection procedures for patient care equipment (as recommended in this chapter) are adequate to sterilize or disinfect instruments or devices contaminated with blood or other body fluids from persons infected with bloodborne pathogens, emerging pathogens, and bioterrorism agents, with the exception of prions (see later). no changes in procedures for cleaning, disinfecting, or sterilizing need to be made. 9 in addition, there are no data to show that antibiotic-resistant bacteria (methicillin-resistant staphylococcus aureus [mrsa], vancomycin-resistant enterococcus [vre], multidrug-resistant m. tuberculosis) are less sensitive to the liquid chemical germicides that antibiotic-sensitive bacteria at currently used germicide contact conditions and concentrations. 255, 256 creutzfeldt-jakob disease (cjd) is a degenerative neurologic disorder of humans with an incidence in the united states of approximately 1 case/million population/year. 257, 258 cjd is believed to be caused by a proteinaceous infectious agent or prion. cjd is related to other human transmissible spongiform encephalopathies (tses) that include kuru (0 incidence, now eradicated), gertsmann-straussler-sheinker (gss) syndrome (1/40 million), and fatal insomnia syndrome (ffi) (<1/40 million). the agents of cjd and other tses exhibit an unusual resistance to conventional chemical and physical decontamination methods. because the cjd agent is not readily inactivated by conventional disinfection and sterilization procedures and because of the invariably fatal outcome of cjd, the procedures for disinfection and sterilization of the cjd prion have been both conservative and controversial for many years. units (cfu)/cm 2 and of vre by more than 3-to 4-log 10 cfu/cm 2 . 282 thus, there are now three studies that have demonstrated that a uv-c system is capable of reducing vegetative bacteria inoculated on a carrier by more than 3-to 4-log 10 in 15 to 20 minutes and c. difficile by more than 1.7-to 4-log 10 in 35 to 100 minutes. the studies also demonstrate reduced effectiveness when surfaces were not in direct line of sight. [280] [281] [282] several systems that produce hydrogen peroxide (e.g., vapor, aerosolized dry mist) have been studied for their ability to decontaminate environmental surfaces and objects in hospital rooms. hydrogen peroxide vapor (hpv) has been used increasingly for the decontamination of rooms in health care facilities. [283] [284] [285] [286] [287] [288] [289] [290] [291] [292] investigators found that hydrogen peroxide systems are a highly effective method for eradicating various pathogens (e.g., mrsa, m. tuberculosis, serratia, c. difficile spores, clostridium botulinum spores) from rooms, furniture, and equipment. importantly, using a before-after study design, boyce and co-workers have shown that use of hydrogen peroxide vapor was associated with a significant reduction in the incidence of c. difficile infection on five high-incidence wards. 283the uv-c system studied and the systems that use hydrogen peroxide have their own advantages and disadvantages 268 and there is now ample evidence that these "no-touch" systems can reduce environmental contamination with health care-associated pathogens. however, each specific system should be studied and its efficacy demonstrated before being introduced into health care facilities. the main advantage of both units is their ability to achieve substantial reductions in vegetative bacteria. as noted earlier, manual cleaning has been demonstrated to be suboptimal because many environmental surfaces are not cleaned. another advantage is their ability to substantially reduce c. difficile because low-level disinfectants (e.g., quaternary ammonium compounds) have limited or no measurable activity against spore-forming bacteria. 278 both systems are residual free and they decontaminate all exposed surfaces and equipment in the room.the major disadvantages of both decontamination systems are the substantial capital equipment costs, the need to remove personnel and patients from the room, thus limiting their use to terminal room disinfection (must prevent/minimize exposure to uv and hydrogen peroxide), the staff time needed to transport the system to rooms to be decontaminated and monitor its use, the need to physically clean the room of dust and debris, and the sensitivity to use parameters. there are several important differences between the two systems. the uv-c system offers faster decontamination that reduces the "down" time of the room before another patient can be admitted. the hydrogen peroxide systems have been demonstrated to be more effective in eliminating spore-forming organisms. whether this improved sporicidal activity is clinically important is unclear because studies have demonstrated that although environmental contamination is common in the rooms of patients with c. difficile infection, the level of contamination is relatively low (also true for mrsa and vre). finally, the hydrogen peroxide system was demonstrated to reduce c. difficile incidence in a clinical study, whereas similar studies with the uv-c system have not been published. if additional studies continue to demonstrate a benefit, then widespread adoption of these technologies should be considered for terminal room disinfection of certain patient rooms (e.g., contact precautions) in health care facilities.health care facilities that generate medical, chemical, or radiologic waste have a moral and legal obligation to dispose of these wastes in a manner that poses minimal potential hazard to the environment or public health. the proper disposal of these wastes requires a dynamic waste management plan that conforms to federal, state, and local regulations and provides adequate personnel and financial resources to ensure implementation. that only 57.1% of sites were cleaned after discharge of the room's occupant. 273 a recent study using atp bioluminescence assays and aerobic cultures demonstrated that medical equipment frequently had not been disinfected as per protocol. 274investigators have reported that intervention programs aimed at environmental services workers resulted in significant improvement in cleaning practices. 65, 66 such interventions have generally included multiple activities: improved education, monitoring the thoroughness of cleaning (e.g., by use of atp assays or fluorescent dyes) with feedback of performance to the environmental service workers or use of cleaning checklists or both. we have found that assignment of cleaning responsibility (e.g., medical equipment to be cleaned by nursing; environmental surfaces to be cleaned by environmental service) is also important to ensure all objects and surfaces are decontaminated, especially the surfaces of medical equipment (e.g., cardiac monitors). improved environmental cleaning has been demonstrated to reduce the environmental contamination with vre, 275, 276 mrsa, 276 and c. difficile. 277 importantly, no study has reported in the postintervention period proper cleaning of more than 85% of objects. further, all studies have only focused improvement on a limited number of "high risk" objects. thus, a concern of published studies is that they have only demonstrated improved cleaning of a limited number of "high risk" objects (or "targeted" objects), not an improvement in the overall thoroughness of room decontamination.as noted earlier, multiple studies have demonstrated that environmental surfaces and objects in rooms are frequently not properly cleaned and these surfaces may be important in transmission of health careassociated pathogens. further, although interventions aimed at improving cleaning thoroughness have demonstrated effectiveness, many surfaces remain inadequately cleaned and therefore potentially contaminated. for this reason, several manufacturers have developed room disinfection units that can decontaminate environmental surfaces and objects. these systems use one of two methods-either ultraviolet light or hydrogen peroxide. 268 these technologies supplement, but do not replace, standard cleaning and disinfection because surfaces must be physically cleaned of dirt and debris.uv irradiation has been used for the control of pathogenic microorganisms in a variety of applications, such as control of legionellosis, as well as disinfection of air, surfaces, and instruments. 278, 279 at certain wavelengths, uv light will break the molecular bonds in dna, thereby destroying the organism. uv-c has a characteristic wavelength of 200 to 270 nm (e.g., 254 nm), which lies in the germicidal active portion of the electromagnetic spectrum of 200 to 320 nm. the efficacy of uv irradiation is a function of many different parameters such as intensity, exposure time, lamp placement, and air movement patterns.an automated mobile uv-c unit has been shown to eliminate more than 3-log 10 vegetative bacteria (mrsa, vre, acinetobacter baumannii) and more than 2.4-log 10 c. difficile seeded onto formica surfaces in patients' rooms experimentally contaminated. 280 boyce and colleagues report the results of assessing the effectiveness of the same uv-c unit to reduce environmental contamination with vegetative bacteria (measured using aerobic colony counts) and c. difficile inoculated onto stainless steel carrier disks. 281 room decontamination with the uv system resulted in significant reductions in aerobic bacteria on five high-touch surfaces. mean c. difficile log 10 reductions ranged from 1.8 to 2.9 using cycle times of 34.2 to 100.1 minutes. surfaces in direct line-of-sight were significantly more likely to yield negative cultures after uv decontamination than before decontamination. nerandzic and colleagues showed that uv-c at a reflected dose of 22,000 mws/ cm 2 for approximately 45 minutes consistently reduced recovery of c. difficile spores and mrsa by more than 2-to 3-log 10 colony-forming (e.g., the cdc, epa, or states) define waste as infectious when it is suspected to contain pathogens in sufficient number to cause disease. not only does this subjective definition result in conflicting opinions from the cdc, epa, and state agencies on what constitutes infectious waste and how it should be treated, but it also gives undue emphasis to the mere presence of pathogens.guidelines produced by the cdc have designated five types of hospital waste as regulated medical waste (i.e., microbiology laboratory waste, pathology and anatomy waste, contaminated animal carcasses, blood, and sharps). 40 the epa guidelines consider the same types of waste as infectious or regulated medical waste but also designate communicable disease isolation waste. 296 in the mwta, the epa modified its position on "communicable disease isolation waste" by including only certain "highly" communicable disease waste such as class 4 (e.g., marburg, ebola, and lassa viruses) as regulated medical waste 298 (table 301-4 ). in a systematic random survey of all u.s. hospitals conducted in july 1987 and january 1988, the overall compliance rates with the cdc and epa recommendations were 82% and 75%, respectively. not only were the majority of hospitals in compliance, but the hospitals frequently treated other hospital waste as infectious, including contaminated laboratory waste (87%), surgery waste (78%), dialysis waste (69%), items contacting secretions (63%), intensive care (37%), and emergency department waste (41%). 293 a key component in evaluating the impact of a medical waste management program is the quantity of waste produced per patient. hospitalized patients generate about 15 pounds of hospital waste per day. the amount of hospital waste generated by u.s. hospitals is approximately 6700 tons per day. u.s. hospitals designate approximately 15% of the total hospital waste by weight as infectious (about 1000 tons of infectious waste per day). 293 not surprisingly, the percentage of medical waste treated as infectious increases with the number and types of medical waste classified as infectious. for example, about 6% of hospital waste would be treated as infectious waste if the cdc guidelines are followed but 45% of hospital waste could be considered infectious waste under the mwta. 293, 299 the vast majority of u.s. hospitals designate and treat microbiologic, pathologic, isolation, blood, and sharp waste as infectious. 293 in the late 1980s, treatment of infectious waste by u.s. hospitals was most medical waste disposal has been as a major problem in the united states for the past 40 years. the problem has developed as a result of medical waste washing ashore in some coastal states in 1987 and 1988 and the perceived threat of acquiring hiv infection via this waste. this has led to restrictive rules governing the disposal of medical waste in many states and an increase in the volume of waste defined as regulated medical waste. coincidentally, with an increase in volume of regulated medical waste (formerly called "infectious waste"), the options for medical waste treatment and disposal are diminishing because of space and environmental concerns. this section will review some of the principles associated with medical waste management, but a more detailed description of collection, storage, processing, transporting, treatment, and public health implications of medical waste may be found elsewhere. [293] [294] [295] [296] [297] despite the attention given to medical waste by the public, the media, and all levels of government, the terms hospital waste, medical waste, regulated medical waste, and infectious waste are often used synonymously. hospital waste refers to all waste, biologic or nonbiologic, that is discarded and not intended for further use. medical waste refers to materials generated as a result of patient diagnosis, immunization, or treatment, such as soiled dressings or intravenous tubing. infectious waste refers to that portion of medical waste that could potentially transmit an infectious disease. congress and the epa used the term regulated medical waste rather than infectious waste in the medical waste tracking act (mwta) of 1988 in deference to the remote possibility of disease transmission associated with this waste. thus, medical waste is a subset of hospital waste, and regulated medical waste (which is synonymous with infectious waste from a regulatory perspective) is a subset of medical waste. 293 as stated, regulated medical waste (or infectious waste) is capable of producing an infectious disease. this definition requires a consideration of the factors necessary for disease induction that include dose, host susceptibility, presence of a pathogen, virulence of a pathogen, and the most commonly absent factor, a portal of entry. for a waste to be infectious, therefore, it must contain pathogens with sufficient virulence and quantity so that exposure to the waste by a susceptible host could result in an infectious disease. because there are no tests that allow infectious waste to be identified objectively, responsible agencies the cdc guidelines specify "microbiology laboratory waste" as infectious waste. this term includes stocks and cultures of etiologic agents and microbiology laboratory waste contaminated with etiologic agents (e.g., centrifuge tubes, pipettes, tissue culture bottles). † the act went into effect on june 22, 1989 , and expired june 22, 1991 . it affected only four states (new jersey, new york, connecticut, and rhode island). the act required both treatment (any method, technique, or process designed to change the biologic character or composition of medical waste so as to eliminate or reduce its potential for causing disease) and destruction (waste is ruined, torn apart, or mutilated so that it is no longer generally recognizable as medical waste). ‡ mwta specified used and unused sharps. the act regulated wastes from persons with highly communicable diseases such as class 4 etiologic agents (e.g., marburg, ebola, lassa viruses). § optional infectious waste: epa states that the decision to handle these wastes as infectious should be made by a responsible, authorized person or committee at the individual facility.cdc, centers for disease control and prevention 40 ; epa, u.s. environmental protection agency 296 ; mwta, medical waste tracking act. 298 disposal/treatment abbreviations: c, chemical disinfection for liquids only; cb, cremation or burial by mortician; i, incineration; iw, infectious waste; s, steam sterilization; sew, sanitary sewer (epa requires secondary treatment); sw, steam sterilization with incineration or grinding; ti, thermal inactivation.note: the joint commission requires that there be a hazardous waste system designed and operated in accordance with applicable law and regulations. acknowledge that much of the medical waste that washed ashore in the summer of 1988 was syringe related (65%) and came from home health care and illegal drug use. fourth, studies have shown that most u.s. hospitals are in compliance with the cdc infectious waste guidelines. fifth, although the principal purpose of the mwta was to reduce medical waste on beaches, it has not demonstrated its intended benefit. the relative number of syringes on the beaches in the mwta states was significantly greater during implementation of the act (17.23%) than before the act went into effect (3.2%). 299 if regulatory control were based on epidemiologic, microbiologic, and environmental data, only two types of medical waste would require special handling and treatment-sharps and microbiologic waste. federal medical waste regulations have been promulgated by the u.s. department of transportation and osha. the department of transportation regulation involves the transport of infectious substances and medical waste and went into effect january 1996. 302 the osha bloodborne pathogen standard requires labeling to designate waste that poses a health threat in the workplace. the osha definition of regulated waste is not intended to designate waste that must be treated. in fact, generators who apply the osha definition of regulated waste (rather than state regulations) to designate infectious waste for treatment by incineration or other means may unintentionally incur additional expenses. 247 when properly used, disinfection and sterilization can ensure the safe use of invasive and noninvasive medical devices. however, current disinfection and sterilization guidelines must be strictly followed.commonly accomplished by incineration (range, 64% to 93%, depending on the type of waste), but emission regulations that limit air pollutants has reduced the number and use of incineration for medical waste. for example, in september 1997 there were an estimated 2373 medical waste incinerators in the united states, but based on the epa's 2010 inventory there are 54 infectious waste incinerators. 300 autoclaves or steam sterilizers have become the primary nonincineration technology used by hospitals to process their regulated medical waste (except pathology waste) (e. krisiunas, written communication, 2008). several other nonincineration alternatives have been proposed for treating regulated medical waste (e.g., mechanical/chemical disinfection, microwave decontamination, steam disinfection, and compacting). 297 nonregulated medical waste is generally discarded in a properly sited and operated sanitary landfill because this is a safe and inexpensive disposal method (e.g., landfill disposal costs $0.02 to 0.05 per pound for nonregulated medical waste versus a contract incinerator cost of $0.20 to 0.60 per pound for regulated medical waste).the conflicting opinions of state and federal regulations are related to the paucity of microbiologic and epidemiologic evidence that medical waste represents a threat to the public health. first, with the exception of "sharps" such as needles, which have caused disease only in an occupational setting, there is no scientific evidence that medical waste has caused disease in the hospital or the community. second, data demonstrate that household waste contains on average 100 times as many microorganisms with pathogenic potential for humans than medical waste. 301 third, detailed reports of the beach washups found that the vast majority of waste on beaches was debris (about 99%) such as wood, plastic, and paper, not medical waste. epa documentsthe complete reference list is available online at expert consult.pathogenicity, the capacity of one organism to cause disease in another, is a complex and variable process. at the simplest level there is the question of defining what disease is. an all-embracing definition would be that disease is a departure from the normal physiological parameters of an organism. this could range from a temporary and very minor condition, such as a slightly raised temperature or lack of energy, to chronic pathologic conditions that eventually result in death. any of these conditions may result from a tremendous number of internal or external sources. there is rarely one single factor that "causes" a disease; most disease states are multifactorial at some level.in considering virus diseases, two aspects are involved-the direct effects of virus replication and the effects of body's responses to the infection. the course of any virus infection is determined by a delicate and dynamic balance between the host and the virus, as described in chapter 6. the extent and severity of virus pathogenesis is determined similarly. in some virus infections, most of the pathologic symptoms observed are not directly caused by virus replication but are to the side effects of the immune response. inflammation, fever, headaches, and skin rashes are not usually caused by viruses themselves but by the cells of the immune system due to the release of potent chemicals such as interferons and interleukins. in the most extreme cases, it is possible that none of the pathologic effects of certain diseases is caused directly by the virus, except that its presence stimulates activation of the immune system.in the past few decades, molecular analysis has contributed enormously to our understanding of virus pathogenesis. nucleotide sequencing and sitedirected mutagenesis have been used to explore molecular determinants of virulence in many different viruses. specific sequences and structures found only in disease-causing strains of virus and not in closely related attenuated or avirulent strains have been identified. sequence analysis has also led to the identification of t-cell and b-cell epitopes on virus proteins responsible for their recognition by the immune system. unfortunately, these advances do not automatically lead to an understanding of the mechanisms responsible for pathogenicity.unlike the rest of this book, this chapter is specifically about viruses that cause disease in animals. it does not discuss viruses that cause disease in plants since this has already been considered in chapter 6. three major aspects of virus pathogenesis are considered: direct cell damage resulting from virus replication, damage resulting from immune activation or suppression, and cell transformation caused by viruses.virus infection often results in a number of changes that are detectable by visual or biochemical examination of infected cells. these changes result from the production of virus proteins and nucleic acids, but also from alterations to the biosynthetic capabilities of infected cells. virus replication sequesters cellular apparatus such as ribosomes and raw materials that would normally be devoted to synthesizing molecules required by the cell. eukaryotic cells mustvirus pathogenesis is an abnormal and fairly rare situation. the majority of virus infections are silent and do not result in any outward signs of disease. it is sometimes said that viruses would disappear if they killed their hosts. this is not necessarily true. it is possible to imagine viruses with a hit-and-run strategy, moving quickly from one dying host to the next and relying on continuing circulation for their survival. nevertheless, there is a clear tendency for viruses not to injure their hosts if possible. a good example of this is the rabies virus. the symptoms of human rabies virus infections are truly dreadful, but thankfully rare. in its normal hosts (e.g., foxes), rabies virus infection produces a much milder disease that does not usually kill the animal. humans are an unnatural, dead-end host for this virus, and the severity of human rabies is as extreme as the condition is rare. ideally, a virus would not even provoke an immune response from its host, or at least would be able to hide to avoid the effects. herpesviruses and some retroviruses have evolved complex lifestyles that enable them to get close to this objective, remaining silent for much of the time. of course, fatal infections such as rabies and acquired immune deficiency syndrome (aids) always grab the headlines. much less effort has been devoted to isolating and studying the many viruses that have not (yet) caused well-defined diseases in humans, domestic animals, or economically valuable crop plants.carry out constant macromolecular synthesis, whether they are growing and dividing or in a state of quiescence. a growing cell needs to manufacture more proteins, more nucleic acids, and more of all of its components to increase its size before dividing. however, there is another reason for such continuous activity. the function of all cells is regulated by controlled expression of their genetic information and the subsequent degradation of the molecules produced. such control relies on a delicate and dynamic balance between synthesis and decay which determines the intracellular levels of all the important molecules in the cell. this is particularly true of the control of the cell cycle, which determines the behavior of dividing cells (see "cell transformation by dna viruses," below). in general terms, a number of common phenotypic changes can be recognized in virus-infected cells. these changes are often referred to as the cytopathic effects (c.p.e.) of a virus, and include: i altered shape: adherent cells that are normally attached to other cells (in vivo) or an artificial substrate (in vitro) may assume a rounded shape different from their normal flattened appearance. the extended "processes" (extensions of the cell surface resembling tendrils) involved in attachment or mobility are withdrawn into the cell.i detachment from the substrate: for adherent cells, this is the stage of cell damage that follows that above. both of these effects are caused by partial degradation or disruption of the cytoskeleton that is normally responsible for maintaining the shape of the cell.i lysis: this is the most extreme case, where the entire cell breaks down. membrane integrity is lost, and the cell may swell due to the absorption of extracellular fluid and finally break open. this is an extreme case of cell damage, and it is important to realize that not all viruses induce this effect, although they may cause other cytopathic effects. lysis is beneficial to a virus in that it provides an obvious method of releasing new virus particles from an infected cell; however, there are alternative ways of achieving this, such as release by budding (chapter 4).i membrane fusion: the membranes of adjacent cells fuse, resulting in a mass of cytoplasm containing more than one nucleus, known as a syncytium, or, depending on the number of cells that merge, a giant cell. fused cells are short lived and subsequently lyse-apart from direct effects of the virus, they cannot tolerate more than one nonsynchronized nucleus per cell.i membrane permeability: a number of viruses cause an increase in membrane permeability, allowing an influx of extracellular ions such as sodium. translation of some virus mrnas is resistant to high concentrations of sodium ions, permitting the expression of virus genes at the expense of cellular messages. i inclusion bodies: these are areas of the cell where virus components have accumulated. they are frequent sites of virus assembly, and some cellular inclusions consist of crystalline arrays of virus particles. it is not clear how these structures damage the cell, but they are frequently associated with viruses that cause cell lysis, such as herpesviruses and rabies virus. i apoptosis: virus infection may trigger apoptosis ("programmed cell death"), a highly specific mechanism involved in the normal growth and development of organisms (see chapter 6).in some cases, a great deal of detail is known about the molecular mechanisms of cell injury. a number of viruses that cause cell lysis exhibit a phenomenon known as shutoff early in infection. shutoff is the sudden and dramatic cessation of most host-cell macromolecular synthesis. in poliovirusinfected cells, shutoff is the result of production of the virus 2a protein. this molecule is a protease that cleaves the p220 component of eif-4f, a complex of proteins required for cap-dependent translation of messenger rnas by ribosomes. because poliovirus rna does not have a 5 0 methylated cap but is modified by the addition of the vpg protein, virus rna continues to be translated. in poliovirus-infected cells, the dissociation of mrnas and polyribosomes from the cytoskeleton can be observed, and this is the reason for the inability of the cell to translate its own messages. a few hours after translation ceases, lysis of the cell occurs.in other cases, cessation of cellular macromolecular synthesis results from a different molecular mechanism. for many viruses, the sequence of events that occurs is not known. in the case of adenoviruses, the penton protein (part of the virus capsid) has a toxic effect on cells. although its precise action on cells is not known, addition of purified penton protein to cultured cells results in their rapid death. toxin production by pathogenic bacteria is a common phenomenon, but this is the only well-established case of a virusencoded molecule with a toxin-like action. however, some of the normal contents of cells released on lysis may have toxic effects on other cells, and antigens that are not recognized as "self" by the body (e.g., nuclear proteins) may result in immune activation and inflammation. the adenovirus e3à11.6k protein is synthesized in small amounts from the e3 promoter at early stages of infection and in large amounts from the major late promoter at late stages of infection (chapter 5). it has recently been shown that e3à11.6k is required for the lysis of adenovirus-infected cells and the release of virus particles from the nucleus.membrane fusion is the result of virus-encoded proteins required for infection of cells (see chapter 4), typically, the glycoproteins of enveloped viruses. one of the best-known examples of such a protein comes from sendai virus (a paramyxovirus), which has been used to induce cell fusion during the production of monoclonal antibodies (chapter 1). at least 9 of the 11 known herpes simplex virus (hsv/hhv-1) glycoproteins have been characterized regarding their role in virus replication. several of these proteins are involved in fusion of the virus envelope with the cell membrane and also in cell penetration. production of fused syncytia is a common feature of hsv infection.another virus that causes cell fusion is human immunodeficiency virus (hiv). infection of cd4 1 cells with some but not all isolates of hiv causes cellàcell fusion and the production of syncytia or giant cells (figure 7 .1). the protein responsible for this is the transmembrane envelope glycoprotein of the virus (gp41), and the domain near the amino-terminus responsible for this fusogenic activity has been identified by molecular genetic analysis. because hiv infects cd4 1 cells and it is the reduction in the number of these crucial cells of the immune system that is the most obvious defect in aids, it was initially believed that direct killing of these cells by the virus was the basis for the pathogenesis of aids. although direct cell killing by hiv undoubtedly occurs in vivo, it is now believed that the pathogenesis of aids is considerably more complex (see "viruses and immunodeficiency," below). many animal retroviruses also cause cell killing and, in most cases, it appears that the envelope protein of the virus is required, although there may be more than one mechanism involved.at least two groups of viruses, herpesviruses and retroviruses, directly infect the cells of the immune system. this has important consequences for the outcome of the infection and for the immune system of the host. hsv establishes a systemic infection, spreading via the bloodstream in association with platelets, but it does not show particular tropism for cells of the immune system. however, herpes saimirii and marek's disease virus are herpesviruses that cause lymphoproliferative diseases (but not clonal tumors) in monkeys and chickens, respectively. the most recently discovered human herpesviruses (hhvs)-hhv-6, hhv-7, and hhv-8-all infect lymphocytes (chapter 8).epsteinàbarr virus (ebv; hhv-4) infection of b-cells leads to their immortalization and proliferation, resulting in "glandular fever" or mononucleosis, a debilitating but benign condition. ebv was first identified in a lymphoblastoid cell line derived from burkitt's lymphoma and, in rare instances, ebv infection may lead to the formation of a malignant tumor (see "cell transformation by dna viruses," below). while some herpesviruses such as hsv are highly cytopathic, most of the lymphotropic herpesviruses do not cause a significant degree of cellular injury. however, infection of the delicate cells of the immune system may perturb their normal function. because the immune system is internally regulated by complex networks of interlinking signals, relatively small changes in cellular function can result in its collapse. alteration of the normal pattern of production of cytokines could have profound effects on immune function. the trans-regulatory proteins involved in the control of herpesvirus gene expression may also affect the transcription of cellular genes; therefore, the effects of herpesviruses on immune cells are more complex than just cell killing. the virus envelope glycoprotein, which plays a role on virus particles in receptor binding and membrane fusion, is expressed on the surface of infected cells. uninfected cd4 1 cells coming into contact with these infected cells are fused together to form a multinucleate syncytium.retroviruses cause a variety of pathogenic conditions including paralysis, arthritis, anemia, and malignant cellular transformation. a significant number of retroviruses infect the cells of the immune system. although these infections may lead to a diverse array of diseases and hematopoetic abnormalities such as anemia and lymphoproliferation, the most commonly recognized consequence of retrovirus infection is the formation of lymphoid tumors. however, some degree of immunodeficiency, ranging from very mild to quite severe, is a common consequence of the interference with the immune system resulting from the presence of a lymphoid or myeloid tumor.the most prominent aspect of virus-induced immunodeficiency is acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (aids), a consequence of infection with hiv, a member of the genus lentivirus of the retroviridae. a number of similar lentiviruses cause immunodeficiency diseases in animals. unlike infection by other types of retrovirus, hiv infection does not directly result in the formation of tumors. some tumors such as b-cell lymphomas are sometimes seen in aids patients, but these are a consequence of the lack of immune surveillance that is responsible for the destruction of tumors in healthy individuals.the clinical course of aids is long and very variable. a great number of different abnormalities of the immune system are seen in aids. as a result of the biology of lentivirus infections, the pathogenesis of aids is highly complex (figure 7 .2).it is still not clear how much of the pathology of aids is caused directly by the virus and how much is caused by the immune system. numerous models have been suggested to explain how hiv causes immunodeficiency. these mechanisms are not mutually exclusive and indeed it is probable that the underlying loss of cd4 1 cells (see chapter 6) in aids is complex and multifactorial. aids is defined as the presence of hiv infection, plus one or both of the following:1 t-cell count of less than 200 cells/ml of blood (the normal count is 600à1,000 per ml). i development of an opportunistic infection that occurs when the immune system is not working correctly, such as pneumocystis carinii pneumonia (pcp), certain eye diseases, encephalitis, and some specific tumors such as kaposi's sarcoma (ks).the best way to avoid aids is not to become infected with hiv, but that is not much help to the 35 million people worldwide who already are infected with the virus. if we are to find a cure for aids, we need to understand the mechanisms by which the virus causes the disease. although the basic biology of hiv is well understood (see further reading at the end of this chapter), scientists have never had a complete understanding of the processes by which cd4 1 t-helper cells are depleted in hiv infection, and therefore have never been able to fully explain why hiv destroys the body's supply of these vital cells. to infection with the virus, and following infection these cells may produce many new copies of hiv before dying. one explanation for cd4 1 cell loss is the "runaway" hypothesis, in which cd4 1 cells infected by hiv produce more virus particles, which activate more cd4 1 cells that in turn become infected, leading to a positive feedback cycle of cd4 1 cell activation, infection, hiv production, and cell destruction. unfortunately, mathematical models consisting of a series of equations to describe the processes by which cd4 1 cells are produced and eliminated suggest that if the "runaway" hypothesis was correct, then cd4 1 cells in hiv-infected individuals would fall to low levels over a few months, not over several years as usually happens. this implies that the "runaway" hypothesis cannot explain the slow pace of cd4 1 cell depletion in hiv infection. that leaves open the question of what exactly is going on between the time someone becomes infected with hiv and the time that they develop aids. while virus adaptation (antigenic variation) is important in the biology of hiv, this alone cannot explain the whole story.in general, hiv is regarded as an incurable infection, although in many cases doctors are able to stave off the onset of aids by giving patients sustained courses of antiretrovirus drugs. as a retrovirus, the biology of hiv, including integration of the virus genome into host-cell chromosomes, is a major problem in eradicating the virus from the body (see chapter 3). in hiv-infected people receiving antiviral therapy there is a reservoir of latently infected resting cd4 1 t cells. many hiv patients can manage their infection with a cocktails of antiretrovirus drugs which can reduce their "viral load"-the amount of virus circulating in the blood plasma-to undetectable levels. but even in such "noninfectious" patients hiv is still lurking in gut tissues, and still infecting other immune cells in the blood. mathematical modeling and clinical observations suggest it might not ever be possible to completely eradicate the virus from the body with current therapies. the hope is that new approaches such as rnai (see chapter 6) might one day be able to tackle this latent virus pool and completely eliminate the virus from the body, curing the infection. recent work has focused on the development of therapies to disrupt virus latency and expose the virus to replication-blocking drugs and to the immune response which exists in hiv-positive people. even if this is possible, the cost of these advanced therapies would be beyond the reach of developing countries where the majority of hiv-infected people live. it may be that adaptation of hiv to replication in humans may eventually temper the pathogenicity of the virus by lowering its replication capacity. however, this process will be speeded up by antiviral therapies in many different forms, including genetic, drugs, and vaccines.virus infections are believed to be a necessary prerequisite for a number of human diseases which are not directly caused by the virus. in some instances, the link between a particular virus and a pathological condition is well established, but it is clear that the pathogenesis of the disease is complex and also involves the immune system of the host. in other cases, the pathogenic involvement of a particular virus is less certain and, in a few instances, rather speculative.although the incidence of measles virus infection has been reduced sharply by vaccination (chapter 6), measles still causes thousands of deaths worldwide each year. the normal course of measles virus infection is an acute febrile illness during which the virus spreads throughout the body, infecting many tissues. the vast majority of people spontaneously recover from the disease without any lasting harm. in rare cases (about 1 in 2,000), measles may progress to a severe encephalitis. this is still an acute condition that either regresses or kills the patient within a few weeks; however, there is another, much rarer late consequence of measles virus infection that occurs many months or years after initial infection of the host. this is the condition known as subacute sclerosing panencephalitis (sspe). evidence of prior measles virus infection (antibodies or direct detection of the virus) is found in all patients with sspe, whether they can recall having a symptomatic case of measles or not. in about 1 in 300,000 cases of measles, the virus is not cleared from the body by the immune system but establishes a persistent infection in the cns. in this condition, virus replication continues at a low level, but defects in the envelope protein genes prevent the production of extracellular infectious virus particles. the lack of envelope protein production causes the failure of the immune system to recognize and eliminate infected cells; however, the virus is able to spread directly from cell to cell, bypassing the usual route of infection. it is not known to what extentthe more we study viruses the more examples we find of viruses interacting with the immune system. not interacting as in "argh! i'm dead", but interacting as in "i wonder what happens if i twist this knob?". almost all viruses moderate the immune responses directed against them. this makes sense-if they couldn't do this, they probably wouldn't be able to replicate. and some viruses are masters of the art, subtly tweaking and muting strands of the immune system to make life easier for them. herpesviruses and poxviruses spring to mind. in comparison to them, viruses which go for an all-out assault on the body or on the immune system seem like amateurs. the consequences on their hosts are devastating, which is bad for both the virus and the host. so let's hear it for the true masters of the craft of sneaking around, of getting on with things quietly.damage to the cells of the brain is caused directly by virus replication or whether there is any contribution by the immune system to the pathogenesis of sspe. vaccination against measles virus and the prevention of primary infection should ultimately eliminate this condition.another well-established case where the immune system is implicated in pathogenesis concerns dengue virus infections. dengue virus is a flavivirus that is transmitted from one human host to another via mosquitoes. the primary infection may be asymptomatic or may result in dengue fever. dengue fever is normally a self-limited illness from which patients recover after 7à10 days without further complications. following primary infections, patients carry antibodies to the virus. unfortunately, there are four serotypes of dengue virus (den-1, 2, 3, and 4), and the presence of antibody directed against one type does not give cross-protection against the other three; worse still is the fact that antibodies can enhance the infection of peripheral blood mononuclear cells by fc-receptor-mediated uptake of antibody-coated dengue virus particles (see chapter 4). in a few cases, the consequences of dengue virus infection are much more severe than the usual fever. dengue hemorrhagic fever (dhf) is a life-threatening disease. in the most extreme cases, so much internal hemorrhaging occurs that hypovolemic shock (dengue shock syndrome or dss) occurs. dss is frequently fatal. the cause of shock in dengue and other hemorrhagic fevers is partly due to the virus, but largely due to immune-mediated damage of virus-infected cells (figure 7 .3). dhf and dss following primary dengue virus infections occur in approximately 1 in 14,000 and 1 in 500 patients, respectively; however, after secondary dengue virus infections, the incidence of dhf is 1 in 90 and dss 1 in 50, as cross-reactive but nonneutralizing antibodies to the virus are now present. these figures show the problems of cross-infection with different serotypes of dengue virus, and the difficulties that must be faced in developing a safe vaccine against the virus. dengue virus is discussed further later in this chapter (see "new and emergent viruses").another instance where virus vaccines have resulted in increased pathology rather than the prevention of disease is the occurrence of postvaccination reye's syndrome. reye's syndrome is a neurological condition involving acute cerebral edema and occurs almost exclusively in children. it is well known as a rare postinfection complication of a number of different viruses, but most commonly influenza virus and varicellaàzoster virus (chicken pox). symptoms include frequent vomiting, painful headaches, behavioral changes, extreme tiredness, and disorientation. the chances of contracting reye's syndrome are increased if aspirin is administered during the initial illness. the basis for the pathogenesis of this condition is completely unknown, but some of the most unfortunate cases have followed the administration of experimental influenza virus vaccines.guillainàbarré syndrome is another mysterious condition in which demyelination of nerves results in partial paralysis and muscle weakness. the onset of guillainàbarré syndrome usually follows an acute "virus-like" infection, but no single agent has ever been firmly associated with this condition. kawasaki disease is similar to reye's syndrome in that it occurs in children but is distinct in that it results in serious damage to the heart. like guillainàbarré syndrome, kawasaki disease appears to follow acute infections. the disease itself is not infectious but does appear to occur in epidemics, which suggests an infectious agent as the cause. a large number of bacterial and virus pathogens have been suggested to be associated with the induction of kawasaki disease, but once again the underlying cause of the pathology is unknown. it would appear that acute infection itself rather than a particular pathogen may be responsible for the onset of these diseases.in recent years, there has been a search for an agent responsible for a newly diagnosed disease called chronic fatigue syndrome (cfs) or myalgic encephalomyelitis. unlike the other conditions described above, cfs is a rather illdefined disease and is not recognized by all physicians. recent research has discounted the earlier idea that ebv might cause cfs, but a variety of other possible virus causes, including other herpesviruses, enteroviruses, and retroviruses, have also been suggested. in october 2009 it was reported that a the cause of hypovolemic shock in dengue and other hemorrhagic fevers is partly due to the virus, but largely due to immune-mediated damage of virus-infected cells.novel retrovirus, xenotropic murine leukemia virus-related virus (xmrv), might be a possible cause. unfortunately, subsequent research findings about xmrv proved to be contradictory and confusing, and there is no strong evidence for the role of xmrv in cfs.can bacteriophages, viruses that are only capable of infecting prokaryotic cells, play a role in human disease? surprisingly, the answer is yes. shiga toxin (stx)-producing escherichia coli (stec) are able to cause intestinal foodborne diseases such as diarrhea and hemorrhagic colitis. stec serotype o157:h7, the "hamburger bug," has received much attention in recent years. stec infections can lead to fatal complications, such as hemolyticàuremic syndrome, as well as neurological disorders. the major virulence characteristics of these strains of bacteria are the ability to colonize the bowel (a natural trait of e. coli) and the production of secreted "shiga toxins," which can damage endothelial and tubular cells and may result in acute kidney failure. at least 100 different e. coli serotypes produce stx toxins, and stec bacteria occur frequently in the bowels of cattle and other domestic animals such as sheep, goats, pigs, and horses. meat is infected by fecal contamination, usually at the time of slaughter. ground meat such as hamburger is particularly dangerous as surface bacterial contamination may become buried deep within the meat where it may not be inactivated by cooking.what has this got to do with bacteriophages? various types of stx are known, but they fall into two main types: stx1 and stx2. the stx1 and stx2 toxin genes are encoded in the genome of lysogenic lambda-like prophages within the bacteria. stimuli such as uv light or mitomycin c are known to induce these prophages to release a crop of phage particles which can infect and lysogenize other susceptible bacteria within the gut, accounting for the high prevalence of stec bacteria (up to 50% of cattle in some herds). recent research has shown that the scandalous overuse of antibiotics as "growth promoters" in animal husbandry and even antibiotic treatment of infected people can stimulate the production of phage particles and contributes to the increased prevalence of stec bacteria and growing human death toll.other bacterial virulence determinants are also encoded by lysogenic phages (e.g., diphtheria toxin, streptococcus erythrogenic toxins, staphylococcus enterotoxins), although the selective pressures that maintain these arrangements are not yet understood. emerging bacterial genome sequence data strongly indicate that phages have been responsible for spreading virulence determinants across a wide range of pathogens.the other area where bacteriophages may influence human illness is phage therapy-the use of bacteriophages as antibiotics. this is not a new idea, with initial experiments having been performed (unsuccessfully) shortly after the discovery of bacteriophages almost 100 years ago (appendix 3); however, with increasing resistance of bacteria to antibiotics and the emergence of "superbugs" immune to all effective treatments, this idea has experienced a resurgence of interest. although attractive in theory, this approach suffers from a number of defects:i bacteriophages are quite specific in their receptor usage and hence the strains of bacteria they can infect; thus, they are "narrow spectrum" antibacterial agents. i bacteria exposed to bacteriophages rapidly develop resistance to infection by downregulating or mutating the phage receptor. i liberation of endotoxin as a consequence of widespread lysis of bacteria within the body can lead to toxic shock. i repeated administration of bacteriophages results in an immune response that neutralizes the phage particles before they can act.it may be, however, that this is a useful therapy for certain bacterial infections that cannot be treated by conventional means. recently, it has been shown that bioengineered antibodies can be delivered to the brain by bacteriophage vectors, and this novel approach is being investigated for the treatment of alzheimer's disease and cocaine addiction.transformation is a change in the morphological, biochemical, or growth parameters of a cell. transformation may or may not result in cells able to produce tumors in experimental animals, which is properly known as neoplastic transformation; therefore, transformed cells do not automatically result in the development of "cancer." carcinogenesis (or more properly, oncogenesis) is a complex, multistep process in which cellular transformation may be only the first, although essential, step along the way. transformed cells have an altered phenotype, which is displayed as one (or more) of the following characteristics:i loss of anchorage dependence: normal (i.e., nontransformed) adherent cells such as fibroblasts or epithelial cells require a surface to which they can adhere. in the body, this requirement is supplied by adjacent cells or structures; in vitro, it is met by the glass or plastic vessels in which the cells are cultivated. some transformed cells lose the ability to adhere to solid surfaces and float free (or in clumps) in the culture medium without loss of viability.i loss of contact inhibition: normal adherent cells in culture divide and grow until they have coated all the available surface for attachment. at this point, when adjacent cells are touching each other, cell division stops-the cells do not continue to grow and pile up on top of one another. many transformed cells have lost this characteristic. single transformed cell in a culture dish becomes visible as small thickened areas of growth called "transformed foci"-clones of cells all derived from a single original cell. i colony formation in semisolid media: most normal cells (both adherent and nonadherent cells such as lymphocytes) will not grow in media that are partially solid due to the addition of substances such as agarose or hydroxymethyl cellulose; however, many transformed cells will grow under these conditions, forming colonies since movement of the cells is restricted by the medium. i decreased requirements for growth factors: all cells require multiple factors for growth. in a broad sense, these include compounds such as ions, vitamins, and hormones that cannot be manufactured by the cell. more specifically, it includes regulatory peptides such as epidermal growth factor and platelet-derived growth factor that regulate the growth of cells. these are potent molecules that have powerful effects on cell growth. some transformed cells may have decreased or may even have lost their requirement for particular factors. the production by a cell of a growth factor required for its own growth is known as autocrine stimulation and is one route by which cells may be transformed.cell transformation is a single-hit process; that is, a single virus transforms a single cell (c.f. oncogenesis, which is the formation of tumors and a multistep process). all or part of the virus genome persists in the transformed cell and is usually (but not always) integrated into the host-cell chromatin. transformation is usually accompanied by continued expression of a limited repertoire of virus genes or rarely by productive infection. virus genomes found in transformed cells are frequently replication defective and contain substantial deletions.transformation is mediated by proteins encoded by oncogenes. these regulatory genes can be grouped in several ways-for example, by their origins, biochemical function, or subcellular locations ( i oncogenes and proto-oncogenes: oncogenes are mutated forms of proto-oncogenes, cellular genes whose normal function is to promote the normal growth and division of cells. i tumor suppressor genes: these genes normally function to inhibit the cell cycle and cell division. intermediate (e.g., months)intermediate c-onc in cell genome activated by provirus insertionno oncogene present in virus genome (replication competent) trans-activatinglong (e.g., years) low (,1%) activation of cellular genes by trans-acting virus proteins (replication competent) i dna repair genes: these genes ensure that each strand of genetic information is accurately copied during cell division of the cell cycle. mutations in these genes lead to an increase in the frequency of other mutations (e.g., in conditions such as ataxiaàtelangiectasia and xeroderma pigmentosum).the function of oncogene products depends on their cellular location (figure 7.4) . several classes of oncogenes are associated with the process of signal transduction-the transfer of information derived from the binding of extracellular ligands to cellular receptors to the nucleus (figure 7 .5).many of the kinases in these groups have a common type of structure with conserved functional domains representing the hydrophobic transmembrane and hydrophilic intracellular kinase regions (figure 7 .6). these proteins are associated with the cell membranes or are present in the cytoplasm. other classes of oncogenes located in the nucleus are normally involved with the control of the cell cycle (figure 7 .7). the products of these genes overcome the restriction between the g1 and s phases of the cell cycle, which is the key control point in preventing uncontrolled cell division. some virus oncogenes are not sufficient on their own to produce a fully transformed phenotype in cells; however, in some instances, they may cooperate with another oncogene of complementary function to produce a fully transformed phenotype-for example, the adenovirus e1a gene plus either the e1b gene or the c-ras gene transforms nih3t3 cells (a mouse fibroblast cell line). this further underlines the fact that oncogenesis is a complex, multistep process.not all retroviruses are capable of transforming cells-for example, lentiviruses such as hiv do not transform cells, although they are cytopathic. the retroviruses that can transform cells fall into three groups: transducing, cis-activating, and trans-activating. the characteristics of these groups are given in table 7 additional sequences derived from virus genes, most commonly virus gag sequences at the amino-terminus of the protein. these additional sequences may alter the function or the cellular localization of the protein, and these abnormal attributes result in transformation.alternatively, viruses may result in abnormal expression of an unaltered oncoprotein. this might be either the overexpression of an oncogene under the control of a virus promoter rather than its normal promoter in the cell, or it may be the inappropriate temporal expression of an oncoprotein that disrupts the cell cycle. chronic transforming retrovirus genomes do not contain oncogenes. these viruses activate c-oncs by a mechanism known as insertional activation. a provirus that integrates into the host-cell genome close to a c-onc sequence may indirectly activate the expression of the gene in a way analogous to that in which v-oncs have been activated by transduction (figure 7 .8). this can occur if the provirus is integrated upstream of the c-onc gene, which might be expressed via a read-through transcript of the virus genome plus downstream sequences; however, insertional activation can also occur when a provirus integrates downstream of a c-onc sequence or upstream but in an inverted orientation. in these cases, activation results from enhancer elements in the virus promoter (see chapter 5). these can act even if the provirus integrates at a distance of several kilobases from the c-onc gene. transformation by the third class of retroviruses operates by quite a different mechanism. human t-cell leukemia virus (htlv) and related animal viruses encode a transcriptional activator protein in the virus tax gene. the tax protein acts in trans to stimulate transcription from the virus long terminal repeat. it is believed that the protein also activates transcription of many cellular genes by interacting with transcription factors (chapter 5); however, htlv oncogenesis (i.e., the formation of a leukemic tumor) has a latent period of some 20à30 years. therefore, cell transformation (which can be mimicked in vitro) and tumor formation (which cannot) are not one and the same-additional events are required for the development of leukemia. it is thought that chromosomal abnormalities that may occur in the population of htlv-transformed cells are also required to produce a malignant tumor, although because of the difficulties of studying this lengthy process this is not completely understood.in contrast to the oncogenes of retroviruses, the transforming genes of dna tumor viruses have no cellular counterparts. several families of dna viruses are capable of transforming cells (table 7 .3). in general terms, the functions of their oncoproteins are much less diverse than those encoded by retroviruses. they are mostly nuclear proteins involved in the control of dna replication which directly affect the cell cycle. they achieve their effects by interacting with cellular proteins which normally appear to have a negative regulatory role in cell proliferation. two of the most important cellular proteins involved are known as p53 and rb. p53 was originally discovered by virtue of the fact that it forms complexes with sv40 t-antigen. it is now known that it also interacts with other dna virus oncoproteins, including those of adenoviruses and papillomaviruses. the gene encoding p53 is mutated or altered in the majority of tumors, implying that loss of the normal gene product is associated with the emergence of malignantly transformed cells. tumor cells, when injected with the native protein in vitro, show a decreased rate of cell division and decreased tumorigenicity in vivo. transgenic mice that do not possess an intact p53 gene are developmentally normal but are susceptible to the formation of spontaneous tumors; therefore, it is clear that p53 plays a central role in controlling the cell cycle. it is believed to be a tumor suppressor or "antioncogene" and has been called the "guardian of the genome." p53 is a transcription factor that activates the expression of certain cellular genes, notably waf1, which encodes a protein that is an inhibitor of g1 cyclindependent kinases, causing the cell cycle to arrest at the g1 phase (figure 7 .7). because these viruses require ongoing cellular dna replication for their own propagation, this explains why their transforming proteins target p53.rb was discovered when it was noticed that the gene that encodes this protein is always damaged or deleted in a tumor of the optic nerve known as retinoblastoma; therefore, the normal function of this gene is also thought to be that of a tumor suppressor. the rb protein forms complexes with a transcription factor called e2f. this factor is required for the transcription of adenovirus genes, but e2f is also involved in the transcription of cellular genes which drive quiescent cells into s phase. the formation of inactive e2fàrb complexes thus has the same overall effect as the action of p53-arrest of the cell cycle at g1. release of e2f by replacement of e2fàrb complexes with e1aàrb, t-antigenàrb, or e7àrb complexes therefore stimulates cellular and virus dna replication.the sv40 t-antigen is one of the known virus proteins that binds p53. chapter 5 describes the role of large t-antigen in the regulation of sv40 transcription. infection of cells by sv40 or other polyomaviruses can result in two possible outcomes:the outcome of infection appears to be determined primarily by the cell type infected; for example, mouse polyomavirus establishes a lytic infection of mouse cells but an abortive infection of rat or hamster cells, while sv40 shows lytic infection of monkey cells but abortive infection of mouse cells. however, in addition to transcription, t-antigen is also involved in genome replication. sv40 dna replication is initiated by binding of large t-antigen to the origin region of the genome (figure 5 .12). the function of t-antigen is controlled by phosphorylation, which decreases the ability of the protein to bind to the sv40 origin.the sv40 genome is very small and does not encode all the information necessary for dna replication; therefore, it is essential for the host cell to enter s phase, when cell dna and the virus genome are replicated together. proteinàprotein interactions between t-antigen and dna polymerase α directly stimulate replication of the virus genome. the precise regions of the t-antigen involved in binding to dna, dna polymerase α, p53, and rb are all known (figure 7 .9). inactivation of tumor suppressor proteins bound to t-antigen causes g1-arrested cells to enter s phase and divide, and this is the mechanism that results in transformation; however, the frequency with which abortively infected cells are transformed is low (about 1 3 10 25 ). therefore, the function of t-antigen is to alter the cellular environment to permit virus dna replication. transformation is a rare and accidental consequence of the sequestration of tumor suppressor proteins.the immediate-early proteins of adenoviruses are analogous in many ways to sv40 t-antigen. e1a is a trans-acting transcriptional regulator of the adenovirus early genes (see chapter 5). like t-antigen, the e1a protein binds to rb, inactivating the regulatory effect of this protein, permitting virus dna replication, and accidentally stimulating cellular dna replication. e1b binds p53 and reinforces the effects of e1a. the combined effect of the two proteins can be seen in the phenotype of cells transfected with dna containing these genes (table 7 .4). however, the interaction of these transforming proteins with the cell is more complex than simple induction of dna synthesis. expression of e1a alone causes cells to undergo apoptosis. expression of e1a and e1b together overcomes this response and permits transformed cells to survive and grow. human papillomavirus (hpv) genital infections are very common, occurring in more than 50% of young, sexually active adults, and are usually asymptomatic. certain serotypes of hpv appear to be associated with a low risk of subsequent development of anogenital cancers such as cervical carcinoma, after an incubation period of several decades. 500,000 new cases of cervical neoplasia are diagnosed every year, making this one of the three most common causes of cancer death in women globally. hpv is a primary cause of cervical cancer; 93% of all cervical cancers test positive for one or more high-risk type of hpv. of the 60 hpv types currently recognized, only four seem to be associated with a high risk of tumor formation 18, 31, and 45) . once again, transformation is mediated by the early gene products of the virus. however, the transforming proteins appear to vary from one type of papillomavirus to another, as shown in table 7 .3. in general terms, it appears that two or more early proteins often cooperate to give a transformed phenotype. although some papillomaviruses can transform cells on their own (e.g., bovine papillomavirus 1, bpv-1), others appear to require the cooperation of an activated cellular oncogene (e.g., hpv-16/ras). in bovine papillomavirus, it is the e5 protein that is responsible for transformation. in hpv-16 and hpv-18, the e6 and e7 proteins are involved.more confusingly, in most cases all or part of the papillomavirus genome, including the putative transforming genes, are maintained in the tumor cells, whereas in some cases (e.g., bpv-4) the virus dna may be lost after transformation, which may indicate a possible hit-and-run mechanism of transformation. different papillomaviruses appear to use slightly different mechanisms to achieve genome replication, so cell transformation may proceed via a slightly different route. it is imperative that a better understanding of these processes is obtained. there is no positive evidence that adenoviruses or polyomaviruses are involved in the formation of human tumors. in contrast, the evidence that papillomaviruses are commonly involved in the formation of malignant penile and cervical carcinomas is now very strong.in recent years, evidence has emerged that p53 and rb are major cellular sensors for apoptosis. loss of these protein functions triggers apoptosis-the major anticancer mechanism in cells; thus, viruses that interfere with these proteins must have evolved mechanisms to counteract this effect (see discussion in chapter 6).there are numerous examples of viruses that cause tumors in experimental animals, stimulating a long search for viruses that might be the cause of cancer in humans. for many years, this search was unsuccessful, so much so that a few scientists categorically stated that viruses did not cause human tumors. like all rash statements, this one was wrong. an estimated 20% of all human cancers worldwide may be caused by viruses. although it is convenient to consider human tumor viruses as a discrete group of viruses, the six viruses which cause human cancers have very different genomes, replication cycles, and come from five different virus families (hhv-4/ebv, hbv, hcv, hhv-8, hpvs, htlv). the path from virus infection to tumor formation is slow and inefficient. only a minority of infected individuals progress to cancer, usually years or even decades after primary infection. virus infection alone is generally not sufficient for cancer, and additional events and host factors, such as immunosuppression, somatic mutations, genetic predisposition, and exposure to carcinogens, must also play a role.the role of the htlv tax protein in leukemia has already been described (see "cell transformation by retroviruses"). the evidence that papillomaviruses may be involved in human tumors is now well established. there are almost certainly many more viruses that cause human tumors, but the remainder of this chapter describes two examples that have been intensively studied: ebv and hepatitis b virus (hbv).ebv was first identified in 1964 in a lymphoblastoid cell line derived from an african patient with burkitt's lymphoma. in 1962, dennis burkitt described a highly malignant lymphoma, the distribution of which in africa paralleled that of malaria. burkitt recognized that this tumor was rare in india but occurred in indian children living in africa and therefore looked for an environmental cause. initially, he thought that the tumor might be caused by a virus spread by mosquitoes (which is wrong). the association between ebv and burkitt's lymphoma is not entirely clear cut:i ebv is widely distributed worldwide but burkitt's lymphoma is rare. i ebv is found in many cell types in burkitt's lymphoma patients, not just in the tumor cells. i rare cases of ebv-negative burkitt's lymphoma are sometimes seen in countries where malaria is not present, suggesting there may be more than one route to this tumor.ebv has a dual cell tropism for human b-lymphocytes (generally a nonproductive infection) and epithelial cells, in which a productive infection occurs. the usual outcome of ebv infection is polyclonal b-cell activation and a benign proliferation of these cells which is frequently asymptomatic but sometimes produces a relatively mild disease known as infectious mononucleosis or glandular fever. in 1968, it was shown that ebv could efficiently transform (i.e., immortalize) human b-lymphocytes in vitro. this observation clearly strengthens the case that ebv is involved in the formation of tumors.there is now epidemiological and/or molecular evidence that ebv infection is associated with at least five human tumors: i burkitt's lymphoma. i nasopharyngeal carcinoma (npc), a highly malignant tumor seen most frequently in china. there is a strong association between ebv and npc. unlike burkitt's lymphoma, the virus has been found in all the tumors that have been studied. environmental factors, such as the consumption of nitrosamines in salted fish, are also believed to be involved in the formation of npc (cf. the role of malaria in the formation of burkitt's lymphoma). i b-cell lymphomas in immunosuppressed individuals (e.g., aids patients). i some clonal forms of hodgkin's disease. i x-linked lymphoproliferative syndrome (xlp), a rare condition usually seen in males where infection with ebv results in a hyperimmune response, sometimes causing a fatal form of glandular fever and sometimes cancer of the lymph nodes. xlp is an inherited defect due to a faulty gene on the x chromosome.cellular transformation by ebv is a complex process involving the cooperative interactions between several viral proteins. three possible explanations for the link between ebv and burkitt's lymphoma are:1. ebv immortalizes a large pool of b-lymphocytes; concurrently, malaria causes t-cell immunosuppression. there is thus a large pool of target cells in which a third event (e.g., a chromosomal translocation) results in the formation of a malignantly transformed cell. most burkitt's lymphoma tumors contain translocations involving chromosome 8, resulting in activation of the c-myc gene, which supports this hypothesis.immortalizes a cell containing a preexisting c-myc translocation. this mechanism would be largely indistinguishable from the above.europe and north america although it is very rare in these regions; however, 85% of these patients are not infected with ebv, which implies that there are other causes for burkitt's lymphoma.although it has not been formally proved, it seems likely that either (1) and/ or (2) is the true explanation for the origin of burkitt's lymphoma.another case where a virus appears to be associated with the formation of a human tumor is that of hbv and hepatocellular carcinoma (hcc). hepatitis is an inflammation of the liver and as such is not a single disease. because of the central role of the liver in metabolism, many virus infections may involve the liver; however, at least seven viruses seem specifically to infect and damage hepatocytes. no two of these belong to the same family (see chapter 8).hbv is the prototype member of the family hepadnaviridae and causes the disease formerly known as "serum hepatitis." this disease was distinguished clinically from "infectious hepatitis" (caused by other types of hepatitis virus) in the 1930s. hbv infection formerly was the result of inoculation with human serum (e.g., blood transfusions, organ transplants) but is still common among intravenous drug abusers, where it is spread by the sharing of needles and syringes; however, the virus is also transmitted sexually, by oral ingestion, and from mother to child, which accounts for familial clusters of hbv infection. all blood, organ, and tissue donations in developed countries are now tested for hbv, and risk of transmission is extremely low. the virus does not replicate in tissue culture which has seriously hindered investigations into its pathogenesis. hbv infection has three possible outcomes:1. an acute infection followed by complete recovery and immunity from reinfection (.90% of cases). 2. fulminant hepatitis, developing quickly and lasting a short time, causing liver failure and a mortality rate of approximately 90% (,1% of cases).virus persistence (about 10% of cases).there are approximately 350 million chronic hbv carriers worldwide. the total population of the world is approximately 6 billion; therefore, about 5% of the world population is persistently infected with hbv. all of these chronic carriers of the virus are at 100à200 times the risk of noncarriers of developing hcc. hcc is a rare tumor in the west, where it represents ,2% of fatal cancers. most cases that do occur in the west are alcohol related, and this is an important clue to the pathogenesis of the tumor; however, in southeast asia and in china, hcc is the most common fatal cancer, resulting in about half a million deaths every year. the virus might cause the formation of the tumor by three different pathways: direct activation of a cellular oncogene(s), trans-activation of a cellular oncogene(s), or indirectly via tissue regeneration (figure 7 .10). as with ebv and burkitt's lymphoma, the relationship between hbv and hcc is not clear cut:i cirrhosis (a hardening of the liver which may be the result of infections or various toxins, such as alcohol) appears to be a prerequisite for the development of hcc. it would appear that chronic liver damage induces tissue regeneration and that faulty dna repair mechanisms result eventually in malignant cell transformation. unrelated viruses that cause chronic active hepatitis, such as the flavivirus hepatitis c virus (hcv), are also associated with hcc after a long latent period. i a number of cofactors, such as aflatoxins and nitrosamines, can induce hcc-like tumors in experimental animals without virus infection; therefore, such substances may also be involved in human hcc (cf. nitrosamines and npc, above).for many years, it was thought that hbv integration events were random with regard to their sites within the human genome, but when the relationship between "fragile sites" in the host genome and virus integration events are compared, hbv dna is found to integrate within or near many of these fragile regions. in most cases, integration at a particular site has only been reported for a single or small number of tumors, but a closer look shows that individual integration sites alters the expression of different components in the same or redundant biochemical or signaling pathways that support hepatocellular growth and survival important for tumor development. most (but not all) hbv integration events retain the open reading frame encoding the hbx antigen (hbxag), which suggests that this protein contributes to hcc, possibly via mirnas. it is possible that all the mechanisms shown in figure 7 .10 might operate in vivo. the key risk factor is the development of a chronic as opposed to an acute hbv infection. this in itself is determined by a number of other factors: i sex-for chronic infection, the male:female ratio is 1.5:1; for cirrhosis, the male:female ratio is 3:1. i hcc-the male:female ratio is 6:1. i route of infection-oral or sexual infections give rise to fewer cases of chronic infection than serum infection.until there is a much better understanding of the pathogenesis and normal course of hbv infection, it is unlikely that the reasons for these differences will be understood. there may be a happy ending to this story. a safe and effective vaccine that prevents hbv infection is now available and widely used in the areas of the world where hbv infection is endemic as part of the who expanded programme on immunization. this will prevent a million deaths annually from hcc and hbv disease in the future.what constitutes a "new" infectious agent? are these just viruses that have never been discovered, or are they previously known viruses that have changed their behavior? this section will describe and attempt to explain current understanding of a number of agents that meet the above criteria. in the century, massive and unexpected epidemics have been caused by certain viruses. for the most part, these epidemics have not been caused by completely new (i.e., previously unknown) viruses but by viruses that were well known in the geographical areas in which they may currently be causing epidemic outbreaks of disease. such viruses are known as emergent viruses (table 7 .5).there are numerous examples of such viruses that appear to have mysteriously altered their behavior with time, with significant effects on their pathogenesis.one of the better known examples of this phenomenon is poliovirus. it is known that poliovirus and poliomyelitis have existed in human populations for at least 4,000 years. for most of this time, the pattern of disease was endemic rather than epidemic (i.e., a low, continuous level of infection in particular geographical areas. during the first half of the twentieth century, the pattern of occurrence of poliomyelitis in europe, north america, and australia changed to an epidemic one, with vast annual outbreaks of infantile paralysis. although we do not have samples of polioviruses from earlier centuries, the clinical symptoms of the disease give no reason to believe that the virus changed substantially. why, then, did the pattern of disease change so dramatically? it is believed that the reason is as follows. in rural communities with primitive sanitation facilities, poliovirus circulated freely. serological surveys in similar contemporary situations reveal that more than 90% of children of 3 years of age have antibodies to at least one of the three serotypes of poliovirus. (even the most virulent strains of poliovirus cause 100à200 subclinical infections for each case of the paralytic poliomyelitis seen.) in such communities, infants experience subclinical immunizing infections while still protected by maternal antibodies-a form of natural vaccination. the relatively few cases of paralysis and death that do occur are likely to be overlooked, especially in view of high infant mortality rates. during the nineteenth century, industrialization and urbanization changed the pattern of poliovirus transmission. dense urban populations and increased traveling afforded opportunities for rapid transmission of the virus. in addition, improved sanitation broke the natural pattern of virus transmission.children were likely to encounter the virus for the first time at a later age and without the protection of maternal antibodies. these children were at far greater risk when they did eventually become infected, and it is believed that these social changes account for the altered pattern of disease. fortunately, the widespread use of poliovirus vaccines has since brought the situation under control in industrialized countries (chapter 6). in 1988, the world health organization committed itself to wiping out polio completely ("eradication") by the year 2000. but the disease has proved to be troublingly resilient in a few of the poorest, more corrupt and most dangerous countries, and is still hanging on. polio eradication is no longer a technical challenge, rather it is a political and economic one.there are many examples of the epidemic spread of viruses caused by movement of human populations. measles and smallpox were not known to the ancient greeks. both of these viruses are maintained by direct person-toperson transmission and have no known alternative hosts; therefore, it has been suggested that it was not until human populations in china and the roman empire reached a critical density that these viruses were able to propagate in an epidemic pattern and cause recognizable outbreaks of disease. before this time, the few cases that did occur could easily have been overlooked. smallpox reached europe from the far east in 710 ad, and in the eighteenth century it achieved plague proportions-five reigning european monarchs died from smallpox. however, the worst effects occurred when these viruses were transmitted to the new world. smallpox was (accidentally) transferred to the americas by hernando cortés in 1520. in the next two years, 3.5 million aztecs died from the disease and the aztec empire was decimated by disease rather than conquest. although not as highly pathogenic as smallpox, epidemics of measles subsequently finished off the aztec and inca civilizations. more recently, the first contacts with isolated groups of eskimos and tribes in new guinea and south america have had similarly devastating results, although on a smaller scale. these historical incidents illustrate the way in which a known virus can suddenly cause illness and death on a catastrophic scale following a change in human behavior.measles and smallpox viruses are transmitted exclusively from one human host to another. for viruses with more complex cycles of transmission (e.g., those with secondary hosts and insect vectors), control of infection becomes much more difficult (figure 7 .11). this is particularly true of the families of viruses known collectively as "arboviruses" (arenaviruses, bunyaviruses, flaviviruses, and togaviruses). as human territory has expanded, this has increasingly brought people into contact with the type of environment where these viruses are found-warm, humid, vegetated areas where insect vectors occur in high densities, such as swamps and jungles.a classic example is the mortality caused by yellow fever virus during the building of the panama canal at the end of the nineteenth century. more recently, the increasing pace of ecological alteration in tropical areas has resulted in the resurgence of yellow fever in central america, particularly an urban form of the disease transmitted directly from one human to another by mosquitoes. dengue fever is also primarily an urban disease of the tropics, transmitted by aedes aegypti, a domestic, day-biting mosquito that prefers to feed on humans. some outbreaks of dengue fever have involved more than a million cases, with attack rates of up to 90% of the population. there are believed to be over 40 million cases of dengue virus infection worldwide each year. this disease was first described in 1780. by 1906, it was known that the virus was transmitted by mosquitoes, and the virus was isolated in 1944; therefore, this is not a new virus, but the frequency of dengue virus infection has increased dramatically in the last 30 years due to changes in human activity.of more than 500 arboviruses known, at least 100 are pathogenic for humans and at least 20 would meet the criteria for emergent viruses. attempts to control these diseases rely on twin approaches involving both the control of insect vectors responsible for transmission of the virus to humans and the development of vaccines to protect human populations. however, both of these approaches present considerable difficulties, the former in terms of avoiding environmental damage and the latter in terms of understanding virus pathogenesis and developing appropriate vaccines (see chikungunya virus (chikv) is transmitted by aedes mosquitoes and was first isolated in 1953 in tanzania. chikv is a member of the genus alphavirus and the family togaviridae. the disease caused by this virus typically consists of an acute illness characterized by fever, rash, and incapacitating joint pain. the word chikungunya means "to walk bent over" in some east african languages and refers to the effect of the joint pains that characterize this denguelike infection. chikungunya is a specifically tropical disease, but was previously geographically restricted and outbreaks were relatively uncommon. the virus remained largely unknown until a major outbreak in 2005 and 2006 on islands across the indian ocean. plausible explanations for this outbreak (and subsequent spread, which has continued) include increased tourism, chikv introduction into a naive population, and virus mutation. it is the last of those three factors which seems to be most significant in this case, with the outbreak strain showing a single amino acid change in the envelope glycoprotein which allows more effective transmission due to more efficient crossing of the mosquito gut membrane barrier. there is every possibility that chikv will continue to extend its territory.plant viruses can also be responsible for emergent diseases. group iii geminiviruses are transmitted by insect vectors (whiteflies), and their genomes consist of two circular, single-stranded dna molecules (chapter 3). these viruses cause a great deal of crop damage in plants such as tomatoes, beans, squash, cassava, and cotton, and their spread may be directly linked to the inadvertent worldwide dissemination of a particular biotype of the whitefly bemisia tabaci. this vector is an indiscriminate feeder, encouraging the rapid and efficient spread of viruses from indigenous plant species to neighboring crops.occasionally, there appears an example of an emergent virus that has acquired extra genes and as a result of this new genetic capacity has become capable of infecting new species. a possible example of this phenomenon is seen in tomato spotted wilt virus (tswv). tswv is a bunyavirus with a very wide plant host range, infecting over 600 different species from 70 families. in recent decades, this virus has been a major agricultural pest in asia, the americas, europe, and africa. its rapid spread has been the result of dissemination of its insect vector (the thrip frankinellia occidentalis) and diseased plant material. tswv is the type species of the tospovirus genus and has a morphology and genomic organization similar to the other bunyaviruses (chapter 3). however, tswv undergoes propagative transmission, and it has been suggested that it may have acquired an extra gene in the m segment via recombination, either from a plant or from another plant virus. this new gene encodes a movement protein (chapter 6), conferring the capacity to infect plants and cause extensive damage.in addition to viruses whose ability to infect their host species appears to have changed, new viruses are being discovered continually. after many years of study, three new hhv have been discovered comparatively recently:i hhv-6: first isolated in 1986 in lymphocytes of patients with lymphoreticular disorders; tropism for cd4 1 lymphocytes. hhv-6 is now recognized as being an almost universal human infection. discovery of the virus solved a longstanding mystery: the primary infection in childhood causes "roseola infantum" or "fourth disease," a common childhood rash of previously unknown cause. antibody titers are highest in children and decline with age. the consequences of childhood infection appear to be mild. primary infections of adults are rare but have more severe consequences-mononucleosis or hepatitisand infections may be a severe problem in transplant patients. i hhv-7: first isolated from human cd4 1 cells in 1990. its genome organization is similar to but distinct from that of hhv-6, and there is limited antigenic cross-reactivity between the two viruses. currently, there is no clear evidence for the direct involvement of hhv-7 in any human disease, but might it be a cofactor in hhv-6-related syndromes. i hhv-8: in 1995, sequences of a unique herpesvirus were identified in dna samples from aids patients with ks and in some non-ks tissue samples from aids patients. there is a strong correlation (.95%) with ks in both hiv 1 and hiv2 patients. hhv-8 can be isolated from lymphocytes and from tumor tissue and appears to have a less ubiquitous world distribution than other hhvs; that is, it may only be associated with a specific disease state (cf. hsv, ebv). however, the virus is not present in ks-derived cell lines, suggesting that autocrine or paracrine factors may be involved in the formation of ks. there is some evidence that hhv-8 may also cause other tumors such as b-cell lymphomas (6 ebv as a "helper").although many different virus infections may involve the liver, at least six viruses seem specifically to infect and damage hepatocytes. no two of these belong to the same family! the identification of these viruses has been a long story:reports continue to circulate about the existence of other hepatitis viruses. some of the agents are reported to be sensitive to chloroform (i.e., enveloped) while others are not. this may suggest the existence of multiple viruses, as yet undescribed, although this is still uncertain. although the viral causes of the majority of cases of infectious human hepatitis have now been identified, it is possible that further hepatitis viruses will be described in the future. new human retroviruses are being discovered regularly, some of them of great significance: many emergent virus diseases are zoonoses (i.e., transmitted from animals to humans). this emphasizes the importance of the "species barrier" in preventing transmission of infectious diseases, and several recent examples illustrate the potentially disastrous consequences that can occur when this is breached. strictly speaking, many of the "arboviruses" discussed earlier are zoonotic in humans, but their transmission involves an insect vector. on occasions, viruses can spread from animals into the human population and then be transmitted from one person to another without the involvement of a vector.severe acute respiratory syndrome (sars) is a type of viral pneumonia, with symptoms including fever, a dry cough, shortness of breath, and headaches. death may result from progressive respiratory failure due to lung damage. the first sars outbreak originated in the guangdong province of china in 2003, where 300 people became ill and at least five died. the cause was box 7.3 where do viruses come from?in spite of what a few people believe, there's no evidence they come from outer space (strike one for the alien abduction theory of virology). so either they come from preexisting viruses which change in some way, or they were there all the time and we just didn't notice them. that's not as stupid as it sounds. using molecular clock built into virus genomes researchers have been able to show pretty convincingly that viruses such as measles seemed to pop up just at the point when human populations were big enough to support them by continuous person-to-person spread. and so a cow virus (rinderpest) became a human virus (measles). like smallpox before them, both measles and rinderpest are now on the verge of complete eradication. but don't get too excited. just as monkeypox seems to be evolving into the old niche that smallpox filled in africa, there'll be another virus along to replace measles pretty soon.found to be a novel coronavirus, sars-cov. the sars virus is believed to be spread by droplets produced by coughing and sneezing, but other routes of infection may also be involved, such as fecal contamination. where did the sars virus come from? coronaviruses with 99% sequence similarity to the surface spike protein of human sars isolates have been isolated in guangdong, china, from apparently healthy masked palm civets, a cat-like mammal closely related to the mongoose. the unlucky palm civet is regarded as a delicacy in guangdong and it is believed that humans became infected as they raised and slaughtered the animals rather than by consumption of infected meat. after 2003, sars went away, but in 2012, a related coronavirus, middle east respiratory syndrome coronavirus (mers-cov), popped up in the middle east. like sars, mers is a zoonotic infection, probably originating in bats but also found in camels. it is not clear whether the emergence of mers is the result of a single zoonotic event with subsequent human-tohuman transmission, or if the multiple geographic sites of infection across the middle east represent multiple zoonotic events from a common source. mers-cov is less infectious than sars-cov but has still infected nearly a thousand people and killed 350 to date.ebola virus was first identified in 1976. isolates from central africa appear to be highly pathogenic, whereas those from the philippines are less pathogenic for humans. the molecular basis for these differences is unknown. most ebola virus outbreaks appear to be associated with contact with infected primates; however, extensive ecological surveys in central africa have failed to show any evidence that primates (or any of the thousands of animals, plants, and invertebrate species examined) are the natural reservoir for infection. no animal reservoir for the virus has been positively identified, but fruit and insectivorous bats support replication and circulation of high titers of ebola virus without necessarily becoming ill. as with sars, consumption of exotic wild meats (called "bushmeat"), particularly primates, may be a risk factor. the most recent outbreak in west africa which began in 2013 and is still continuing is by far the largest to date, having killed over 9,000 people, but fortunately not the most virulent as the death rate is around 60%, compared with over 90% in some smaller previous outbreaks.other new zoonotic viruses are frequently discovered, fortunately rarely with the serious disease potential of sars or ebola virus.along with the threats from emerging viruses, the world currently faces the potential use of viruses as terrorist weapons. although this issue has received much media attention, the reality is that the deliberate releases of such bioterrorism 257 pathogens may have less medical impact than is generally appreciated. many governments devoted considerable resources to the development of viruses as weapons of war before deciding that their military usefulness was very limited. the u.s. centers for disease control (cdc) only recognizes two types of virus as potentially dangerous terrorist weapons: smallpox and agents causing hemorrhagic fevers such as filoviruses and arenaviruses. emerging viruses such as nipah virus and hantaviruses are also recognized as possible future threats. however, this is in contrast to a much larger number of bacterial species and toxins. the reason for this is that bacterial pathogens would be much easier for terrorist groups to prepare and disseminate than viruses. the potential threat from bioterrorism is in reality insignificant in relation to the actual number of deaths caused by infections worldwide each year. nevertheless, this is an issue which governments are sensibly treating with great seriousness.virus pathogenesis is a complex, variable, and relatively rare state. like the course of a virus infection, pathogenesis is determined by the balance between host and virus factors. not all of the pathogenic symptoms seen in virus infections are caused directly by the virus-the immune system also plays a part in causing cell and tissue damage. viruses can transform cells so that they continue to grow indefinitely. in some but not all cases, this can lead to the formation of tumors. there are some well-established cases where certain viruses provoke human tumors and possibly many others that we do not yet understand. the relationship between the virus and the formation of the tumor is not a simple one, but the prevention of infection undoubtedly reduces the risk of tumor formation. new pathogenic viruses are being discovered all the time, and changes in human activities result in the emergence of new or previously unrecognized diseases.further readingenvironments, urban areas, and agricultural systems; raising and processing animal-based foods; and the roles of global trade, migration, and climate change. better understanding of these factors learned from epidemiological investigation of past and present emergence events, and modeling and study of the cost-effectiveness of interventions that could result in their mitigation, could provide evidence necessary to better address the political and economic barriers to prevention of infections in animals. such economically convincing arguments for change and mitigation are required because of the basic difference in animal health-driven by the need for profit; and human health-driven by the need to save lives. 1 infections at the animal/human interface severe acute respiratory syndrome (sars) was the first major emerging infection identified during the twenty-first century (parashar and anderson 2004) . a close examination of the outbreak-its origins, the human sickness and death it caused, the national and international responses that occurred, and the effect these responses had on asian economies-provides a clear lesson of the importance of emerging infections at the animal/human interface, and underscores the reasons that emerging infections must be rapidly detected, assessed, and managed. but understanding and mitigating the factors that align to cause emergence could move this current paradigm of detection, assessment, and response further upstream, to prevention of emergence at its source.severe acute respiratory syndrome (sars) was first detected as a severe atypical pneumonia in the guangdong province of china (heymann and rodier 2004a) . it soon became a burden in hospitals where many patients required respiratory support, and broad-spectrum antibiotics had no effect. as is common with emerging infections, particularly when they present with symptoms common to other known infections, unsuspecting hospital workers became infected. they in turn inadvertently infected family members, and infection then spread to the communities in which they lived (heymann and rodier 2004b) .one of these health workers-a medical doctor-travelled to hong kong where he stayed in a hotel on the same floor as both chinese and international guests. some of these hotel guests became infected. hypotheses of how they were infected ranged from transmission by aerosols-generated by the infected doctor by cough, sneeze, or vomit-in the corridors or through the hotel ventilation system to shared closed environment such as sharing the same lift (chan-yeung and xu 2003) . some of the infected hotel guests travelled while still in the incubation period, and as illness developed and became serious they were admitted to hospital in hong kong, singapore, canada, and vietnam. hospitalized, they too became the source of infection for hospital workers who in turn served as unintentional amplifiers of transmission to their families and communities.molecular and epidemiological investigation suggested that the infection of the index case-never identified-was an onetime event (walker et al. 2012; xu et al. 2004) . as more information became available, it was further hypothesized that this initial infection was due to close contact with an infected animal, possibly a civet cat, in one of the province's many live (wet) animal markets (woo et al. 2006 ). the animal host was thought to have been a carrier of a coronavirus that mutated while replicating, either in the animal or an infected human, in such a way as to cause severe human illness (wang and eaton 2007) .the world's interconnectivity through air transport facilitated the international spread of sars. precautionary travel advisories were made by the world health organization (who) recommending that people avoid unnecessary travel to countries where outbreaks were occurring, and by july 2003, just over 7 months after the sars coronavirus was thought to have emerged, human to human transmission had been interrupted and the outbreak was declared over (heymann 2006) . sars resulted in 8,422 probable infections and 916 (11 %) deaths (chan-yeung and xu 2003) . the economic impact of the outbreak on gdp was estimated at us$30-100 billion from decreased commerce, travel, and tourism (keogh-brown and smith 2008). unlike hiv, which is thought to have emerged during the late nineteenth or early twentieth century, the sars coronavirus did not become endemic, and economic recovery was rapid.sars and other emerging infections share a common theme: infection is often first detected in human populations in which an emergency containment response occurs, most times before the source of infection is understood. initial recommendations for control are thus based on what evidence is available from the current outbreak or previous outbreaks caused by similar organisms. they are of necessity precautionary, and often severe. and as for sars, the burden and response can cause a wide-ranging negative impact to economies.if it were possible to identify infectious agents carried by wild and domestic animals and to predict if, when and where they would emerge in humans, and if these animals could then be somehow removed from contact with humans or cleared of infection, human sickness and death could be prevented and economies protected. studies are underway to identify and characterize infectious organisms in wild animals in geographic sites where emerging infections are known to have occurred in the past (grace et al. 2012; jones et al. 2008 ; uc davis: vet medicine 2009). though it is possible through these studies to understand the variety of infectious agents carried by wild animals, prediction of which organisms will emerge in human populations using genetic sequence or other information will likely be very challenging and as yet is not possible (biek and real 2010) .moving further upstream, investigation of individual emergence events can identify the risk factors, or determinants, that align to cause the putative breaches in the animal/human species barrier. if these risk factors could in some way be mitigated, the risk of future emergence could be decreased. the current paradigm of emergency response, and the concurrent attempts at prediction and prevention, could then be shifted further upstream.in the case of sars, there was a flurry of field research activity in the guangdong province during and just after the outbreak, but over time funding decreased and research slowed. among the research that was completed was a study of workers in some of the province's wet markets that suggested that up to 22 % (12/55) had antibody evidence of a coronavirus infection related to the sars coronavirus, but that none had a history of severe respiratory symptoms such as were occurring in persons with sars (parry 2003) . further field research might have helped to better understand the risk factors for emergence, but it was not conducted, and the epidemiology remains unclear.risk factors for emergence, in addition to being a market worker as suggested by the completed study, might also include being a hunter of wild animals, being a restaurant worker who kills and or butchers/prepares wild animal meat for consumption, or being a member of a household who buys live or recently killed wild game meat from a wet market (weiss and mcmichael 2004; wolfe et al. 2007) .even though evidence is available from just one epidemiological study of sars, a series of actions outside the human and animal health sectors could be useful in preventing a future outbreak in the guangdong province from another emerging pathogen (daszak et al. 2012; wood et al. 2012 ). these include education of all those who come into contact with wild game (and domestic animals) about how to protect themselves against infection; regulation with enforcement of wet markets and eating establishments that does not drive these activities underground, but rather ensures safe animal handling; and regulation and enforcement of trade between hunters and markets, and between markets and those who purchase. other activities might be research to determine whether wild animals (e.g. civet cats) could be raised commercially under conditions that prevent their infection and risk to humans-or further downstream, more effective education of health workers about infection control. this latter activity would ensure that if other actions such as those above fail to prevent emergence, amplification of transmission of emergent organisms could be prevented.risk factors for emergence events caused by a more broad range of organisms might occur in sectors such as plant agriculture, community planning, water, and sanitation. human migratory dynamics, land-use approaches, and the influence of climate and manipulation of natural ecosystems can also amplify known risks, and create novel emergence pathways (patz et al. 2008) .mitigation of the risk factors for emergence thus requires a focussed and collaborative effort across multiple disciplines-a one health approach, as defined by the american veterinary medical association (2008) (american veterinary medical association 2012). emergence may occur among humans living and working in small rural farming communities carved out of tropical rain forests, savannah, mountains, and desert that are in close proximity to wild animals, or to domestic animals they tend that have been in close proximity to wild animals. outbreaks of nipah and ebola reston virus infection in pigs raised in unprotected environments in malaysia and the philippines, respectively, are an example, and both outbreaks spilled over into human populations (luby et al. 2009; miranda and miranda 2011) .emergence may occur in larger urban communities where human contact with animals is limited to a few farm animals in close proximity to households, to domestic pets, or to rodents and other animals that have adapted to the urban environment (alirol et al. 2011) . animals come in contact with humans or other animals as they range (e.g. cows and chickens in parts of asia) or browse (e.g. urban foxes and rodents) (bradley and altizer 2007). the continued high rate of contact between humans and poultry in both smaller backyard farms and larger market system farms continues to permit repeated human exposure to the h5n1 influenza a virus that is endemic in poultry stock. children and adults are thought to have been infected by contact with living chickens in backyards, and adults have been shown to become infected at some point during the process of raising or slaughtering/butchering chickens (kerkhove et al. 2011) .risk factors of emergence in these settings are lacking or inadequate community planning, lack of understanding by populations about risks associated with animal contact, failure to adopt and adhere to safe farming and slaughter/food processing and preparation practices, and failure to maintain sanitation and water infrastructure. mitigation across all these sectors would require empowering communities to develop a safer living environment through urban planning, developing and maintaining robust water and sanitation infrastructure, controlling rodent and other animal populations in both peri-urban and urban areas, ensuring safe animal husbandry, and providing understanding of risks through communitybased education (fobil et al. 2012) .risk factors for emergence also occur all along the food chain. growing demand for animal-based food has led to the ever more complex food chains that involve live animal processing and trade networks (schlundt et al. 2004 ). prevention of infectious disease emergence through the food chain and agricultural system requires understanding of the risks at each step along the pathway from the farm to the fork. if infectious agents pass through the food chain and enter foods, their impact can be minimized at the final intervention point, where animalderived foods can be prepared carefully in the factory, restaurant, and household either by cooking or other means to remove or mitigate the risk of infection. others must be controlled earlier-during the period animals are being raised, during slaughter, and during transport (collins and wall 2004) .climate change also appears to be a factor in emergence of human infection. rainfall associated with enso (el niño/southern oscillation) in east africa, for example, has contributed to frequent outbreaks of rift valley fever as a result of flooding that increases breeding sites of the mosquito vector (anyamba et al. 2009 ). the frequency of leptospira transmission from rodents to humans has been shown to increase during events in latin america, bangladesh, and india following heavy rains and flooding (lau et al. 2010) . lassa fever has also emerged after severe drought in sierra leone, when rodents carrying the lassa virus were forced to move closer to humans so that they could survive on agricultural products in cultivated fields or storage facilities, contaminating human food supplies (bonner et al. 2007) .risk factors related to climate change are multiple, and in addition to more robust civil engineering projects to prevent flooding and channel water for irrigation, better rodent and wild animal control is required, as is continued participation in the negotiation of the international climate control treaty (tol et al. 2007) .finally, overuse of antibiotics in livestock animals is thought to be a risk factor for the emergence of antimicrobial-resistant bacteria in animals. though there is still much debate within the scientific community as to the contribution of antibiotics in farming systems to the rise of antibiotic resistance, the implications on emerging antibiotic resistance in human populations is even less well understood (barton 2000) . but there is general consensus that farming systems are likely to contribute to the flow of antibiotic residues and resistant microbes in the wider ecosystem and in humans by runoff into water used or consumed by humans, especially in economically poor settings where farming communities exist alongside densely populated human environments with poor sanitation/sewage systems (abraham 2011; segura et al. 2009 ). clearly, cross-sector action is required to mitigate these risks using the example of the connection between antimicrobial resistance in both animal and human sectors provides a key lesson for ensuring interdisciplinary planning is incorporated when designing zoonotic control strategies.there is an opportunity to learn from past emergence events, and from those that are presently occurring or will occur in the future. application of what has been learned can help shift the paradigm from detection, assessment, and response to prevention at the source. but solid evidence must be available or obtained, assessed for risk, and used. there is a great amount of scientific knowledge about the risk factors of emergence and their mitigation already available from previous investigation and risk assessment. much more can be obtained from in-depth study of each emergence event as it occurs. research must also take into account human behavior, and ensure that populations most at risk clearly understand the measures required to reduce or protect behavior that is high risk. many emergence events occur in well-defined geographical areas involving the poorest communities, so designing interventions and strategies that are cost-effective and sustainable will be imperative.devising & testing mitigation strategies -developing the evidence base:• modelling (clinical & transmission impact, costeffectiveness)• trial data (randomised control data where possible/feasible)• biological (pathogen characterisation)• epidemiological (transmission cycle and animal host characteristics) • socio-economic (human behaviour, market systems etc.)obtaining data from outbreaks at the animal/human interface• identifying the animal source of infection (potentially retrospective)submission of evidence to cross-sectoral policy actors for discussion, review &implementationof mitigation strategies fig. 1 transforming evidence at the animal/human interface into policy, a simple flow chart many of the measures required to shift the paradigm will encounter political barriers, especially when commercial benefits are at stake, and these barriers will need to be broken down by using clear and easy to understand evidence from costeffectiveness and of a variety of risk mitigation strategies (fig. 1) . by working together at the animal/human interface using a one health approach, emergence events in the future can be decreased, and lives and economies saved.in the recent past, we have witnessed the emergence of many new infectious diseases, some of which are major public health threats. the public health threats posed by emerging diseases have been well described in 2 reports from the institute of medicine, 1 in 1992 and 1 in 2001. 1, 2 since the outbreak of legionella in 1976 3, 4 and aids in 1981 5,6 later demonstrated to be due to hiv in 1983, 7 many emerging infectious diseases have had important infection control implications. this review will focus on several of the most important current infection prevention threats including ebola virus, middle eastern respiratory syndrome (mers) coronavirus (cov), carbapenem-resistant enterobacteriaceae (cre), and candida auris with a focus on mechanisms of transmission, environmental contamination and stability, and germicide susceptibility. germicides that will be discussed include chemical sterilants used to process critical equipment and devices (eg, surgical instruments, implants), high-level disinfectants that are used to disinfect semicritical equipment and devices (ie, medical equipment or devices that come into contact with nonintact skin or mucous membranes), low-level disinfectants used for disinfection of surfaces or shared equipment that come into contact with intact skin (eg, blood pressure cuffs, room surfaces), and antiseptics (ie, germicides used on skin or mucous membranes to reduce the microbial flora). 8, 9 this review updates a previous article that reviewed ebola and mers and also reviews cre and c auris. 10 the world health organization (who) states, "an emerging disease is one that has appeared in a population for the first time, or that may have existed previously but is rapidly increasing in incidence or geographic range." 11 the centers for disease control and prevention (cdc) provides the following definition of emerging infections as "infectious diseases whose incidence in humans has increased in the past 2 decades or threatens to increase in the near future have been defined as 'emerging.'" these diseases, which respect no national boundaries, include: (1) new infections resulting from changes or evolution of existing organisms; (2) known infections spreading to new geographic areas or populations; (3) previously unrecognized infections appearing in areas undergoing ecologic transformation, and (4) old infections reemerging as a result of antimicrobial resistance in known agents or breakdowns in public health measures. 12 the factors leading to the emergence of infectious diseases have been described. [13] [14] [15] [16] [17] importantly, all these authors noted that we will continue to see new and emerging infectious diseases for the foreseeable future. recent articles have provided recommendations for preparedness at the health care facility, local and national levels. 10, [18] [19] [20] assessing and managing the threat of an emerging infectious disease requires an understanding of the biology of the pathogen, its epidemiology, the clinical manifestations of infection, the methods of diagnosis, and therapies (if available). 10 all health care facilities should have a highly communicable disease plan for agents that are transmitted by droplet or aerosols (eg, severe acute respiratory syndrome [sars] , mers) or are transmitted by contact (eg, ebola, lassa). 10 detailed information is best found, especially early in an epidemic, on the web pages of local and state health department, the cdc, and the who. for highly communicable diseases, there are 2 major areas that place a health care facility and the personnel at substantial risk for disease acquisition and transmission. 10 first, inadequate screening procedures when patients enter a health care facility can potentially allow transmission from an ill patient to health care personnel, other patients, or visitors. second, inadequate supplies of personal protective equipment (ppe) and/or training of health care personnel (hcp) in proper donning and doffing procedures can increase the risk of exposure for hcp.a key focus of this article is to review the transmission routes of new and emerging infectious agents. preventing disease acquisition via person-to-person transmission or contact with the contaminated environment depends on rapid and appropriate institution of isolation precautions, appropriate hand hygiene, and appropriate disinfection of medical equipment, devices, and the surface environment. importantly, once the nature of the emerging disease is known (ie, enveloped virus, bacteria, fungi, nonenveloped virus, mycobacteria), it is possible to determine the proper antiseptics and disinfectants, even in the absence of studies of the exact infectious agent. 21 for example, an enveloped virus (eg, ebola, mers-cov) or vegetative bacterium (eg, cre) would be inactivated by any agent active against nonenveloped viruses or mycobacteria. it is important to remember that alcohol has reduced activity against nonenveloped viruses (eg, norovirus) and no activity against spores (eg, clostridioides difficile).the first recognized outbreak of ebola occurred in west africa in 1976. in the 40 years since the initial outbreaks in zaire and sudan, >20 outbreaks have occurred. 22 the largest outbreak occurred in west africa (guinea, sierra leone, and liberia) from 2014-2016, and resulted in 28,600 cases and 11,325 deaths. 23 importantly, in the 2014-2016 outbreak >850 hcp developed confirmed or probable ebola virus disease (evd). 24 the percentage of exposed hcp who developed evd has ranged from 12.5%-76%. 24 the mortality of hcp who developed ebola has frequently exceeded 50%. 24 key concerns for hcp include the low inoculating dose required for transmission; high frequency of hcp infections, especially in resource poor countries; and high mortality. as of 2019, an evd outbreak is continuing with moderate intensity in the democratic republic of the congo.overall, 11 people were treated for ebola in the united states during the 2014-2016 epidemic. 23 two out of 149 hcp who cared for a patient with evd in the united states developed evd; both recovered. 24 the microbiology, epidemiology, diagnosis, clinical features, and treatment of ebola have been reviewed. 22, [25] [26] [27] [28] [29] [30] ebola is caused by a nonsegmented, single-stranded negative rna virus of the family filoviridae. there are 5 identified ebola virus species, 4 of which are known to cause disease in humans: zaire, sudan, tai forest (formerly cote d'ivoire), and bundibugyo. the fifth, reston virus, has caused disease in nonhuman primates, but not in humans. the natural reservoir host of ebola virus remains unknown. however, the detection of antibodies against ebola and ebola virus fragments in fruit-and insectivore bats are highly suggestive that these animals serve as a reservoir.evd is characterized by the sudden onset of fever, headache, myalgias, arthralgias of the large joints, and back pain. typically, 2-3 days after the initial symptoms gastrointestinal symptoms occur including abdominal pain, nausea, vomiting, and diarrhea. a macular or maculopapular skin rash may appear on days 5-7 of the disease. hemorrhage is less common, occurring in only 15%-20% of patients. terminal cases develop disseminated intravascular coagulation, septic shock, and multiorgan system failure. mortality ranges from 40%-90% and depends, in part, on the infecting strain.ebola is transmitted person-to-person most commonly through direct contact (ie, nonintact skin or via mucous membrane contact) with blood, body fluids (eg, urine, saliva, sweat, feces, vomit, breast milk, and semen) of an ill person, or indirectly via objects such as needles and syringes that have been contaminated with body fluids from an ill person (table 1 ). 31 less common mechanisms include acquisition from infected fruit bats or nonhuman primates. sexual transmission has also been described. ebola is not transmitted via the air or by water. however, in africa it has been acquired by handling bush meat. the incubation period of ebola is generally 8-10 days (range, 2-21 days). person-to-person transmission has only occurred from persons with signs or symptoms of evd. diagnostic testing is achieved with the use of real time (rt) polymerase chain reaction (pcr) on blood. 32 viral rna is usually detectable by pcr between 3 and 10 days after the onset of symptoms.patients with evd should be provided appropriate critical care including fluid and electrolyte replacement; oxygen therapy to maintain oxygen status; medications to support blood pressure, reducing vomiting and diarrhea, and to manage fever and pain; oral or parenteral nutrition; and treating coexisting infections (eg, malaria), if present. [33] [34] although there are currently no antiviral drugs approved by the us food and drug administration (fda), a number of therapies are under investigation including antibody-based therapies (eg, convalescent blood products, monoclonal antibodies), and drugs and small molecules (eg, ebola virus gene expression inhibitors, and ebola virus entry and inhibitors). [33] [34] [35] a number of preventive vaccines are currently in clinical trials. [33] [34] [35] environmental contamination and survival ebola virus has been isolated by cell culture from multiple body fluids of infected or convalescent patients including blood, saliva, stool, vaginal fluid, sweat, and urine for days or months after illness. 36 given the high volume of diarrhea and vomiting and the potential for fomite transmission, the frequency of environmental contamination and survival of ebola virus is of high concern. several studies have assessed the frequency of contamination within the health care 37, 39 or rt-pcr. [37] [38] [39] [40] [41] [42] although the frequency of environmental contamination was variable, all studies reported some environmental samples were positive by rt-pcr. contamination was most often demonstrated for blood stained items, 37, 42 and toilet/latrine, 39, 40, 42 or objects in close proximity to the patient (eg, mattress, bed rails). 37, 42 samples from ppe (eg, gloves) have tested positive by rt-pcr for ebola virus. 37, 42 viable virus was not isolated in either of the 2 studies that cultured environmental samples.the environmental survival of ebola virus has been studied using culture-based techniques under a variety of environmental conditions (eg, temperature, humidity), in various liquids, aerosols, and surfaces. [43] [44] [45] [46] [47] [48] [49] these studies may be summarized as follows. first, viable ebola can survive in liquids (eg, liquid media, tissue culture media, water, liquid blood, plasma) for days to weeks. second, viable ebola virus can also survive dried on a variety of surfaces (eg, plastic, glass, stainless steel, polypropylene, nitrile, bank notes) for days to weeks. third, ebola survives in liquids and on surfaces for a longer duration of time at lower temperatures (eg, 4°c vs 21°c). fourth, although aerosol transmission has not been observed, ebola virus has been demonstrated to survive in an aerosol for >3 hours. fifth, survival of ebola on porous surfaces, such as cotton, is substantially less than on steel and plastic surfaces.using macaques, viable ebola virus was demonstrated to survive in corpses for at least 3 days and rna could be detected for tissues for the entire 10-week study period. 50 ebola virus was detected by rt-pcr in a deceased patient's house 14 days after a patient was buried. 41 consistent use of appropriate ppe with strict adherence to donning and doffing protocols is crucial to preventing acquisition of evd during patient care. 28, 51, 52 a key component of reducing hcp risk is proper training in ppe donning and doffing with ongoing training to maintain competency.ebola virus is not inactivated by detergents. 53 using rt-pcr, cook et al 54 demonstrated that ebola virus outbreak variants dried with an organic soil load on a stainless steel carrier were inert after 5 minutes exposure to sodium hypochlorite (≥0.5%) and after 2.5 minutes exposure to 70% ethanol. smither et al 55 confirmed the activity of sodium hypochlorite; 10 4 ebola viruses as measured by pcr were inactivated by 0.75% sodium hypochlorite with 10 minutes contact time. in a later study, smither et al 56 reported that multiple disinfectants (ie, 0.5% hypochlorite, 10% hypochlorite, 5% peracetic acid, 70% ethanol) were effective against dried cell culture medium containing ebola virus. however, only 5% peracetic acid consistently reduced ebola virus titers in dried blood to undetectable levels. based on the hierarchy of microbial susceptibility to germicides and studies of germicide efficacy, the cdc states that any us environmental protection agency-(epa) registered hospital disinfectant with a label claim for a nonenveloped virus (eg, norovirus, rotavirus, adenovirus) can be used to disinfect environmental surfaces in rooms of patients with known or suspected evd. 57 in a systematic review, kampf 58 reported that 80% ethanol was highly effective against all 21 tested, enveloped viruses within 30 seconds. a >4-log 10 reduction of an ebola strain was achieved in 15 seconds using the following povidone-iodine solutions: 4%, 7.5%, 10%, and 3.2% iodine with 78% alcohol. 59 therefore, data suggests that hand antisepsis for skin contamination with ebola virus can be obtained with either povidone-iodine or 70%-80% alcohol (although proper ppe should always be worn).an ultraviolet-light (uv-c) booth was demonstrated to inactivate >3-log 10 bacteriophage ms2 (a nonenveloped virus) and could be useful for disinfection of contaminated ppe. 60 the history of mers has been reviewed. [61] [62] [63] mers, a new viral respiratory disease of humans, was first described in 2012 and later discovered to be caused by a novel coronavirus, mers-cov (lineage 2c b cov). the who has reported that between 2012 and december 2018, there were 2,279 laboratory-confirmed cases of mers, including 806 associated deaths (case-fatality rate = 35.3%), reported globally. 64 although cases have been reported from 27 countries, the majority of cases (ie, 1,901) have been reported from saudi arabia. 64 two cases of mers have been reported in the united states, both of whom were health care providers who acquired infection in saudi arabia. 65 no transmission has been reported in the united states.the microbiology, epidemiology, and clinical manifestations of mers have been reviewed. [66] [67] [68] [69] [70] [71] [72] mers-cov, a betacoronavirus, is a single-stranded, positive-sense enveloped rna virus that can cause an acute respiratory illness in humans. mers-cov is a zoonotic disease that is transmitted from animals-to-humans. dromedary camels, hosts for mers-cov, have been implicated in direct and indirect transmission to humans, although the exact mode of transmission is unknown. 63, 67, 71 bats are likely the main mammalian reservoir. 71 the clinical spectrum of mers infection ranges from asymptomatic or mild respiratory symptoms to severe acute respiratory disease and death. typical symptoms of mers include fever, cough, and shortness of breath. pneumonia is common but not always present. gastrointestinal symptoms (vomiting, diarrhea) frequently occur. risk factors for more severe disease include older age, comorbidities (eg, chronic lung diseases, diabetes), and immunosuppression. the diagnosis is confirmed by a positive rt-pcr assay targeting at least 2 different genomic regions. currently, there are no specific therapies or vaccines available.mers may be transmitted from person-to-person via direct contact likely due to droplet transmission ( table 2 ). this occurs most commonly when there is close contact such as providing unprotected care to an infected patient. thus far, no sustained community transmission has been documented. studies of family clusters and hcp contacts of patients have reported low frequencies of transmission (ie, 1%-3%). however, increased transmission has occurred in health care settings with limited infection control procedures. importantly, mers may be transmitted from an asymptomatic source. 73 however, super spreaders have also been reported. 74 the epidemiology and prevention of mers in health care settings has been reviewed. 10,75-77 infection prevention strategies have been informed by the multiple reports of outbreaks of mers involving health care facilities, [78] [79] [80] [81] and by the large outbreak in south korea. 82 importantly, during these outbreaks >20% of cases may have occurred in health care providers. factors contributing to intrahospital transmission include: (1) the initial symptoms of mers are nonspecific extensive environmental contamination has been documented by both culture and rt-pcr in clinical areas housing mers patients. 84, 85 positive sites have included patient room surfaces (eg, bed sheets, bedrails, intravenous fluid hangers), anteroom surfaces, medical devices (eg, portable x-ray machines, thermometers), and air-ventilating equipment. touchable surfaces have been found to be contaminated through respiratory secretions from clinically fully recovered patients. 84 mers-cov has also been detected in air samples in the vicinity of patients. 85 however, 1 large outbreak evaluation failed to demonstrate any transmission via the potentially contaminated environment without direct contact with the index case. 86 mers-cov has been shown to be recoverable after 48 hours on steel or plastic washers (20°c and 40% relative humidity). 87 further, no decrease in stability was observed during aerosolization experiments. multiple studies on covs other than mers-cov have demonstrated that these viruses can remain viable for days to weeks on environmental surfaces. 88, 89 survival is enhanced at low temperatures (ie, 4°c vs 20°c). 89 as mers-cov is an enveloped virus, it is likely susceptible to eparegistered hospital disinfectants and fda-approved antiseptics. studies on inactivation of surrogates for sars-cov (mouse hepatitis virus and transmissible gastroenteritis virus) demonstrated the following inactivation after 1-minute contact time: (1) for transmissible gastroenteritis virus, there was a log 10 reduction factor of 3.2 for 70% ethanol, 2.0 for phenolic, 2.3 for ortho-phthalaldehyde, 0.35 for 1:100 hypochlorite, 4.0 for 62% ethanol, and 3.5 for 71% ethanol; and (2) for mouse hepatitis virus, log 10 reduction factors were 3.9 for 70% ethanol, 1.3 for phenolic, 1.7 for ortho-phthalaldehyde, 0.62 for 1:100 hypochlorite, 2.7 for 62% ethanol, and 2.0 for 71% ethanol. 90 guidance from the cdc for managing patients with mers states, "hcp should perform hand hygiene before and after all patient contact, contact with potentially infectious material, and before putting on and upon removal of ppe, including gloves. hand hygiene in healthcare settings can be performed by washing with soap and water or using alcohol-based hand rubs. if hands are visibly soiled, use soap and water, not alcohol-based handrubs." 91 the cdc further states "standard cleaning and disinfection procedures (eg, using cleaners and water to pre-clean surfaces prior to applying an eparegistered disinfectant to frequently touched surfaces or objects for appropriate contact times as indicated on the product's label) are appropriate for mers-cov in healthcare settings, including those patient-care areas in which aerosol-generating procedures are performed. if there are no available epa-registered products that have a label claim for mers-cov, products with label claims against human coronaviruses should be used according to label instructions." 91the cdc defines cre for surveillance purposes as enterobacteriaceae that are "resistant to imipenem, meropenem, doripenem, or ertapenem or documentation that the isolate possess a carbapenemase." 92 the cdc further elaborates that cre is "a phenotypic definition (ie, based on the antibiotic susceptibility pattern of the organism) and it includes bacteria that are not susceptible to carbapenems via more than one type of mechanism." the cdc specifies that carbapenem resistance mechanisms include the following: (1) the production of carbapenemases (called carbapenemase-producing-cre), enzymes that break down carbapenems and related antimicrobials making them ineffective. this includes enzymes like klebsiella pneumoniae carbapenemase; and (2) the combination of mechanisms other than carbapenemase production (called non-carbapenemaseproducing-cre), most commonly the production of b-lactamases (eg, ampc) in combination with alterations in the bacteria's cell membrane (eg, porin mutations). the cdc has reported the following types of cre in the united states: ndm, oxa48, vim, imp, and klebsiella pneumoniae carbapenemase. 93 the biology, epidemiology, and management of cre have been reviewed. [94] [95] [96] [97] recent articles have reviewed newer antibiotic therapies for cre. 98, 99 follow-up of hospitalized cre colonized patients demonstrated that the mean duration of colonic carriage was >1 year. 100 however, hcp are rarely, if ever, colonized. a study of fecal carriage among hcp in a hospital endemic for cre revealed none of 177 evaluated health care providers were colonized with cre. 101 the main reservoir leading to human cre infections is the human gut. person-to-person transmission via direct and indirect contact are the most common mechanisms of transmission (table 3) . multiple hospital outbreaks have resulted from contaminated endoscopes, especially duodenoscopes. [102] [103] [104] these outbreaks have occurred despite all steps in cleaning and high-level disinfection of endoscopes compliant with current guidelines. strategies to provide pathogenfree endoscopes have been reviewed. 104 water sources in the hospital (eg, faucets, wash basins, showers, toilets), especially sinks have been demonstrated to be a reservoir of cre. [105] [106] [107] strategies and success rates of interventions to eliminate cre from water reservoirs have been reviewed. 105, 106 companion animals have been demonstrated to occasionally be colonized with cre. 108 this is of relevance to health care facilities considering that us health care facilities must permit persons with "service" animals in the facility and many hospitals permit animal-assisted therapy.strategies to manage cre colonized/infected patients and to control outbreaks in health care facilities have been reviewed. [109] [110] [111] both the who 112 and the cdc 113 provide detailed guidance on methods to control cre. the use of bundles to control horizontal transmission of cre in health care facilities have been reviewed. 114 environmental contamination and survival cre has been isolated from the environment in the vicinity of hospitalized colonized/infected patients including pillows, infusion pumps, bedside tables, and toilet areas. [115] [116] [117] the frequency of recovery has varied among studies, but objects closer to the patient are more likely contaminated with 5%-15% of samples from bedrails and over bed tables yielding cre. 115, 116 fecal continence is an independent predictor of being a nonspreader of cre. 117 cre has also been isolated in the environment of long-term care facilities. 118 havill et al 119 reported survival of cre on stainless steel discs for >10 days. however, weber et al 120 reported that 3 species of cre (klebsiella, enterobacter, and escherichia coli) survived poorly (>85% die-off in 24 hours). likely this difference was owing to the fact that havill et al 119 used a high inoculum (ie, 5-7-log 10 ) whereas weber used a low inoculum (ie, »2-log 10 ), which is similar to the actual amount of cre found on surfaces in the vicinity of patients colonized/ infected with cre.with rare possible exceptions, antibiotic-resistant bacteria including multidrug-resistant organisms do not have reduced susceptibility to epa-registered germicides. 121 even when reduced susceptibility to a germicide (eg, quaternary ammonium compounds by methicillinresistant staphylococcus aureus [mrsa]) has been demonstrated, the pathogen has not demonstrated resistance to the use concentration of the germicide. 121 kanamori et al 122 assessed the efficacy of 21 germicides against multiple cre enterobacteriaceae strains at 1-minute contact time and in the presence of 5% fetal calf serum. four highlevel disinfectants achieved >4-log 10 kill for all tested strains, but 0.55% ortho-phthalaldehyde achieved a 2.4-4.8-log 10 kill depending on the cre strain tested. eight disinfectants all achieved a >4-log 10 kill. among the 9 antiseptics tested (70% ethanol, 10% povidoneiodine, 2% and 4% chlorhexidine gluconate, 70% isopropyl alcohol, and 1% chloroxylenol) achieved ≥2.9-log 10 kill against all test cre strains. based on this study, epa-registered disinfectants and fdaapproved antiseptics can be used with assurance for equipment/ instrument high-level disinfection, surface disinfection, and hand antisepsis. a uv-c device for room disinfection has been shown to inactivate >5-log 10 cre reduction in direct line of sight and >4-log 10 cre reduction in indirect line of sight when used at the recommended cycle time (ie, 5-10 minutes). 123 the effectiveness of uv-c for room disinfection was confirmed in another study. 124 history and microbiology c auris is a novel candida species that was first reported following its isolation from the ear canal of a patient in japan in 2009. 125 since then, c auris has been reported from multiple countries throughout the world. [126] [127] [128] the cdc reported that as of january 22, 2019, 551 cases of c auris had been reported from 12 states, with some states (ie, new york, illinois, new jersey) reporting >100 cases. 129 c auris is an emerging pathogen that presents a serious global health threat for the following reasons: (1) it causes serious infections with a high mortality; (2) it is often difficult to identify with standard laboratory methods and can be misidentified in laboratories unless specialized technology is used; (3) it is often multidrug resistant (intrinsic or rapidly inducible antifungal resistance); (4) it is becoming more widespread geographically; (5) increasing prevalence; (6) biofilm formation; (7) persistence in the environment; and (8) it has caused multiple outbreaks in health care facilities. 128, 130, 131 the microbiology, clinical syndromes, diagnosis, and treatment of c auris have been reviewed. 127, [132] [133] [134] [135] [136] genetic analyses have shown that c auris is most closely related to c lusitaniae and c haemulonii, although it has a striking divergence from some other candida species. 127 c auris is often misidentified in conventional diagnostic laboratories using biochemical typing. 127 c auris most commonly has been misidentified as c haemulonii, but also as c famata, c sake, rhodotorula glutinis, r mucilaginosa, and saccharomyces boulardii. 127, 137, 138 currently, accurate identification of c auris can be accomplished by the use of maldi-tof or pcr assays specific for c auris. multiple virulence factors have been described. 133 the most common clinical syndromes reported have been bloodstream infections (candidemia), wound infections, and ear infections. 129 other clinical syndromes reported have included infections of the respiratory tract, central nervous system, urogenital system, intra-abdominal, skin and soft tissues, and bone. 127 patients with c auris infection have almost always presented with underlying illnesses or comorbidities such as diabetes, chronic or acute renal failure, pulmonary disease, immunosuppressive conditions, tumor or malignancies, liver disease, or solid organ transplants. 137 risk factors for infection have usually included care in an intensive care unit, the presence of indwelling central venous catheters, arterial lines, foley catheters, invasive surgical procedures, mechanical ventilation, and prior or continued exposure to broad-spectrum antibiotics and antifungal agents. 132, 133, 136 mortality rates >30% have been reported for patients with invasive infections. 127, 132, 133 at the present time, there are no clinical breakpoints for c auris. high minimum inhibitory concentrations have been reported to fluconazole and other triazole antifungals such as voriconazole, itraconazole, and isavaconazole. 127, 132 variability in susceptibility of isolates has also been reported to amphotericin. 127 epidemiology and transmission c auris has been associated with multiple nosocomial outbreaks, especially in the intensive care setting. [139] [140] [141] [142] [143] [144] an evaluation of c auris in new york city health care facilities demonstrated epidemiologic links between cases in multiple hospitals and long-term care facilities. 138 importantly, colonization with c auris has been detected at multiple body sites including nares, groin, axilla, and rectum. 127 prolonged colonization has been reported with c auris detected >3 months after initial isolation and despite multiple negative screens and antifungal therapy. 136, 138 multiple mechanisms for transmission of c auris are likely based on outbreak investigations (table 4 ). risk factors for colonization or infection have been reported to include contact with patients known to harbor c auris. 138, 145 sharing an environment with a c auris patient or sequential bed occupancy that was previously occupied by a patient with c auris has also been described as a risk. 145 importantly, patients occupying a room that previously housed a patient with c auris have acquired c auris even though the room had been decontaminated prior to occupancy. 145 an outbreak evaluation found that use of reusable probes for temperature monitoring was associated with a significantly increased risk of c auris colonization with an odds ratio of 6.80. 142 transmission of c auris via transplantation of lung from a patient with respiratory tract colonization or infection to the lung transplant recipient has been reported. 146 c auris has occasionally been isolated from health care providers. biswal et al 144 reported that c auris was detected on the hands of 4 table 4 modes of transmission of candida aurispatient-to-patient via direct contact patient-to-patient via indirect contact due to environmental contamination (ie, sharing same hospital room, admission to a hospital room previously occupied by a patient with c auris) less common patient-to-patient via indirect contact: shared equipment due to inadequate disinfection (eg, thermometer) patient-to-patient via direct contact: donor-derived transmission (eg, lung transplantation) person-to-person via indirect contact due to transiently colonized health care provider's hands health care providers (2.8%), although this was likely due to inadequate hand hygiene rather than long-term colonization. schelenz et al, 139 while conducting an outbreak investigation in the united kingdom, screened (nose, axilla, groin, and throat) >250 health care providers for colonization and found only a single person (nurse) transiently colonized with c auris.widespread contamination of the surface environment has been reported by multiple investigators. 138 importantly, contaminated sites have included sites in the patient's room such as surfaces, toilets, ventilator/respiratory equipment, and sites outside of the patient's room such as computer workstations, thermometers, glucometers, housekeeping carts, dialysis equipment, ultrasound equipment, and vital sign machines. 138 the environmental survival of c auris has been studied. 144, 147, 148 in laboratory tests, c auris and other candida spp were demonstrated to persist for 7 days on moist or dry (steel disks) surfaces. 147 survival on dry linen for up to 7 days has been demonstrated. 148 c auris cells have been demonstrated to remain viable on plastic surfaces for at least 4 weeks, or 2 weeks after they were no longer culturable. 148 several reviews have included a discussion of the susceptibility of c auris to germicides. 149 the susceptibility of c auris to germicides (ie, antiseptics and disinfectants) has been studied by several investigators. 139, 144, [150] [151] [152] [153] rutala et al 153 assessed the germicidal activity of high-level disinfectants and/or chemical sterilants and reported that all agents (ie, 0.20% peracetic acid, 2.4% glutaraldehyde, 0.65% hydrogen peroxide plus 0.14% peroxyacetic acid, 2% accelerated hydrogen peroxide) achieved a ≥4.1-log 10 reduction of c auris with the exception of 0.55% ortho-phthalaldehyde that achieved only a 2.3-log 10 inactivation for e coli. importantly, these in vitro experiments were done under challenging conditions (ie, 5% fetal calf serum and 1-minute exposure time). it is likely that all high-level disinfectants that are currently approved by the fda when used appropriately (ie, after appropriate cleaning and the manufacturer's recommended concentration and duration) are effective against c. auris. the activity of low-level disinfectants has been evaluated by several investigations. 152, 153 direct comparison between the studies is impeded by the use of different test conditions including test method, duration of exposure, and presence or absence of proteins such as fetal calf serum. the activity of low-level disinfectants has been most comprehensively investigated using the disc-based quantitative carrier test and is summarized in table 5 . 152, 153 importantly, both investigators added 5% fetal calf serum to assess germicidal efficacy under more stringent conditions (ie, presence of proteins). importantly, quaternary ammonium disinfectants alone were significantly less effective against c auris than other products. 152, 153 some investigators reported that concentrations of sodium hypochlorite ≥1,000 ppm were effective in killing >4-log 10 c auris in 3-5 minutes, 150, 151 whereas others 153 reported sodium hypochlorite »1,200 ppm at an exposure time of 1 minute resulted in only a 1.6-log 10 reduction in c auris. it is unclear whether the longer exposure times and lack of protein load led to the high reduction rates reported by abdolrasouli et al 150 and moore et al. 151 however, all investigators have reported that a 1:10 dilution of 5.25% sodium hypochlorite is effective in killing >4-log 10 c auris even with short exposure times (ie, 1 minute) and in the presence of protein. 152, 153 based on current studies, the cdc states "quaternary ammonium compounds (qacs) that are routinely used for disinfection may not be effective against c auris. . ..until further information is available for c auris, cdc recommends use of an environmental protection agency (epa)-registered hospital-grade disinfectant effective against clostridium difficile spores (list k)". 154 cdc further states that when the use of products on list k is not feasible, published research has found that the following products led to a substantial reduction 154 room disinfection with a uv-c device has been investigated for its ability to inactivate candida spp, mrsa, and clos difficile. 155 c auris demonstrated substantially less susceptibility to uv-c than mrsa and less susceptibility than c albicans or c glabrata at 10 minutes exposure time. 155 reductions in c auris and clos difficile were similar at 10 minutes. 155 with regard to room disinfection devices, the cdc states that "data on hands-free disinfection methods, like germicidal uv irradiation, are limited, and these methods may require cycle times similar to those used to inactivate bacterial spores (eg, clostridium difficile) when used for c auris." 154 we recommend that daily and terminal room cleaning/disinfection be done with an agent demonstrated to be effective against c auris. the use of a uv-c device for terminal disinfection should be considered as a supplemental method.the activity of antiseptics against c auris has been studied by several investigators (table 6 ). there is good agreement that 70% alcohol (both isopropyl and ethyl) is effective against c auris at 1 minute. importantly, the activity of alcohol has not been studied at the times used by most health care providers when performing hand hygiene (ie, 10-15 seconds). unfortunately, studies on the activity of other important antiseptics such as chlorhexidine gluconate and povidoneiodine have produced variable results (table 6 ). this variability is likely explained by differences in the test conditions including in vitro versus human challenge, duration of exposure, and presence of a protein load (eg, fetal calf serum). it appears that 10% povidone-iodine would provide adequate skin antisepsis if applied for ≥1 minute. using a panel of c auris clinical isolates, kean et al, 156 screened them for their planktonic and sessile susceptibilities to skin disinfection challenge using povidone-iodine, chlorhexidine gluconate, and hydrogen peroxide. c auris biofilms displayed increased tolerance to antisepsis compared with planktonic cells. analysis using a complex biofilm model demonstrated reduced susceptibility against clinically relevant concentrations of chlorhexidine gluconate (0.05%) and hydrogen peroxide (3%), with eradication achieved only with povidone-iodine (10%). as noted by forsberg et al, 136 whether topical antiseptics might reduce the burden of c auris on the skin, and therefore provide a potentially valuable tool for infection prevention, remains unclear. the cdc states that when caring for patients with c auris "healthcare personnel should follow standard hand hygiene practices, which include alcohol-based hand sanitizer use or, if hands are visibly soiled, washing with soap and water. wearing gloves is not a substitute for hand hygiene." 154 w hat do we know about this virus? what do physicians and other clinicians need to do? where can one obtain the most reliable advice? human coronaviruses constitute a large family of viruses that usually cause mild to moderate upper respiratory illnesses in people such as the common cold. 1 initial characterization of the coronavirus occurred in the 1960's when tyrell and bynoe described passage of a virus named b814 at the time, as a group of viruses causing a large proportion of respiratory tract infections in humans. 2 coronavirus infections have since been described in multiple animal species as well, including bats, camels, cattle, cats, chicken, dogs, pigs, rabbits, rats and turkeys. bats account for the largest group of animal reservoirs. 3 there are many, perhaps even hundreds of coronaviruses circulating in animals with what is occasional spread to humans and termed e spill over events, that then cause more serious illness in humans with worsened outcomes yielding significant morbidity and high mortality rates. 4 coronaviruses are medium sized positive stranded rna viruses that are named for the crown-like characteristic structures seen in electron micrographs. the characteristic spikes are formed by heavily glycosolated s protein. viral replication develops in the cytoplasm of infected cells budding into cytoplasmic vesicles from the endoplasmic reticulum resulting in cellular destruction and death. 5 while many different coronaviruses exist, seven types are known to cause disease in humans. 6 four of these viruses 229e, oc43, nl63 and khu have been associated with mild disease symptoms. three of the viruses have been associated with causation of more severe illnesses and worse outcomes in humans. the first of these to appear was named severe acute respiratory syndrome (sars) and was first reported in asia in february 2003, although retrospectively it was present in 2002. 7 it subsequently disappeared in 2004. this was followed by middle east respiratory syndrome (mers) which was first noted in saudi arabia in 2012 and is currently still found in camels. 8 the third being covid-19 and is caused by the sars-cov-2 that was first described in wuhan china in december, 2019. 9 among older adults, coronaviruses have been associated with acute exacerbations of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease and acute asthma events in both adults and children as well as community acquired pneumonia. coronaviruses have also been associated with other diseases including enteric manifestations causing abdominal pain, diarrhea, nausea, and vomiting as well as other symptoms such as chills, fever, headache and myalgia. other rare conditions including acute and chronic neurologic disease have been reported. 10 as there is currently no available specific pharmacologic therapeutic or vaccine, supportive care is the mainstay of treatment. preventive strategies are focused on infection control procedures such as washing hands, careful disposal of material containing nasal and oral secretions, and the use of disinfectants to clean frequently used surfaces. strategies to prevent infection with the new coronavirus from world health organization (who) and the center for disease control (cdc) recommend following these precautions for avoiding covid-19:avoid large events and mass gatherings. avoid close contact (about 6 feet) with anyone who is sick or has symptoms. keep distance between yourself and others if covid-19 is spreading in your community, especially if you have a higher risk of serious illness. wash your hands often with soap and water for at least 20 seconds, or use an alcohol-based hand sanitizer that contains at least 60% alcohol. cover your mouth and nose with your elbow or a tissue when you cough or sneeze. throw away the used tissue. avoid touching your eyes, nose and mouth if your hands aren't clean. avoid sharing dishes, glasses, bedding and other household items if you're sick. clean and disinfect surfaces you often touch on a daily basis. stay home from work, school and public areas if you're sick, unless you're going to get medical care. avoid taking public transportation if you're sick.cdc doesn't recommend that healthy people wear a face mask to protect themselves from respiratory illnesses, including covid-19. 11 the cdc has produced multiple information and useful guidelines to facilitate care and prevention of corona viruses including: it is so important that we in the national medical association maintain ongoing updates and information for our own and family care, our patients, our communities and our nation.get the latest public health information from cdc: https://www.coronavirus.gov.get the latest research information from nih: https:// www.nih.gov/coronavirus. the publisher of journal of the national medical association, elsevier, has compiled an extensive list of publications that may also be useful to physicians and other clinicians and can be found at: elsevier's novel coronavirus information center.enteric viruses comprise a broad assortment of viruses that are transmissible to humans through contaminated food and water and through person -to -person contamination. among the most notable foodborne enteric viruses are hepatitis a and e viruses, small round -structured viruses, and group a rotaviruses. all of these viruses can be spread readily to foods during food production, processing, and handling. hepatitis a virus has contributed to numerous foodborne outbreaks and is often associated with raw or lightly cooked shellfish [ 83 ] . the largest foodborne outbreak of hepatitis a was from the consumption of contaminated clams where nearly 300,000 people became sick during a 3 -month period [ 38 ] . in the united states, hepatitis a causes an estimated 83,000 illnesses per year [ 70 ] . to date, there have been only two reported cases of domestically acquired hepatitis e in the united states [ 29, 56 ] . epidemics of hepatitis e have been reported in asia, africa, and mexico [ 19 ] . both of these viruses can migrate from the intestinal tract to infect and damage the liver, leading to jaundice and, occasionally, death. hepatitis a is often self -limiting and spontaneous recovery is common [ 88 ] . the fatality rate from hepatitis a is about 100 per year in the united states [ 57 ] . hepatitis e has a low mortality rate for the general population ( 0.5 -3.0% ); however, pregnant women have a mortality rate between 15% and 25% [ 64 ] . the incubation period for hepatitis a is 25 -45 days, whereas the incubation period for hepatitis e is 15 -60 days.caliciviruses, small round -structured viruses, may be divided into three genogroups represented by norwalk virus, snow mountain virus, and sapporo virus. genogroup i viruses include norwalk, southampton, and desert shield viruses. genogroup ii includes the snow mountain, camberwell, lordsdale, mexico, toronto, bristol, hawaii, and oth -25 viruses. collectively, genogroups i and ii viruses may be referred to as norwalk -like viruses. genogroup iii consists of the classical caliciviruses with sapporo virus as the prototype. other members of this genogroup include houston, london, and parkville viruses. the centers for disease control and prevention recently estimated the annual incidence of norwalk -like viral illness in the united states at 23 million [ 70 ] . the caliciviruses may cause diarrhea and vomiting with rapid onset, but lasting for only a few days. norwalk -like viruses have been listed as the leading cause of foodborne hospitalizations in the united states today and responsible for 7% of the food -related deaths [ 70 ] .rotavirus illness, also referred to as acute infantile diarrhea, is a common cause of infantile diarrhea worldwide. the exact role of foods in rotavirus transmission has not been elucidated; however, food, water, and person -to -person are all vehicles of transmission. it was estimated that only 1% of rotavirus cases was foodborne [ 70 ] . rotavirus diarrhea may lead to dehydration and death, particularly in regions of the world where rehydration therapy is not available. rotavirus causes an estimated 2.7 -3.9 million illnesses, 49,000 -50,000 hospitalizations [ 9, 70 ] , and about 30 deaths per year in the united states [ 70 ] , but an estimated 800,000 deaths per year worldwide [ 76 ] . although rare in the united states, rotavirus deaths are common in poor countries where rehydration therapy is unavailable.other enteric viruses include the astroviruses, enteric adenoviruses, and coronaviruses, which are also spread by the fecal -tooral route. the number of astrovirus infections in the united states is estimated at 3.9 million per year with only 10 deaths [ 70 ] . water and person -to -person transmissions may be responsible for the majority of illnesses from hepatitis a, rotavirus, and astroviruses; but 40% ( about 9.2 million cases ) of norwalk -like virus illnesses may be foodborne [ 70 ] . the number of enteric virus illnesses in the united states can only be estimated because most of the illnesses are mild, go unreported, and routine testing of patients for specific virus infections is not performed.unlike some bacterial pathogens which may require a moderate to high dose to induce illness, it is believed that just a few virus particles may be sufficient to elicit infection. viral contaminants may persist in the environment, on food surfaces, or within foods for extended periods [ 25, 94, 96 ] . hepatitis a virus was detected in cream cookies maintained at 218c and 498c for up to 30 and 14 days, respectively, in oysters maintained at 12 -248c for > 5 days and in environmental samples ( soil and water ) at 258c for 56 -84 days [ 94 ] . fortunately, human enteric viruses can only replicate in susceptible mammalian hosts, so there is no virus amplification within foods.enteroviruses consist of poliovirus, echovirus, coxsackievirus types a and b, and enterovirus serotypes 70 and 71. poliovirus has been used extensively as a laboratory model since it is similar to hepatitis a virus in some respects, but unlike hepatitis a virus, it can be readily propagated in cell culture. the use of poliovirus has provided much information on the effectiveness of various treatments and processes for the disinfection of foods and food contact surfaces. nearly all of the polioviruses present in the environment are vaccine strains which enter the environment from the stools of children recently immunized with an attenuated oral poliovirus vaccine. this vaccine is being phased out and the inactivated, injectable vaccine is being employed to remove all traces of poliovirus from the environment. currently, polio has been eliminated from the western hemisphere and there is substantial progress being made to eradicate the disease worldwide. over the next few years, it is likely that polio will be eradicated and that laboratory strains, even attenuated vaccine strains, will have to be destroyed. soon, the poliovirus model will be a thing of the past. unfortunately, there is no good successor for poliovirus; however, feline calcivirus is becoming a popular model for research on norwalk -like viruses [ 93 ] .determination of the source of contamination is fundamental to development of an effective remedy. pre -harvest contamination may occur in foods subjected to irrigation with reclaimed wastewater, crop fertilization with sewage sludge, or fecal pollution of the areas in which food products are obtained [ 14, 75, 90 ] . nonpoint sources of pollution, like land runoff into watersheds and discharge of human wastes from boats, have caused major pollution events leading to foodborne illness [ 8, 13, 54, 67 ] . improperly operated sewage treatment plants, plants overloaded with storm water, or damaged or poorly maintained septic systems have been linked to outbreaks of enteric virus illness [ 73, 99 ] . land disposal of sewage sludge may contaminate groundwater and lead to potential disease outbreaks [ 96 ] . improper dumping of septage or the leaching from baby diaper and related wastes from sanitary landfills can contribute to contamination of groundwater, which may in turn be used for drinking or irrigation. dumps also contain insects, rodents, birds, raccoons, and other pests which may carry viruses many miles from the original disposal site. it is uncertain as to what extent wind and evaporation contribute to virus dispersal, although the incidence of illness among farm workers using spray irrigation of wastewater appears low [ 33, 59 ] . during harvest, foods may be contaminated by harvesters, as was suspected in outbreaks of hepatitis a from strawberries [ 7, 46, 74 ] , raspberries [ 82 ] , and lettuce [ 89 ] ; rotavirus from lettuce [ 41 ] ; and norwalk -like illness from raspberries [ 35 ] and oysters [ 54, 67 ] .enteric virus outbreaks have been associated with post -harvest contamination from the hands of food handlers, recontamination after cooking or processing, and inadequate sanitation. the restaurant industry has contributed to the incidence of illness due to poor managerial practice. infected workers handling foods may transmit hepatitis a virus, norwalk -like virus, and other enteric viruses to foods and no level of food processing will eliminate post -processing contamination. virtually any food handled by ill workers may become contaminated, although certain food products have received more attention than others. among the foods most commonly cited as contributing to viral illness from handling by infected workers are salads, raw fruits and vegetables [ 36, 52, 61, 62, 78 ] , and bakery products [ 103, 107 ] -foods that may be handled frequently and are not generally heated or reheated after handling. cross -contamination of processed products by raw materials, like the contamination of salad by raw seafood, has also been reported [ 36 ] . adequate plant sanitation may reduce the threat of product cross -contamination. water must be of sanitary quality if it is to be used in food processing as an added ingredient in food preparation, or for use in manufacturing ice. celery contaminated with non -potable water was responsible for an outbreak of norwalk virus gastroenteritis, causing morbidity in over 1400 people [ 105 ] . ice may become contaminated during or after production and can lead to food -or water-borne illness [ 12, 51, 58 ] .although most food -related industries are conscientious in producing safe and wholesome products, some are at higher risk of producing tainted products by the very nature of the food or the production process. foods served raw or only lightly cooked are at greatest risk of transmitting viral contaminants obtained from either pre -or post -harvest sources. the molluscan shellfish industry is particularly susceptible since: ( i ) shellfish can bioconcentrate viruses within their edible tissues to levels much higher than in the water itself; ( ii ) there are no good methods to ascertain whether the shellfish or their harvest waters contain infectious viruses; and ( iii ) shellfish are frequently eaten raw or only lightly cooked. outbreaks of foodborne viral illness have been attributable to viruscontaminated shellfish [ 20, 83 ] . for the fruit and vegetable industries, farming practices, including fertilization and irrigation techniques, product transportation, and the health of the harvesters themselves, are coming under increased scrutiny. today, food processors have an extensive list of disinfectants for sanitizing processing surfaces, but many disinfectants are ineffective in inactivating enteric viruses. processors may also be unfamiliar with the best methods to apply disinfectants. there are many questions concerning processing conditions necessary to fully eliminate virus contaminants and further research is needed in this area. the transportation industry must share the responsibility of maintaining clean trucks, ice, boxes, pallets, etc., to haul food products. it is fortunate for food transporters that human enteric viruses do not replicate in foods even under abuse temperatures. the transportation industry should follow the same safeguards as for protecting foods from external sources of bacterial contamination. perhaps, the segment of the economy most at risk from virus contamination of foods is the restaurant industry. they are impacted most because they have a greater potential for contaminating foods due to extensive handling, often by inexperienced and untrained workers. restaurants may be held liable in civil and criminal prosecutions if their products cause illness. the restaurant trade is, by no means, the only industry culpable in the event of an outbreak, so all facets of the production from the growth, harvest, and distribution, to the processing and marketing industries must be accountable for their role in ensuring safe foods. hotels and restaurants reportedly have a high level of virus transmission through person -to -person contacts [ 68 ] . cruise ship lines have also been hit hard by enteric virus -like illness [ 42, 43, 51, 69 ] . outbreaks often involve a substantial number of passengers and crew. in these cases, transmission is not only from direct consumption of contaminated foods, but likely from person -to -person spread.there are certain fundamental industrial practices that will allow the elimination or significant reduction of viruses from foods. methods for elimination of enteric viruses from foods depend somewhat on the type of virus present and the food contaminated. no one step will be sufficient to ensure a safe and wholesome product since recontamination may occur at any stage in the food chain; however, a concerted effort will reduce the risk of foodborne illness. the following are some strategies that the food industry may consider adopting.the practice of using wastewater for crop irrigation and sewage sludge for fertilization should be evaluated carefully. one study demonstrated the ineffectiveness of anaerobic mesophilic digestion at 35 -368c to inactivate rotavirus and coxsackie b5 viruses; however, anaerobic thermophilic digestion at 54 -568c and aerobic thermophilic fermentation at 60 -618c inactivated these viruses [ 95 ] . wastewater should be subjected to, at least, primary and secondary treatments followed by chlorination or ultraviolet ( uv ) light disinfection to reduce virus levels. wastewater irrigation may pose a particular risk for produce that is consumed raw. viruses from spray irrigation may be harbored on the surfaces of fruits and vegetables and can lead to illness if the produce is not adequately washed or peeled. an antibacterial compound for use in washing and disinfecting the surfaces of fruits and vegetables was recently marketed and could offer some benefits in reducing the levels of external viral contamination.the harvest of shellfish should be strictly regulated in regard to the criteria of the national shellfish sanitation program and the water quality criteria set forth by the interstate shellfish sanitation conference [ 100 ] . under this program, shellfish -growing waters are classified based on the levels of coliform bacteria in the water. although the fecal coliform standard does not correlate directly with the levels of viruses in the water or in the shellfish, outbreaks of enteric virus illness are not often reported for shellfish obtained from approved harvesting waters. the shellfish industry and regulatory agencies should continue to actively pursue shellfish poachers who obtain shellstock from closed areas. sacks of shellfish should be clearly marked with tags providing information required by state health authorities regarding the date and location of the harvest and the name of the harvester. such information is crucial in epidemiological studies designed to track and remove from the market foods implicated in outbreaks.sick food handlers have been responsible for numerous cases of foodborne viral illness [ 24, 78, 79, 108 ] . all food industries should mandate that sick workers do not handle foods, packaging materials or ingredients, or processing line equipment, dishes or utensils during or immediately after their illness. workers who have seemingly recovered from an illness may still carry and shed viruses which can lead to food contamination [ 108 ] . employers should require that sick workers not be allowed to work until they are better, and the employees should be given temporary jobs away from the food for a few days after recovering from enteric illness. provisions should be made to financially help sick employees, through paid sick leave or by other means, so that the workers will not hide the fact that they are sick for fear of a reduced paycheck.viruses may be present in seemingly clean foods. since viruses are not associated with product spoilage, flavor and odor changes that signal spoilage from bacteria will not indicate the virological quality or safety of foods. therefore, it is important to provide a system of checks and balances to ensure the safety of all foods. the food industry has subscribed to a new approach to protect the nation's food supply known as the hazard analysis critical control point ( haccp ) system [ 10, 16 ] . under the haccp system, food operations must develop and implement a plan, based on sound scientific data and reasoning, to identify those points in the operation most likely to contribute to product contamination. these become the critical control points for the operation. the haccp approach also requires that the critical control points be monitored to ensure proper operation of the system. in the case of cooked products, cooking times and temperatures would be monitored to ensure adequate inactivation of microbes. for canning operations, times and temperatures are routinely monitored to ensure that they are adequate to eliminate the presence of clostridium spores. similar safeguards are needed to control and eliminate viral contaminants. many factors go into the development of a haccp plan, but all too often, the health status of the employee is highly subjective. to reduce foodborne illness, employee health must be a prime consideration for all sectors of the food industry. epidemiological data should also be used to design haccp and risk assessment systems [ 81 ] . over the next few years, haccp is likely to expand into new areas of the food industry to encompass all aspects of the farm -to -fork continuum.one fundamental attribute of the haccp system is the monitoring aspect, where data and records are maintained and scrutinized for various critical control points. under many haccp programs, bacteriological tests are required to ensure that adequate processing times and temperatures are maintained or to demonstrate adequate sanitation of the equipment. unfortunately, routine testing of viral contaminants in foods is not possible because virus assay procedures are generally lacking. in the absence of sound methods for virus detection, it may be necessary to identify potential hazards not empirically identifiable. as improved detection methods become available for viruses, critical control points for viral contaminants may be identified.industrial application of processing technologies to reduce or eliminate viral contamination from foods can be highly effective, depending on the food type and the technology applied. some of the processes that are effective in preventing, reducing, or eliminating enteric viruses in foods are discussed below.good sanitation can reduce the incidence of foodborne contamination. sanitation guidelines should be in place for foods from production and harvest to the consumer. current haccp systems are beneficial in identifying and controlling those factors critical to the maintenance of safe products.a number of studies determined the effectiveness of disinfectants in eliminating enteric viruses ( table 1 ) . references from table 1 should be scrutinized closely to determine if the disinfectants are appropriate for specific applications. chemical disinfectants should be selected based on their effectiveness against foodborne viruses. although solutions containing chlorine are effective disinfectants for most viruses, other disinfectants may be more practical or have residual effects to enhance sanitation efforts. in one study evaluating 27 chemical disinfectants for their ability to inactivate rotavirus on glass, plastic, and stainless steel surfaces, only nine were effective: chloramine -t, chlorhexidine gluconate, glutaraldehyde, hydrochloric acid, isopropyl alcohol, peracetic acid, povidone iodine, quaternary ammonium compound, and sodium -o -benzyl -p -chlorophenate [ 60 ] . the treatment of norwalk virus with up to 10 mg / ml of chlorine for 30 min was insufficient to inactivate all the viruses present as determined by a volunteer study [ 50 ] , although there is some speculation that the amount of free chlorine available was substantially less than 10 mg / ml. in another study, chlorine, chlorine dioxide, peracetic acid, and ozone were effective in reducing poliovirus, echovirus, coxsackievirus type b5, and rotavirus [ 39 ] . rotavirus was readily inactivated by chlorine dioxide at alkaline ph values [ 22 ] and by chlorine [ 102 ] and ozone [ 101 ] , particularly at acidic and neutral ph values. chlorine dioxide and iodine, at alkaline ph values, have also been effective in inactivating poliovirus [ 3 ] . engelbrecht et al [ 28 ] demonstrated that poliovirus types 1 and 2, echovirus types 1 and 5, and coxsackievirus types a9 and b5 were 99% inactivated in 0.3 -4.5 min with residual chlorine levels of $0.5 mg / l at ph values of 6.0 and 7.8; however, at ph 10, inactivation times were substantially increased ( 21 -96 min ) for all viruses except coxsackie a9, which was still rapidly inactivated after 1.5 min. chlorine solutions at low ph ( ph 6 ) were previously shown to inactivate enteric viruses more readily than chlorine solutions maintained at ph 10 [ 28 ] . poliovirus was treated with 0.5 mg / l of free chlorine for various intervals, and virus propagation was attempted in cell culture followed by detection by reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction ( rt-pcr ) [ 17 ] . poliovirus required 10 min for inactivation to non -detectable levels, demonstrating that poliovirus is five times more sensitive than previously expected [ 17 ] .sattar et al [ 91 ] evaluated a host of potential disinfectants for the inactivation of rotaviruses and found that the best inactivation occurred with a 3 -min exposure to a spray containing ophenylphenol and ethanol; however, chlorine bleach and a phenolic compound were also effective in eliminating the viruses over a longer exposure period. a quarternary ammonium -based product was ineffective as a disinfectant [ 91 ] .depending on the food type, chemical disinfection of viruses from surfaces of foods may be difficult or impossible to accomplish. disinfectant solutions or detergents incorporated into the rinse water may facilitate the elimination of gross external contamination, but may be insufficient to remove viral contaminants, particularly if the viruses have penetrated through the skin. washing and disinfection may not be effective for cut vegetables since viruses may enter the tissues through cuts and abrasions. leafy vegetables may be more difficult to disinfect because of the rough or wrinkled nature of the surfaces. likewise, fruits such as strawberries, raspberries, and blackberries have a porous surface texture which may trap viruses beyond the reach of chemical disinfectants. rinsing without the use of suitable detergents or disinfectants may allow viruses to infiltrate the tissues of fruits and vegetables and to become redistributed onto products that were not previously contaminated. therefore, individual washing of produce would be better than bulk washing to prevent cross -contamination. potential disinfectants and cleaning agents must be scrutinized carefully to ensure that they are approved for use in food establishments or on the foods themselves. sanitation of equipment and food contact surfaces should employ the use of ample detergents and water to rinse away and dilute -if nothing else -the viruses associated with food residues or hand contamination. large -scale food processing plants should consider the use of commercial sanitation stations utilizing hot disinfectant solutions and high -pressure water rinses for inactivation of microorganisms and removal of food residues from processing equipment and food contact surfaces.thorough cooking is one of the best and most practical methods to totally inactivate enteric viruses; however, the times and temperatures required vary with the composition of the food. high protein and fat content tends to enhance thermal stability of enteric viruses [ 34 ] . enteric viruses were inactivated from hamburgers heated to an internal temperature of 608c ( rare ), but only when the patties were rapidly cooled after cooking [ 97 ] . studies performed by adding 1.0 -1.9â10 4 poliovirus per gram of oysters followed by stewing, frying, baking, and steaming gave varying results, depending on the cooking method [ 26 ] . thirteen percent of the viruses remained infective in fried oysters cooked to an internal temperature of 1008c ( requiring 8 min ); whereas baking to 908 ( requiring 29 min ), steaming to 97.38c ( requiring 30 min ), and stewing to 758c ( requiring 8 min ) left 12.7%, 7%, and 10% of the viruses remaining, respectively [ 26 ] . another gastroenteritis virus, the astrovirus, was inactivated by heating to 608c for 10 min [ 55 ] . studies on heat inactivation of hepatitis a virus in skim milk, homogenized milk, and table cream demonstrated a 5 -log reduction with exposure of 858c for < 0.5 min; whereas at 808c, skim and homogenized milk required up to 0.68 min and cream required 1.24 min for similar reductions [ 15 ] . their findings [ 15 ] supported the conclusion that higher fat content provides thermal stability for hepatitis a virus.ionizing radiation, uv light, and microwave energy are all effective in reducing enteric viruses in foods. viral nucleic acids are fragmented in the presence of ionizing radiation. ionizing radiation, in the form of gamma emissions, is becoming more generally accepted for food processing [ 4, 31, 32 ] . depending on the product, irradiation levels as high as 10 kgy may be used. a petition currently before the u.s. food and drug administration seeks to allow the use of 4.5 kgy for non -frozen and non -dry products and 10.0 kgy for frozen or dry products [ 11 ] . enteric virus inactivation requires a higher dose of gamma irradiation than bacterial pathogens [ 32, 72, 77 ] . the level of irradiation required to eliminate 90% of the hepatitis a virus, poliovirus, and rotavirus in shellfish was 3.1 kgy [ 63 ] , but 6.8 kgy was required to inactivate coxsackievirus type b2 from ground beef [ 98 ] . in -shell molluscan shellfish experience high mortalities and reduced shelf -life when subjected to the levels of irradiation necessary to eliminate the enteric viruses. when poliovirus was suspended in water, 90% of the viruses was inactivated with 1.92 kgy, but 3.35 kgy was required to inactivate viruses in wastewater sludges [ 49 ] . in many cases, 90% inactivation may not be sufficient to eliminate the threat of illness, since only a few virus particles may be sufficient to elicit illness.ionizing radiation has the ability to penetrate foods and kill the microbes within; however, the opposite is true for uv irradiation which only inactivates viruses in direct contact with the light. germicidal lamps, operating at a wavelength around 254 nm, are effective in reducing viruses on the surfaces of foods. rotavirus and poliovirus demonstrated similar rates of inactivation from uv; however, these viruses required three to four times the dose of uv necessary for escherichia coli inactivation [ 21 ] .microwave energy inactivates viruses primarily as a function of the heat produced. poliovirus added to infant formula was eliminated by microwaving [ 53 ] ; however, the amount of microwave heating required to inactivate enteric viruses will probably vary depending on product composition [ 15 ] . epidemiological evidence that microwaving of foods inactivates hepatitis a virus was reported [ 71 ] . a major limitation of microwave processing is that it heats foods unevenly, often leaving cold spots where viruses may survive. thoroughly stirring or frequently turning foods during microwave processing can reduce the effects of unbalanced heating and ensure greater levels of virus reduction.viruses subjected to drying are generally perceived as more susceptible to inactivation than viruses stored in moist environments. viruses from raw sewage sludge and wastewater were inactivated more quickly during drying [ 18, 45 ] . several enteric viruses were inactivated faster on a variety of porous and nonporous surfaces at low relative humidity [ 1 ] , although there is one report that the infectivity of hepatitis a virus is inversely proportional to the level of relative humidity [ 66 ] . airborne survival of enteric viruses is enhanced under conditions of high relative humidity [ 47 ] . freeze -drying reduced poliovirus in potato salad, beef and vegetables, beef pot roast, chicken with gravy, and salmon salad by three to four orders of magnitude [ 40 ] .molluscan shellfish may undergo relaying, a process where shellfish are removed from marginally contaminated waters ( as determined by coliform levels ) and replanted in waters classified by state health authorities as approved ( reviewed in ref. [ 84 ] ). once in clean waters, shellfish will purge at least some of their contaminants, provided that the shellfish are physiologically active and the water conditions, temperature, salinity, and dissolved oxygen are favorable. a similar purging process, known as depuration, is conducted commercially in tanks of clean seawater. the water is usually recirculated through a uv or ozone disinfection system which kills or inactivates any bacteria or viruses present in the water ( reviewed in refs. [ 84, 85 ] . relaying requires extended periods ( often 10 days to 2 weeks or more ), whereas depuration may be completed within 48 -72 h. in either case, viruses are reduced in shellfish, but are not totally eliminated; both depuration and relaying are more efficient in eliminating potential bacterial pathogens like e. coli and salmonella spp. than the enteric viruses. depurated shellfish can cause enteric virus illness, either as a consequence of improper depuration controls or due to insufficiency in the process itself [ 5, 37 ] . for these reasons, only lightly contaminated shellfish should be subjected to depuration; more heavily contaminated shellstock should be relayed for extended periods. shellfish -related industries should appreciate the benefits of depuration in reducing bacterial contaminants and intestinal sediment; however, it must be recognized that there are no guarantees that shellfish depurated according to current technologies will be virologically safe.increased automation of processing lines can significantly reduce contact between product and hands. robotic technology provides for rapid and efficient processing of foods with minimal opportunity for hand contamination. for operations where hand contact of the food is common, proper disinfection of hands, gloves, or frequent replacement of disposable gloves may be necessary to reduce the opportunity for product contamination. simple processing techniques to minimize direct human contact with foods can further safeguard the food supply. perhaps, the simplest and most practical example of this concept is to mix salads, coleslaw, and similar products with a spoon or fork rather than by hand. another example is to use clean food processors to slice and dice vegetables or cheeses destined for raw consumption rather than cut them by hand. clean bowls or tubs should be used for mixing rather than sinks which are virtually impossible to thoroughly disinfect. at least one outbreak of foodborne norwalk -like illness was associated with mixing potato salad in a sink [ 78 ] .self -service, buffet -style restaurants should take precautions to protect foods from contamination by consumers. too often, serving utensils at salad bars are so small that they fall into the food trays and have to be ''fished out'' by the consumer, usually using their fingers. long -handled spoons, forks, and tongs reduce the possibility of direct consumer contact with foods. single -use containers for salad dressings and condiments eliminate customer handling and possible contamination that may occur in multi -use containers. sneeze guards are commonly used and, in most cases, mandated around buffet tables to prevent accidental contamination of foods by customers or servers.poor personal hygiene remains one of the greatest stumbling blocks in food safety. providing employee education is a key to improving personal hygiene. thorough disinfection of hands is difficult, since most chemicals are too harsh for the skin at the concentrations required for virus inactivation [ 23 ] . the use of disposable gloves remains a practical and inexpensive alternative to repeated hand disinfection [ 80 ] . automatic or foot -controlled faucets in rest rooms would also reduce the possibility of recontaminating hands after washing. frequent disinfection of rest room doors and door handles could further retard the spread of viruses. restrooms should be maintained in a sanitary condition since they have been linked to the spread of enteric virus illness [ 43 ] . although gloves, aprons, and good hygienic practices should reduce the risk of virus transmission to foods, people occasionally forget or disregard safety practices. signs placed in strategic locations throughout the facility can serve as a reminder of acceptable and unacceptable practices.vaccines are available for hepatitis a virus, but there is none currently available for the norwalk -like viruses, astroviruses, or rotaviruses. the rotashield vaccine ( wyeth -lederle vaccines and pediatrics ) for rotavirus was licensed in the united states for oral administration to infants [ 9, 44 ] , but was recently withdrawn from the market due to unforseen bowel obstructions occurring in children who had received the vaccine. immunizations of individuals who routinely handle foods could reduce the incidence of foodborne illness; however, conventional wisdom dictates that, rather than target at -risk groups, more broad -based immunization programs designed around a childhood immunization strategy would provide a sustained reduction of hepatitis a within the population. states with a higher -than -average incidence of hepatitis a should consider implementation of immunization programs for children. two hepatitis a vaccines are available in the united states for children 2 years old and older: the havrix 1 ( 1992 -smithkline beecham ) and the vaqta 2 ( 1996 -merck ) [ 6 ] . progress is being made on the development of a vaccine against hepatitis e virus [ 109 ] ; however, its use in the united states is not warranted at this time. if the global distribution of hepatitis e changes, as might be expected with an ever-widening influx of foreign travel and demand for imported foods, hepatitis e immunizations may become necessary. the magnitude of the norwalk -like outbreaks in the united states demonstrates the need for an efficacious vaccine; however, there have been obstacles to the development of such a vaccine [ 30 ] .the detection of foodborne viruses can be a difficult task. procedures are available to extract and concentrate viruses from the surfaces of produce and from meats and shellfish [ 87 ] ; however, most extraction and assay procedures are timeconsuming and of limited utility in routine monitoring programs. traditional assay techniques rely on the propagation of ''indicator'' viruses since norwalk -like viruses cannot be propagated in cell cultures, and hepatitis a virus is very difficult to assay. for many years, it was possible to test for the presence of poliovirus in foods since the vaccine strains, commonly shed in the stools of recently immunized children, were indicative of the presence of fecal pollution of human origin and of the possible presence of hepatitis a, norwalk, and other human enteric viruses for which tests were not available. the efforts of the world health assembly have been highly effective in eradicating poliomyelitis from most of the world. the recent elimination of the use of oral polio vaccines in some countries has reduced poliovirus levels in the environment and negated the use of poliovirus as a potential indicator organism.the advent of molecular biology has led to a plethora of techniques to assay viruses; however, the extraction of viruses from the foods remains a difficult task [ 87 ] . molecular techniques are excellent for epidemiological investigations and are amenable for detecting a wide variety of viruses including hepatitis a and e, the caliciviruses, and astroviruses. unfortunately, molecular techniques have limited usefulness in predicting the virological safety of foods [ 86 ] . molecular techniques generally involve rt-pcr to detect hepatitis a and norwalklike viruses; however, the procedure cannot differentiate between infectious and inactivated viruses, and is unable, under most circumstances, to provide a quantitative measure of the level of virus present [ 86 ] .new, innovative approaches are needed to identify the presence of infectious viruses in water and foods. improved cell culture techniques are needed to propagate wild -type hepatitis a and norwalk -like viruses. currently, cell -culture -adapted strains of hepatitis a virus are available for laboratory studies and a feline calicivirus model is available for studies of norwalk -like viruses. with additional studies on virus -receptor interactions and the use of alternative cell cultures or treatments, it may become possible in the future to directly monitor for hepatitis a and e viruses, caliciviruses, astroviruses, and other viral pathogens in foods.communicable diseases are the greatest disease threat facing humankind. diseases previously considered eradicated are re-emerging and new viruses are emerging. due to increased human population and accelerated global travel, local outbreaks become instant global threats. despite technological advances in medicine, devastating communicable diseases such as ebola, severe acute respiratory syndrome (sars) or avian influenza continue to surface and ravage humankind. the 1918 influenza outbreak killed at least 20 million people in about 24 weeks, but hiv/aids has killed more than 25 million since 1981 and continues its march around the globe. researchers are concerned that an avian influenza outbreak could kill many more people when it emerges because of the absence of immunity and human travel interaction patterns.diseases are not distributed uniformly in space. throughout the world, certain locations have diseases that are not present in others. even when a disease occurs in different locations, the rate of occurrence frequently varies between places. some areas have high rates of a particular disease than others or may not have that disease at all. generally, tropical regions with warm, humid climates tend to facilitate the proliferation of disease causing organisms, or insects and animals that carry such disease. similarly, physical environmental characteristics, such as soil type and the mineral content of soils and rock, which vary from one location to another, may also inhibit or encourage disease. swampy vegetation in lowlying areas of the tropics is ideal for the proliferation of mosquitoes and thus, endemic malaria. finally, cultural practices, including diet, behavior, and occupation, also contribute to geographic variations in health and disease.communicable diseases, diseases that are easily transmitted from one person to another, also vary spatially. geographic differences such as levels of crowding, sanitation, and health practices such as defecation, or even sexual behavior contribute to these differences. medical geographers study the spatial differences in disease occurrence, how diseases spread across geographic space, and also the spatial distribution of health care resources. they seek to answer the question of who is getting what diseases/health care where and why? this article examines the geographic distribution of leading communicable or infectious causes of disease and death. we begin with one basic conceptual framework commonly used to account for spatial variations in disease.the disease ecology model attributes spatial variations in disease to three major variables -environment, genetics and behavior. environment is a broad context and includes not just the physical environment of livelihood, environmental pollution e.g. (including indoor pollution such as radon) and water quality, but also the socioeconomic environment, including relative deprivation, healthcare quality and access, land mines, and the political economic context. for example, unlike canada, where universal access to care based on need is provided for all citizens, in the united states, access to care depends on ability to pay. thus, immunization is more easily available in canada than in the us and this influences the infant mortality rate and life expectancy in the two countries. genetic predisposition is important particularly for degenerative diseases. people with light skin pigmentation are more prone to skin cancer than others with a darker pigmentation. similarly, recent research suggests that ashkenazi jewish women have a higher risk of breast cancer compared to other women. the human genome project is not only identifying genes responsible for several serious diseases such as parkinson but also developing exciting new and effective therapies for them. human behavior is the final component in the disease ecology model. put simply, behavior facilitates or inhibits disease. unhealthy behavior traits such as excessive alcohol consumption, overeating and failure to exercise, unsafe sexual practices and smoking are associated with various diseases. in contrast, regular exercise and other positive health behaviors, including proper diet, enhance health and prevent disease. thus, spatial variations in africa's environment, including widespread poverty that promotes extra-marital and transactional sex, poor healthcare environment with limited access to antiretrovirals, cultural practices such as circumcision, widow inheritance, and preference for unsafe sexual practices, combine with other factors to make hiv/aids rates the highest in the world. similarly, variations exist between and within countries. besides vertical transmission (from mother to child), genetics is not as important in hiv transmission -all humans are genetically susceptible.the disease ecology framework has been criticized for its positivist philosophy, dearth of social theory, neglect of social divisions such as race, gender, disability, and sexuality, and the trivialization of the role of place and locality. for example, kearns called on medical geographers to incorporate social theory, but mayer and meade and paul chastised the supposed call for discarding disease ecology in favor of narrow health geography. current work includes much broader frameworks such as vulnerability theory and political ecology.globalization, particularly the increased economic and cultural interdependence, and associated shrinking of time and space due to technological advancements, is transforming disease transmission patterns. traditionally, immigrants have always provided a vital link in disease transmission between their home regions and their destination. by establishing close contact between distant places, immigrant travels promote disease spread. for example, european travelers carried diseases that killed many people in the americas. however, recent developments in technology and travel have escalated the role of travel-related disease spread. in fact, the volume, speed, and reach of travel today have so accelerated the spread of communicable diseases that national boundaries no longer offer isolation or protection. the brief review that follows demonstrates that permanent migrants are not the only means of disease spread. shortterm visitors, including tourists, are also very important in the spatial diffusion of microbes and pathogens.easily the world's worst communicable disease, hiv/ aids has affected every country but sub-saharan africa has experienced the worst devastation. the caribbean and parts of eastern europe and asia also have high rates. even in the united states where rates are much lower, increasing numbers of people are living with hiv/aids, and prevalence is particularly high among subpopulations such as blacks, men who have sex with men, and intravenous drug users.at the end of 2006, an estimated two-thirds of the world's 40 million cases were in sub-saharan africa, a region with 11% of the world's population, and 91% of the world's children living with the disease. hiv prevalence rates vary widely between african countries, ranging from a low of less than 1% of the adult population in senegal and somalia to 15-20% in south africa and zambia. a few countries have even higher prevalence rates -swaziland with 33.4% is the highest, botswana has 24.1%, while lesotho and zimbabwe have 23.2% and 20.1%, respectively, at the end of 2006. generally, west africa has much lower rates than southern africa. besides cote d'ivoire which has an adult rate of 7.1%, most west african countries have lower than 5%. in east africa, prevalence exceeds 6% in uganda, kenya, and tanzania.due to cost, antiretroviral medications reach only a small fraction of africans who need them. rwanda and namibia serve about 70%, kenya, malawi, and zambia range between 25 and 45%, but ghana, nigeria, and mozambique serve fewer than 20%. as a result, life expectancy has fallen across the region and averaged 47 years in 2005.women are more vulnerable and thus more severely affected than men, and at much younger ages. the major driving forces of hiv/aids include poverty and economic inequality which necessitate transactional sex, cultural practices such as widow inheritance, misguided national policies, and neglect such as in south africa where the government, disputing the link between hiv and aids, refused to provide antiretrovirals to prevent vertical transmission of the disease. global efforts to control the disease through improved testing and supply of inexpensive medications and other programs will help those who need care most in african countries.tuberculosis (tb) is an airborne respiratory disease caused by mycobacterium tuberculosis. tb bacilli are propelled into the air when people who are sick with pulmonary tb cough, sneeze, talk, or during normal breathing. inhaling even a small number of these airborne bacilli is enough to cause infection. most exposed persons never become ill but develop latent tuberculosis. an important minority (5-10%) progress from latent to active tuberculosis due, for example, to immunosuppression from co-infection with the human immunodeficiency virus (hiv).despite treatment advances, tuberculosis remains an uncontrolled communicable disease worldwide. worldwide about nine million persons are diagnosed and two million die yearly from tuberculosis particularly in developing countries. currently, more than 90% of the global tuberculosis burden occurs within developing countries due to, among other things, widespread hiv/ aids infection, malnutrition, crowding, medication shortages, and poor healthcare programs. in developed countries, newly diagnosed tb occurs most frequently among foreign-born immigrants, and native-born homeless who typically live in extremely crowded and unsanitary conditions. for example, in germany and france immigrants are 3 times and 6 times, respectively, more likely to be diagnosed with tb than are native-born persons.in canada, while comprising only 18% of the canadian population, the foreign born accounted for 65% of all reported tb cases in 2000. in the us, 54.3% of tb cases were found in foreign-born persons. immigrants entering the us and canada from countries with high tuberculosis incidence have a higher risk of latent or active tuberculosis when they arrive. thus, states or provinces with high immigrant populations have high rates. for example, british columbia, ontario, and quebec, canada's leading immigrant destinations, accounted for 87% of foreign-born tuberculosis cases. moreover, a disproportionate number of the cases were reported from large cities with significant ethnic and minority concentrations such as toronto, montreal, and vancouver. in the us, five states -california, new york, florida, texas, and illinois -account for 66% of the total foreign-born tuberculosis cases reported. similar to the canadian pattern, major us cities, including new york city, los angeles, san francisco, san diego, miami, atlanta, and houston, all report disproportionately high numbers of cases from immigrant neighborhoods.moreover, the origin of foreign-born tuberculosis cases reported from each of these states was largely homogenous, revealing established migration. in 2003, new york reported approximately 64% of the us total of tuberculosis cases born in the dominican republic; florida reported 60% of cases born in cuba; texas and california reported 60% of cases born in mexico; and minnesota reported 55% of somali born cases.polio is a viral disease that is usually spread through fecal contaminated water and food or oral human to human contact. early symptoms of infection include fatigue, fever, vomiting, headache and pain in the neck, and extremities. the virus invades the nervous system and can cause paralysis in hours. the incubation takes between 3 and 30 days, but a person begins to shed the virus in their stool 7-10 days before, and 3-6 weeks after the onset of symptoms. a small minority of cases (0.5-1%) of cases result in paralysis, and while polio can affect people at any age, at least 50% of cases occur in children 3-5 years old. most people infected with the polio virus have no symptoms at all but continue to spread the highly contagious virus for weeks. thus once introduced, polio spreads very quickly and usually infects many people before an outbreak is detected.once considered almost eradicated worldwide, polio has resurged not only in the six countries with endemic polio (nigeria, india, pakistan, niger, afghanistan, and egypt) but transmission has been reestablished in an additional six countries (burkina faso, central african republic, chad, côte d'ivoire, mali, and sudan). despite massive efforts, total eradication continues to be an elusive goal. the global campaign to eradicate polio by 2005 suffered a severe setback when parts of northern nigeria rejected the polio vaccine because muslim clerics claimed that the vaccine causes infertility and spreads hiv/aids and cancer. from those few states, polio spread through large parts of the country, neighboring countries, and eventually to saudi arabia through nigerian muslims on pilgrimage to mecca. indonesian muslims, who were exposed during their pilgrimage in mecca, carried the disease with them to indonesia where it became reestablished. polio reminds us that global cooperation is critical for controlling communicable diseases.sexual behavior of travelers is contributing to spatial mixing of different strains of sexually transmitted pathogens worldwide. consequently, sexually active travelers risk being infected with new strains of known sexually transmitted infections. an often cited example is the current endemicity of quinolone-resistant neisseria gonorrhoeae (qrng) in california and hawaii. this pathogen was originally common only in asia. according to the cdc, persons who engaged in sexual activity abroad first introduced these strains of qrng in the us, but now incidence is no longer related to travel. whereas less than 1% qrng isolates were identified between 1999 and 2001, 9.4% were reported in 2005, and in people with no history of travel. in short, travel, whether in the form of short-term recreational travel or permanent migration, facilitates the spatial spread of disease. consequently, the spatial distribution of immigrant neighborhoods and ethnic islands may provide an important key to understanding the geography of disease diffusion.severe acute respiratory syndrome (sars) illustrates how migration facilitates the spatial spread of disease. from its source, guandong province in south china, sars spread initially to hong kong from where it diffused worldwide. when it was over, a total of 8439 probable cases and 812 deaths had been identified from 30 countries. the devastation of sars was not uniformly distributed, however, but followed a path of spatially linked places and peoples facilitated by international travel.canadians returning from asia imported sars into canada. the first cases involved a canadian family of hong kong descent who live in toronto. a 78-year-old woman and her husband traveled to hong kong and stayed at a hotel where a cluster of 13 persons with suspected or probable sars are known to have stayed. two days after returning home, the woman developed what is now known as sars and died. several family members who had close contact with the index case then developed sars symptoms, and one was later admitted to a hospital that subsequently became the epicenter for the toronto outbreak. sars killed 44 canadians, caused illness in hundreds more, paralyzed a major segment of ontario's healthcare system for weeks, and put more than 25 000 residents of the greater toronto area in quarantine.some communicable diseases originate in animals and occasionally mutate to infect humans. an excellent example is avian influenza. it occurs naturally among wild birds; they shed it in their saliva, nasal secretions, and feces, but usually do not get sick from it. domesticated birds, including chickens, ducks, and turkeys, become infected through contact with contaminated surfaces, birds, or their secretions. human contact with infected birds or contaminated surfaces produces infection, but human to human spread of avian influenza viruses is rare, typically limited, and unsustained. symptoms of avian influenza in humans include fever, cough, sore throat, muscle aches, eye infections, severe respiratory diseases, and other life-threatening complications. human influenza virus refers to those subtypes (currently h1n1, h1n2, and h3n2) that spread widely among humans. in the united states, human flu kills 36 000 people and hospitalizes more than 200 000 people every year.the current communicable disease of global concern is caused by influenza a (h5n1) virus. endemic in birds, h5n1 virus is contagious and often deadly. while it usually does not infect people, human infections have occurred, usually in people with direct close contact with infected poultry or contaminated surfaces. about 60% of the human cases have died, mostly as healthy children and young adults. because humans have little preexisting natural immunity to h5n1 infection, it is feared that a pandemic will results if these h5n1 viruses gain the ability for efficient and sustained transmission among humans. while there has been some human-to-human spread of h5n1, it remains limited. the h5n1 virus responsible for recent human illness and death in asia is resistant to two common antiviral flu medications and currently no commercially available vaccine to protect humans exists.research continues into new vaccines to counter a possible h5n1 pandemic but unfortunately, current vaccine production methods require an outbreak before an effective vaccine can be developed and even then it takes between 5 and 7 months. to avoid a global pandemic of h5n1 or other virus, new vaccine technologies are required, to respond quickly and effectively to new challenges of communicable disease outbreaks.ever since the seminal work of dr. john snow, mapping has been a key tool in fighting communicable diseases. one particularly fascinating recent development is mapping genotypes of communicable disease. each disease causing organism has a specific phenotype, and the species members have a more unique genotype. tools exist for separating and categorizing disease organisms with these more unique genotypes into groups based on their genetic structure (isolates). two people with identical or matching isolates indicate recent transmission from a common source; unique isolates indicate remote transmission from a different source. analyzing and mapping these genotypes allows researchers to distinguish between not just disease species (phenotype) but also locate areas with high incidence and different strains of the disease, including recent versus remote transmission of disease. areas with high rates of clustered genotypes indicate ongoing transmission (i.e., an outbreak), whereas multiple unique isolates indicate infections that were acquired elsewhere (are imported).moonan et al. based a recently successful tb intervention on geographically targeted screening of clustered tuberculosis isolates. because it assumed that persons with clustered strains of disease from geographically related areas represent ongoing community transmission that can be identified and interrupted through treatment, the study focused resources on zip codes with high incidence and clustered isolates. during the 28-month intervention, the number of cases of tuberculosis decreased from 28.5 cases per 1000 screenings to 2.4 cases per 1000. the rate of developing latent tuberculosis infection fell from 14.3 to 2.2 per 100 person-years of exposure. the intervention was successful because it distinguished between high incidence areas with high and low levels of clustered strains, and deployed resources not just on the basis of incidence but on the basis of genotype. since unique isolates represent remote transmission, location-based screening in areas with high rates of unique isolates would be less likely to identify either persons with active tuberculosis or recent acquired latent tuberculosis infection and thus not as costeffective.communicable diseases remain a major threat to humankind. effective surveillance and response remain our best protection against these deadly threats. unfortunately, surveillance remains poor and rudimentary in the most vulnerable countries where outbreaks are most likely. strengthening the health and surveillance systems of poor developing countries is critically needed in a globalized world because communicable diseases do not respect political boundaries. see also: diffusion; disease diffusion; disease mapping; health geography; medical geography.as humans grew fruitful and multiplied, so did the variety and number of their diseases. permanent human settlements transformed ecosystems, and abiding by epidemic theory, the probability of respiratory and fecal-oral transmission of infection rose as population density increased. ecological and evolutionary changes in micro-organisms account for the origins of diarrhea , measles, malaria, smallpox, plague, and many other diseases. micro-organisms evolve rapidly because of their brief generation time and prolific reproduction rates. many that previously had lived in symbiosis with animals began to invade humans, where they became pathogenic. some evolved complex life cycles involving several host species, such as humans and other mammals, humans and arthropods, and humans and freshwater snails. these evolutionary changes in host-parasite relationships occurred at least several millennia before we had created written histories. our oldest written records that have a bearing on health date back about 4,000 years. the code of hammurabi (c. 2000 bce) contains ideas indicative of insight into the effects on health of diet and behaviour. it also suggests rewards and punishments for physicians who did their jobs well or poorly.information about the impact of diseases, especially of epidemic diseases, from those ancient times has come down to us in myths and biblical accounts of pestilences and plagues, although we cannot reliably identify the nature of the epidemics that afflicted ancient populations. the greek historian thucydides provided a meticulously careful description of an epidemic that struck the athenians in the second year of the peloponnesian war in 426 bce, from which the forces of athens perhaps never fully recovered. modern infectious disease specialists have puzzled over this epidemic. was it typhus, a virulent form of epidemic streptococcal infection, that is, a variant form of scarlet fever, or something completely different? similar questions have been raised about other ancient epidemics, for instance the sweating sickness that recurred many times in mediaeval europe then vanished, never to be seen again, almost 1,000 years ago. there has been debate too about the exact nature of the black death, the terrible pandemic that devastated asia minor and the whole of europe in 1347-1350. this is usually attributed to the plague bacillus, yersinia pestis, but revisionist historians and epidemiologists have raised the possibility that other pathogens, for instance, the anthrax bacillus, might have been responsible. here, as with the plague of the athenians, the plague of justinian, the medieval sweating sickness, the accounts of apparent fulminating epidemic syphilis (that may really have been another sexually transmitted disease or may have been caused by a highly virulent variant of the causative organism of syphilis, treponema pallidum, which has slowly lost its extreme virulence and infectivity), and, indeed, as with all other great epidemics of historical times before the rise of modern microbiology, we can only speculate about the exact aetiology and pathogenesis. this is a rather sterile, albeit fascinating, quest.it is more productive and useful to focus on what we know with reasonable certainty, and it is simplest to describe this knowledge in relation to some of the heroic figures who have contributed to advances in our understanding of epidemics and other diseases that have helped to shape history. this account therefore concentrates on a handful of the heroes of public health through the course of written history.hippocrates , the father of medicine, was also the father of public health. he practised and taught in a school of medicine at the temple of asklepios, near epidaurus in greece, and alone or with members of his school, laid the foundations of rational clinical medicine with careful descriptions of diseases and common sense ideas about ways to manage them. the hippocratic writings contain rich medical wisdom based on careful observation of sick and healthy people and their habits and habitats. epidemics is a series of case records of incidents of diseases, many of which we now know to be caused by infectious agents. the accounts of tetanus, rabies, and mumps, for instance, could have been written by a modern clinician. airs, waters, places outlines environmental health as it was understood two-and-a-half thousand years ago. the relationships of environment, social conditions, and behaviours to health and sickness is made explicit in the timeless advice of the opening paragraph:whoever would study medicine must learn of the following. first, consider the effect of each of the seasons . . . and the differences between them. . . . study the warm and cold winds . . . and the effect of water on health . . . when a physician comes to a district previously unknown to him he should consider its situation and its aspect to the winds . . . and the nature of its water supply . . . whether the land be bare and waterless or thickly covered with vegetation and well-watered, whether in a hollow and stifling, or exposed and cold. lastly, consider the life of the inhabitants-are they heavy drinkers and eaters and consequently unable to stand fatigue, or being fond of work and exercise, eat wisely but drink sparely.in short, study environment and life style, which are very modern concepts. for well over a thousand years after hippocrates' lifetime, human communities were afflicted with ever-present respiratory and gastrointestinal infections that cut deeply into the lives of everyone, and most deeply, as a rule, into the lives of young children who all too often died before they reached adolescence, carried off by measles, scarlet fever, diphtheria, bronchitis, croup, pneumonia, gastroenteritis, or typhoid. from time to time, this steady drain on long life and good health was punctuated by great and terrifying epidemics-smallpox, typhus, influenza, and, most terrible of all, the plague, or the "black death." the causes of these periodic devastations, the contributing reasons to why they happened, were a mystery. many at the time believed they were god' s punishment for sin, or the work of evil spirits. ideas about contagion were rudimentary, even though it had been dimly understood since antiquity that leprosy, perhaps the least contagious of all the infectious diseases, was associated with propinquity and uncleanliness.the 16 th century italian monk, fracastorius, recognized some ways infection can spread. his conclusion, that disease could pass by intimate direct contact from one person to others, was easy to draw because he saw the dramatic epidemic of syphilis that was so obviously spread by sexual intercourse. he described this in a mock heroic poem, syphilis, sive morbis gallicus (1530) about the swineherd syphilis, and how he got and passed on to others the "french disease" then raging in europe. his anti-hero, of course, gave us the name of the disease.fracastorius' s other concepts, contamination by droplet spread and by way of shared contaminated articles, such as clothing and kitchen utensils, were published in de contagione in 1546. fracastorius is important because he made a conceptual breakthrough-he brought about what thomas kuhn calls a paradigm shift in understanding of infection and some ways to control it.after fracastorius, the pathfinders on the road to health became numerous, but mention here will be made of only a handful of public health heroes: paracelsus, john graunt, antoni van leeuwenhoek, bernardino ramazzini, james lind, edward jenner, johann peter frank, john snow, ignaz semmelweiss, and louis pasteur.the swiss alchemist theophrastus bombastus von hohenheim, known as paracelsus (1493-1541), occupies the junction of medieval alchemy with scientific chemistry, pharmacy, medicine, and environmental health. he was a colourful character, a foul-mouthed drunkard who insulted and sometimes fought those who disagreed with him, whom he considered superstitious nincompoops. he recognized the relationship of goitre to cretinism, the fact that inhaled dusts caused lung disease, and that some common mental disorders were diseases, not caused by witchcraft or 'possession' by evil spirits. he experimented with chemical remedies containing compounds of mercury, lead, and other galenicals, observed their effects, and, thus, could be considered also a founding figure of pharmacology.john graunt (1620 graunt ( -1674 , a london merchant haberdasher, was an amateur scientist and an early fellow of the royal society. he was interested in the impact of epidemics, especially the plague, and how plague outbreaks caused the numbers of deaths, and the age at death, to vary from one year to another. for over 100 years before his time, parishes had kept records of baptisms and deaths, and what was then understood about causes of death was inscribed in the bills of mortality. graunt collected and analyzed these bills of mortality. he demonstrated statistical differences between males and females, between london and rural areas, and the ebb and flow of epidemics of plague. he published his work in natural and political observations ... upon the bills of mortality (london, 1662). this work was the foundation for the science of vital statistics. john graunt demonstrated the importance of gathering facts in a systematic manner, to identify, characterize and classify health conditions of public health importance. the diagnostic categories in the bills of mortality tell us what was understood 400 years ago about the variety of human ailments and their causes.the nature of diseases caused by things not visible to the naked eye was long a mystery that began to unravel when antoni van leeuwenhoek (1632-1723), a dutch linen draper and amateur lens-grinder in delft, perfected the first functioning microscopes, with which he viewed drops of water, vaginal secretions, feces, his own semen, and the detailed structures of plants and insects. he lacked any formal scholarly training but in a series of 165 letters to the royal society of london, he described accurately and in detail all that he saw. he did not suggest that the tiny creatures he was the first to see with his microscope were capable of causing diseases, but he is nonetheless regarded as the first of the 'microbe hunters' who sought and identified the pathogenic micro-organisms responsible for many diseases.bernardino ramazzini (1633-1714) was an italian physician who observed and classified workers in many occupations, and reported his observations and conclusions about the diseases to which workers in each of these were vulnerable in de morbis artificum diatribe (on the diseases of workers, 1713). it is a tour de force, a masterly account in the form of sweeping generalizations, and although the evidence supporting these generalizations was often flimsy, ramazzini introduced a new way of thinking about ways in which work conditions can affect health.james lind (1716 lind ( -1794 was born and educated in edinburgh. he was apprenticed to a surgeon when he was 15, and spent nine years as a naval surgeon, during which time he saw many cases of scurvy, a disease that disabled and often killed sailors on long ocean voyages. lind thought this disease might be caused by a diet lacking fresh fruit and vegetables. he conducted an experiment, giving different diets to each of several pairs of sailors. this was the first clinical trial ever conducted-although the sample sizes were very small, there was no random allocation, and no informed consent was obtained from the sailors. the two sailors who received fresh oranges and lemons recovered rapidly from the scurvy, the others did not, or got worse. lind also initiated the first effective measures aimed at enhancing hygiene in the british navy, but he is best known for his work on scurvy, reported in a treatise of the scurvy (1753). not only was this the first reported clinical trial, it also was proof that a dietary deficiency can cause disease, that a well-balanced diet is essential for good health. thus lind, like fracastorius, was responsible for an important paradigm shift in the understanding of causes and control of disease.johann peter frank (1745-1821) studied medicine in heidelberg and strasburg, was a professor of medicine at göttingen and pavia, and taught in many other centres of learning including st petersburg, before he ended his career in vienna where he was professor of medicine at the allegemeines krankenhaus. early in his career he began writing system einer vollständigen medicinischen polizey, his great work on ways to improve population health. this appeared in a series of nine volumes from 1779 to 1827. it was, as the title indicates, a system dealing with every then-known way to protect and preserve good health, including community hygiene, personal health protection by cleanliness, and a suggested set of laws and regulations to govern the control of conditions in lodging houses and inns, medical inspection of prostitutes, and so on.edward jenner (1749 jenner ( -1823 was an english family doctor who practised throughout his life in the village of berkeley, gloucestershire. in his days, smallpox was a ubiquitous threat to life and health. in severe epidemics, it killed up to a quarter of all it attacked. when it did not kill, it often left disfiguring facial pockmarks and if it infected the eyes it caused blindness.the practice of variolation, inoculation into the skin of dried secretions from a smallpox bleb, was invented in china about 1000 years ago and spread along the silk route, reaching asia minor in the 17 th century. lady mary wortley montague, wife of the british ambassador to constantinople, described the practice in a letter dated april 1, 1717, and imported the idea to england when she came home. by the time jenner was a child, variolation had become popular among educated english families as a way to provide some protection against smallpox.jenner knew the popular belief in gloucestershire that people who had been infected with cowpox, a mild disease acquired from cattle, did not get smallpox. he reasoned that since smallpox in mild form was transmitted by variolation, it might be possible similarly to transmit cowpox. a smallpox outbreak in 1792 gave him an opportunity to confirm this notion. in 1796 he began a courageous and unprecedented experiment-one that would now be unethical, but that has had incalculable benefit for humankind. he inoculated a boy, james phipps, with secretions from a cowpox lesion. in succeeding months, until the summer of 1798, he inoculated others, most of them children, to a total of 23. all survived unharmed, and none got smallpox.jenner published an inquiry into the causes and effects of the variolae vaccinae in 1798-perhaps the most influential public health treatise of all time. the importance of jenner' s work was immediately recognized and although there were sceptics and hostile opponents, vaccination programs began at once. the frequency and ferocity of smallpox epidemics began to decline early in the 19 th century, but the disease remained a menace until the mid-20 th century. in 1949, the american epidemiologist donald soper worked out the strategy of containment, in other words, vaccinating all known contacts of every diagnosed case. in 1966, who embarked on a global campaign to eradicate smallpox. the last naturally occurring case was a girl in somalia in 1977. in 1980, the world health assembly proclaimed that smallpox, one of the most deadly scourges of mankind, had been eradicated. at the beginning of the new millennium, samples of smallpox virus are preserved in secure biological laboratories in several countries, but, thanks to edward jenner, this terrible disease need never again take a human life-unless it is used illegally in biological warfare. john snow (1813-1858) was a london physician, and a founding father of modern epidemiology. (he was also a pioneer anesthetist who invented a new kind of mask to administer chloroform, which he gave to queen victoria to assist at the births of her two youngest children.)snow' s work on cholera demonstrated fundamental intellectual steps that must be part of every epidemiological investigation. he began with a logical analysis of the available facts, which proved that cholera could not be caused by a 'miasma' (emanations from rotting organic matter) as proposed in a theory popular at that time, but must be caused by a transmissible agent, most probably in drinking water. he confirmed the proof with two epidemiological investigations into the great cholera epidemic of 1854. he studied a severe localized epidemic in soho, using analysis of descriptive epidemiological data and spot maps to demonstrate that the cause was polluted water from a pump in broad street. his investigation of a more widespread epidemic in south london involved an inquiry into the source of drinking water used in over 700 households. he compared the water source in houses where cholera had occurred with that in others where it had not. his analysis of the information about cases and their sources of drinking water showed beyond doubt that the cause of the cholera outbreak was water that was being supplied to houses by the southwark and vauxhall water company, which drew its water from the thames downriver, where many effluent discharges polluted the water. very few cases occurred in households supplied with water by the lambeth company, which collected water upstream from london, where there was little or no pollution. john snow reasoned correctly that the cholera must be caused by some sort of agent in the contaminated water supply. this was a remarkable feat, completed 30 years before robert koch identified the cholera bacillus. snow published his work in a monograph, on the mode of communication of cholera (1855). this book has been reprinted in modern editions and is still used as a teaching text.the hungarian physician ignaz semmelweiss (1818-1865) was a great but tragic figure. working in the obstetric wards of the allgemeines krankenhaus in vienna, he tried to transform traditional but ineffective treatment methods by using logic and statistical analysis to demonstrate the efficacy, or lack of it, when he compared treatment regimens. he believed in the germ theory of disease and was convinced that the terrible death rates from puerperal sepsis must be caused by germs introduced into the raw uterine tissues by birth attendants who did not disinfect their hands. he carried out a meticulous comparative mortality study in his own wards, where he insisted that all birth attendants must cleanse their hands in a disinfectant solution of bleach, and other wards run by senior obstetricians where hand-washing was not routine. his senior colleagues regarded his findings as a gross insult to their professional competence. semmelweiss' s rather abrasive nature and his jewish origins in the anti-semitic atmosphere of 19 th century vienna made matters worse for him. he was hounded out of his hospital post, and ended his life in a mental hospital. his belatedly published comparative statistical analyses of the death rates from puerperal sepsis in his own and other wards of the allgemeines krankenhaus are a model of how to conduct such studies, but, unfortunately, no one in vienna heeded him and young women continued to die of childbed fever for another generation.medical science advanced rapidly in the second half of the 19 th century, applying the exciting discoveries of a new science, bacteriology, which transformed public health. the great bacteriologists of the late 19 th century identified many pathogenic bacteria, classified them, developed ways to cultivate them, and, most important, worked out ways to control their harmful effects, using sera, vaccines, and "magic bullets" such as the arsenical preparations that ehrlich developed to treat syphilis. it would be useful to discuss each of them, but i will focus on just one, louis pasteur (1822-1895). this french chemist evolved into a bacteriologist, and was a towering figure of 19 th century bacteriology and preventive medicine. in 1854, he had recently been appointed professor of chemistry in lille, and was invited to solve the problem of aberrant fermentation of beer that caused it to taste bad and made it undrinkable. he showed that the problem was caused by bacteria that were killed by heat. in this way he invented the process for heat treatment to kill harmful bacteria, first applied to fermentation of beer, then to milk-the process known ever since as pasteurization that has saved innumerable children from an untimely death. he went on to study and solve many other bacteriological problems in industry and animal husbandry. he developed attenuated vaccines, first to prevent chicken cholera, then, in 1881, to control anthrax, which was a serious threat to livestock and, as well, occasionally to humans. before this, in 1880, he began experiments on rabies, seeking a vaccine to control this disease, which without treatment is invariably fatal.as a result of the success of the anthrax vaccine, he believed that an attenuated rabies vaccine could be made. this, of course, was many decades before the virus was visualized. he prepared and successfully tested his rabies vaccine in 1885 on a boy, joseph meister, who had been bitten by a rabid dog. pasteur became not just a national but an international celebrity.born in the same year as louis pasteur, the austro-hungarian monk gregor mendel (1822-1884) was another amateur scientist, a botanist. experimenting with varieties of garden peas, he cross-pollinated them and observed and recorded the results. unfortunately, he published his findings in an obscure journal where they remained un-noticed for many years, but when they were unearthed about 15 years after his death, gregor mendel was retroactively honoured as the father of a new science, genetics, which soon found many applications in clinical medicine, with the recognition of the fact that many inherited diseases were caused by genetic disorders. almost 100 years after mendel' s death, other discoveries with great public health relevance include development of genetically modified sterile insect vectors of disease, genetically resistant strains of rice, wheat, and so on, and applications of genetic engineering to limit and even control and prevent some recessive inherited disorders.pasteur, henle, koch, virchow, and, soon after, battalions of bacteriologists and pathologists firmly established the fact that micro-organisms caused many diseases-the germ theory was a proven fact, not theory. however, many germ diseases require much more than germs before they can cause their worst damage. tuberculosis is caused by the tubercle bacillus acting in conjunction with poverty, ignorance, overcrowding, poor nutrition, adverse social and economic circumstances, and other enabling and predisposing factors.the diarrheal diseases, including cholera, are caused by various microorganisms, but these get into the gut when ingested with contaminated water or food, that is, they are really caused by poor sanitary and hygienic practices.by late in the 19 th century, many of these factors had been clarified. the stage was set for the health reforms that included the sanitary revolution, the beginnings of a social safety net, provision of immunizations, nutritional supplements for school children, prenatal care for pregnant women, and other essential public health functions we take for granted 100 years later. it required a dedicated army of public health workers to achieve all this.i have singled out and mentioned a mere handful of the public health pathfinders on the road to good health. many others could be added, but that would turn this brief chapter into a weighty monograph. often the physician−pathfinders used their own patients as experimental subjects for their path-finding discoveries. lind' s sailors, jenner' s 23 young friends starting with james phipps, pasteur' s patient joseph meister, and all others known and unknown by name who provided the material for the great discoveries of robert koch and other members of the austrian and german schools of bacteriology, should be remembered and honored too.many others belong in their company: the great german pathologist rudolph virchow recognized that political action as well as rational science are necessary to initiate effective action to control public health problems; edwin chadwick and lemuel shattuck reported on the appalling sanitary conditions associated with the unacceptably high infant and child death rates that prevailed in 19 th century industrial towns; william farr established vital statistics in england as a model for other nations to follow. and so the list grows from a handful of public health pathfinders to whole armies.more was needed than scientific discoveries. such discoveries had to be applied, and this often required drastic changes in the established social and economic order. so, other pathfinders appear on the road to health. they include politicians, administrators, journalists, creative writers, performing artists, and cartoonists. the journalists, creative writers, and artists who transmit the scientific concepts of public health to the general public and to the politicians are indispensable partners in the team that makes it possible for us to advance up the road to better health. the process continues in modern times with investigative journalism and tv documentaries.i have identified five essential ingredients of the processes that brought about the public health reforms called the sanitary revolution of the late 19 th and early 20 th century, and have shown that these five features are essential for the control of all public health problems.1. awareness that the problem exists. john graunt began this process with natural and political observations. others consolidated his conceptual breakthrough, and it was applied to great effect after the establishment of formal national vital statistics in england and wales under the inspired leadership of william farr. by farr' s time, widespread literacy, the proliferation of daily newspapers, and word of mouth helped to enhance awareness among thoughtful people everywhere that there were massive public health problems in society at that time. modern computer-based record-keeping and effective health information systems with instantaneous worldwide notification of contagious disease outbreaks with public health significance continue to enhance the process.2. understanding the causes. in the second half of the 19 th century, understanding rapidly increased, as epidemiology and bacteriology, and nutritional and environmental sciences explored previously unknown landscapes of aetiology and pathogenesis. the new mass media-daily newspapers-propagated this understanding among literate people throughout the country. from the middle of the 20 th century, news magazines and tv have ensured that knowledge of causal connections-smoking to cancer, diet and lack of exercise to coronary heart disease, alcohol-impaired driving to traffic fatalities, and many more-are very widely disseminated. this, however, has not necessarily led to effective control measures.3. capability to control the causes. with astonishing speed, once the initial breakthroughs had occurred, sera and vaccines were developed to control many of the lethal microbial diseases that had plagued earlier generations. improved dietary practices, pasteurization of milk, improved personal hygiene and, above all, environmental sanitation to rid drinking water of polluting pathogens, all advanced rapidly in the final quarter of the 19 th century and the first few decades of the 20 th century. thus many ancient infectious disease scourges have been controlled, most dramatically being, perhaps , the eradication of smallpox. unfortunately, new infectious pathogens including the human immunodeficiency virus, viral tropical haemorrhagic fevers, the coronavirus of severe acute respiratory syndrome, and a score or more of others, have emerged to take their place . . .this is an essential prerequisite to the determination to act upon the problem. it is the most fascinating and challenging aspect of the essential features. this belief is the moral imperative that drives public health reforms. geoffrey vickers described the history of public health as a process of redefining the unacceptable-an endless process of identifying conditions, behaviors, and circumstances that individuals, communities, and cultures must no longer tolerate. throwing the contents of the chamber pot into the street, clearing one' s nostrils on the tablecloth, coughing and spitting on the living-room floor, all became unacceptable in the late 19 th century. many people outside the boundaries of traditional medical science and public health practice played a role in this process. in the era of the great reforms of the 19 th century, they included social reformers like edwin chadwick, journalists like henry mayhew and charles kingsley, novelists like charles dickens, cartoonists in punch and other periodicals-all of whom were aided by the rise of literacy in that period. collectively, they inspired a mood of public outrage that became an irresistible force for reform. in the second half of the 20 th century, this sense of moral outrage found new targets-lighting a cigarette without permission in someone else' s home, carrying infant and child passengers in a car without safety equipment, dumping toxic industrial waste where it harms others, and more. yet, much else remains to be done.5. political will. there is always resistance to change, there are always interest groups-often rich and powerful withal-who will do whatever it takes to obstruct necessary improvement. in the era of the sanitary revolution, it was the owners of water companies, factories, and tenement housing who resisted most vigorously. since the 1950s it has been tobacco companies and a host of manufacturers of toxic petrochemical and other dangerous compounds released into the air and water. legislation and regulation are almost always necessary, and inevitably generate opposition. nevertheless, when the other four features-awareness, understanding, capability, and values-are in place, the political will to bring about reforms gathers momentum and usually succeeds eventually.these five essential ingredients required for public health reforms apply to several public health problems that have waxed and waned over time: tobacco addiction, impaired driving, domestic violence, child abuse, irresponsible domestic and industrial waste disposal, and so on.lately, mountainous barriers-of our own making-to maintaining our public health have appeared. the most formidable is a cluster of human-induced changes to global ecosystems and the global commons-the atmosphere, the oceans, wilderness regions, and stocks of biodiversity-that threaten all life and health on earth, not just the life and health of humans.another barrier is perhaps an inherent flaw in the human character that leads many individuals and national leaders to believe that disputes can be settled by violent means. currently, we have so many terrible weapons that violence done by them can and does cause immense suffering, innumerable deaths (80% or more of these deaths, as well as a similar proportion of permanent maiming and disability, are among non-combatants), and appalling damage to ecosystems, the environment, and the fabric of society. sadly, this is rarely recognized as a public health problem. the very first essential ingredient, awareness of the problem, is lacking. both these massive public health problems, in my view, are linked to the insatiable human craving for petroleum fuels, an addiction far more pervasive and dangerous to mankind and the earth than addiction to tobacco. so far in our only partially sentient and insightful civilization, this particular addiction is not even recognized as a public health problem.one public health problem that has been recognized is a worldwide pandemic of tobacco addiction and its many adverse effects on health and long life. recognition of this problem led the delegates to the world health assembly of 2002 to approve the framework convention on tobacco control. another universally recognized public health problem is the global pandemic of hiv/aids. tobacco addiction and the hiv/aids pandemic are both associated with the values of modern life and social behavior, including the marketing practices of transnational corporations. surmounting these barriers to health will require social, cultural, and behavioral changes and political action.i am an optimist. i believe that the pace of scientific advances will be maintained in the future, and that values will continue to shift in favor of essential changes towards global ecosystem sustainability. i do not know whether those who follow us will ever reach the ultimate summit or idealized who vision of halfdan mahler' s "health for all," but i am confident that they will continue to climb towards it.infectious diseases are of great importance to the pathogens as well as to the human population. despite the fact that infectious diseases cause illness, they boost immunity in the human host which allows for survival from attacks by pathogens previously encountered by the host. the development of antibody response against pathogens, and the ability of the human body to fight infections have allowed for the discovery of vaccines and treatments to these diseases.due to the impact of infectious diseases for generations, scientists have embarked on studies to understand these diseases and disease causing pathogens to find ways and means to combat these diseases. this opened doors to research in life sciences and so far has led to many discoveries in science which have allowed for survival of the human population.infectious diseases date back as early as 430 bc in greece where there was the athens epidemic of what could not be properly described then. many people died from this epidemic and lately epidemiologists have hypothesized what could have been the cause of the disease, which was not known then. hippocrates described that "every disease has its own nature and arises from external causes"; this changed the mindset of diseases being caused by spirits and other superstitious beliefs. hippocrates also introduced the theory of clinical practice through patient observation. this led to records on theories of occurrence of disease and the the infectious disease cycle. the infectious disease cycle shows how livelihood (a source of income) is linked to living conditions that affect health through infectious diseases and how lack of knowledge in disease prevention and control and lack of health facilities contribute to infectious disease incidence understanding that there are certain diseases that are always present in people and/or population, hereby called endemic diseases; and those that are not always present but can sometimes occur in great numbers, hereby called epidemic diseases.hippocrates therefore coined what are known as endemic and epidemic diseases (pappas et al. 2008) . infectious disease occurrence and their impact on populations also led to the development of methods to record and follow the occurrence and effects of disease through registration of vital statistics, including mortality and morbidity as early as in the mid-1600s pioneered by william petty .the invention of the microscope by anton van leeuwenhoek (1632-1723) was a great breakthrough as he showed that there were microorganisms which were present in human excreta and other materials such as water. though van leeuwenhoek did not connect these microorganisms to disease, robert koch later showed that microorganisms were responsible for causing diseases and that these disease causing microorganisms were passed on from one individual to another through his experiments on mice infected with anthrax (evans 1976 ). this brief history shows how infectious disease outbreaks in the past led to research and discoveries that have enhanced the understanding of infectious diseases today.some of the catastrophic and most deadly infectious disease outbreaks were associated by the following diseases:1. plague-transmitted by bites from an infected flea; the disease spreads from human to human through contact with infected tissue and/or exposure to cough of an infected individual. this bacterial disease caused by yersnia pestis killed millions of people in the roman empire and spread throughout asia minor and greece as people moved away from infected areas running away from the disease. another well-known outbreak of plague was "black death", which devastated europe and asia, killing almost a third of the population. dhama et al. 2015; na et al. 2015; tartari et al. 2015; van kerkhove et al. 2015 ; who|one year into the ebola epidemic: a deadly, tenacious and unforgiving virus, n.d.). ebola is a viral disease transmitted through contact with body fluids, including the dead body of those who have died from the disease. there is currently no known cure for the disease although there are drugs that have been tested on some patients, some of whom have survived the infections. there are also individuals who have been able to build up immunity and survive the disease. antibodies from these survivors hold information that could assist in further discoveries on the mechanism of disease. a vaccine has also been tried on some individuals who were in contact with ebola patients, and these individuals were protected from the disease (henao-restrepo et al. 2015) . 3. measles-this is one of the leading causes of death in young children. caused by the measles virus, this infectious disease has also caused outbreaks in both adults and children despite the availability of a vaccine (goodson et al. 2011; nsubuga et al. 2006; sniadack et al. 1999; who|measles, n.d.) . although active immunization occurs in developing countries, in some developed and developing countries the population is not immunized against the disease. this could be due to interruption of vaccination campaigns due to conflicts and breakdown in security and/or out of choice, as is the case of some developed countries where the vaccine is available but parents choose not to vaccinate their children against the disease. spreading through droplets, from coughs and sneezes of infected individuals, the disease is highly infectious and mortality due to disease has been recorded worldwide. approximately 1,45,700 deaths in 2013 were reported by who (sniadack et al. 1999 ). 4. malaria-malaria is one of the highest causes of mortality in endemic areas with around 3.2 billion people (approximately half of the world population) at risk of the disease. since the year 2000, malaria mortality rates have reduced by 45 % globally and 49 % in africa (who|world malaria report 2013 shows major progress in fight against malaria, calls for sustained financing, n.d.). transmitted by anopheles mosquitoes, the parasite from the genus plasmodium is responsible for the disease. plasmodium falciparum causes the most severe form of malaria (beare et al. 2011; boeuf et al. 2008; milner et al. 2012; montgomery et al. 2007; roca-feltrer et al. 2012) . p. falciparum is common in sub-saharan africa while p. vivax is common in asia. despite the availability of drugs that treat malaria, complications have risen due to development of resistance to the drugs by the parasite. this has led to change in the first-line drugs for treatment of malaria over the years. since the 1950s drugs such as chloroquine, sulphoxine pyrimethamine (fansidar), lumefantrine artemether (lar) and artemisnin combination drugs are some of those that have been used as first-line drugs. sadly the parasite has developed resistance to most of these drugs. the current malaria treatment uses artemisnin combination therapy, which is recommended by who for treating uncomplicated malaria. it has been observed in the past decade that the parasite is developing resistance to artemisnin in south-east asia (cambodia, laos, myanmar, thailand and viet nam). several methods for malaria prevention have been used including indoor residual spraying to kill the mosquito vector, sleeping under insecticide treated bed nets to prevent mosquito bites and destruction of mosquito habitats. children under the age of 5 and pregnant women are at high risk (who|world malaria report 2013 shows major progress in fight against malaria, calls for sustained financing, n.d.). 5. smallpox-is one of the success stories in infectious diseases as it was declared eradicated by who in 1980. smallpox was one of the most devastating diseases ever known. the last case diagnosed with smallpox was in 1977. the smallpox eradication programme, which ran from 1966 to 1980 was successful in identifying and following up on infected cases and finally in eradication of the disease. the viral disease caused by the variola virus was highly contagious and was transmitted through droplets during close contact with an infected person. eradication of smallpox is a success story in the infectious disease history. the efforts put together to contain the disease in the areas where it was endemic, active surveillance, vaccination and informative campaigns including following trails of the disease by "smallpox detectives" led to the eradication of the disease. the smallpox vaccine prevented infection and lessened the severity of the disease (who|smallpox, n.d., who|the smallpox eradication programme-sep (1966 -1980 , n.d.). 6. yellow fever-is spread by several species of the aedes mosquito. over 900 million people are at risk of yellow fever in endemic countries in africa and latin america. the disease has 50 % mortality in those with severe infections if untreated. the yellow fever vaccine is available and provides lifelong immunity. despite the availability of the vaccine there has been an increase in cases of yellow fever in the past two decades. human factors such as deforestation, urbanization, migration of people and lack of, and/or decline of immunity and climate change have contributed to the increase in cases (who|yellow fever, n.d.). 7. influenza-a viral disease spread through droplets in coughs and sneezes, influenza has caused several outbreaks including four major ones. these include the 1918 spanish influenza, which was followed 40 years later by the asian influenza pandemic of 1958, and 11 years later the 1969 hong kong influenza outbreak and finally 40 years later in 2009 the avian h1n1 influenza pandemic. although a vaccine is available, it is only available on a yearly basis as the combinations of the strains to be included in the vaccine are determined by surveillance information collected each year. influenza affects all ages worldwide (who|influenza (seasonal), n.d.). 8. cholera-a dangerous infectious disease transmitted through water contaminated with faecal matter. cholera is a bacterial disease caused by vibrio cholerae. outbreaks are common in developing countries, especially in sub-saharan africa due to poor sanitation. cholera can also be contracted from food that has come into contact with contaminated water, for example fruit and vegetables that have been washed with contaminated water. characterized by the "rice water" diarrhoea, cholera can easily spread in communities resulting in local outbreaks especially during the rainy season in endemic regions. 9. sleeping sickness (trypanosomiasis)-common in sub-saharan africa, trypanosomiasis is a parasitic disease transmitted by two vectors, tsetse flies for the african trypanosomiasis and triatomes (kissing bugs) for the american trypanosomiasis (chagas disease). the parasite trypanosoma brucei is responsible for the african sleeping sickness. two species of the parasite are responsible for african sleeping sickness, t. b rhodesiense which causes acute infection and t. b gambiense which causes chronic disease. 10. hiv-the current hiv pandemic has resulted in approximately 1.5 million deaths in 2013 with approximately 35 million people infected globally. sub-saharan africa carries the huge burden of the disease. spread through body fluids, including sexual transmission, hiv has spread worldwide. about 3.2 million children were living with hiv in 2013. mother to child transmission has resulted in children being infected with the virus at birth or during breast feeding. with no vaccine and/or cure at present abstinence and/or practicing safe sex through the use of condoms are the ways of preventing infection, being faithful to one partner is another way of preventing the spread of the disease if both partners are hiv negative. to suppress the hiv virus and/or stop the progression of the disease, anti-retro viral treatment is available for pregnant women, children born from hiv positive mothers and for people living with the virus (who|use of antiretrovirals for treatment and prevention of hiv infection, n.d.). 11. severe acute respiratory syndrome (sars)-an emerging viral disease that was first reported in asia in 2003, sars is caused by coronavirus. spread through droplets the disease can rapidly spread within a country and across borders. people of all ages are at risk of the disease. there has been no other diagnosis of the disease since 2004. the disease is believed to have been of zoonotic origin. sars is a good example of how infectious diseases can spread rapidly (board 2013 ; who|severe acute respiratory syndrome (sars), n.d.). 12. dengue haemorrhagic fever-a viral disease that is transmitted by mosquitoes of the genus aedes. the disease is endemic in the tropics and both children and adults are at high risk of contracting the disease. there is no treatment for the disease currently and the only way to prevent the spread of the disease is by controlling the mosquito vector. a vaccine against all four dengue serotypes has currently passed phase 3 trials (villar et al. 2015) . dengue is one of the neglected tropical diseases in the world causing over 390 million dengue infections every year with 128 countries at risk of the disease. dengue fever is present in the americas, south-east asia and the pacific with recent outbreaks occurring in europe (france and croatia in 2010, portugal in 2012) and the united states (florida in 2013). the threat of the disease is increasing and it is a global threat. with the climate change that is being experienced globally vectors are now able to reach and survive in areas that they have never been reported before (aubry et al. 2012; brady et al. 2012; who|dengue, n.d.) .the success of the pathogens in causing diseases is attributed to among others, the ability of the pathogens to evade the host immune system. in order to survive the human immune system, the pathogens have developed strategies that have allowed for their survival and perpetuation. these include virulence, genetic modifications that allow the pathogen to evade the host immune system, and adaptation of pathogens to new environments.research on infectious disease has a resulted in new vaccines and new diagnostic tools that have enabled understanding the pathogenicity and epidemiology of these disease and human development.infectious disease outbreaks have led to new research, understanding of the disease causing pathogens, and the ability of the human body to fight and survive disease.today there are vaccines to some infectious diseases and yet there are still others where vaccines and/or treatments are not yet available. despite this fact, the human population has been able to find ways of controlling and preventing the spread of these diseases.for easy understanding, infectious diseases can be classified according to their modes of transmission.infectious diseases are classified into four categories; those that are transmitted through contaminated food and water, those transmitted by vectors, those transmitted by contact and finally those that are transmitted through droplets/aerosols.diseases that are transmitted through contaminated food and water are known as food-borne and waterborne diseases respectively. these diseases can be caused by bacteria, viruses, protozoans, metazoans (worms) and parasites that have contaminated food and/or water. the food and water can be contaminated through faeces or urine that has found its way into a water source. if the food or water is consumed without proper treatmentthe affected individuals could get sick. washing fruit and vegetables with contaminated water can result in disease causing agents from the water attaching themselves to these items and consumption of such may result in infection. this mode of transmission is also known as the faecal-oral transmission. another common mode of transmission is the oral transmission; this is where a person consumes food and/or water contaminated by disease causing agents.a person may also be infected through what is known as the hand to mouth transmission. this is where an individual contaminates food or water that is being consumed through hands that are contaminated by disease causing agents. for example, if an individual has diarrhoea caused by bacteria or viruses, and does not wash hands properly after using the toilet, the individual can contaminate the food with the bacteria and/or virus by touch, thereby spreading the disease. also, if a person is taking care of someone who has diarrhoea and does not wash hands properly after handling contaminated clothes or cleaning up faecal material, that person can contaminate the food and/or water by touch resulting in spread of the disease. this also applies to touching vomit that is contaminated by disease causing agents.in rural areas of most developing countries where sanitation is poor, diarrhoeal infections are a common occurrence. in sub-saharan africa and most parts of south-east asia, lack of toilets has led to people defecating in water and/or in the bush. when the rain comes, these excreta are washed away and end up in unprotected wells and other water sources such as rivers. domestic use of contaminated water may result in infection.in parts of the world where the diet includes eating raw or undercooked food, there is a high risk of infection by pathogens. consumption of raw or undercooked pork can result in infections of tapeworm, taenia solium. tapeworm infections can result in a serious disease known as cysticercosis. cysticercosis mainly affects the health and livelihoods of subsistence farming communities in developing countries of africa, asia and latin america. cysticercosis infections can lead to epilepsy and death in humans. it also reduces the market value of pigs and cattle and makes pork and beef unsafe to eat. this disease causes loss of human labour through sickness or death, which directly affects the livelihoods of communities in affected regions. reduction of market value of infected livestock affects the households' income which in turn could affect their livelihoods.in areas close to water bodies, where livelihoods include fishing and other vocations that involve spending time in slow moving water, populations are at risk of parasitic infections. these include diseases such as bilharzia, where standing and swimming in water infested with disease causing parasites could result in an infection.the beautiful tropical paradises around the globe are a source of great beauty and relaxation, at the same time the tropics are a habitat of diseases that are commonly called tropical diseases. most of these tropical diseases are contagious, that is, they can spread from one individual to another directly through contact or indirectly through vectors. a vector is any agent, human, animal or microbe that carries and spreads an infectious disease pathogen from one individual to another. the most common vectors are insects. these include mosquitoes, flies, ticks, lice, fleas, mites and sandflies. most of these vectors feed on blood and transmit the pathogen through their saliva and mouthparts as they feed. the disease pathogen is therefore introduced directly into the bloodstream. other vectors such as triatomes introduce pathogens through their excreta. the triatomes defecate during feeding and if their excreta gets into an open wound or cut that may result from the host scratching in response to a bite from the triatome bug; the pathogen is then introduced into the host. human lice have been known to transmit deadly diseases including typhus (fournier et al. 2002; mokrani et al. 2004 ). the lice introduce the pathogens during feeding on human blood. ticks have also been known to transmit pathogens responsible for rickettsia infections in sub-saharan africa (raoult et al. 2001) .these insect vectors transmit diseases by biting a person infected with the disease and thereafter biting another person during their next meal. this cycle is very critical as it is challenging to control the spread of the disease without human intervention. this intervention includes humans protecting themselves from insect bites, controlling vector breeding sites and personal hygiene.infectious diseases transmitted by contact include ebola, hiv, cholera and skin infections such as scabies and yaws disease. these diseases can be spread through person-to-person contact (parasitic skin diseases), contact with contaminated material such as clothes, fluids from an infected person (cholera, ebola) and/or a corpse (ebola), as well as sexual transmission as in the case of hiv.infectious diseases spread through droplets include measles, tb, influenza, common colds and sars. these diseases easily spread in closed environments and overcrowded areas.1. incubation stage: this is the time between the exposure to the pathogen and the appearance of the first signs and symptoms in an individual. during the incubation period, the pathogen establishes itself within the human host. during this period the host does not show any signs or symptoms of illness. 2. prodormal period: though not all infectious diseases have this period, this is the time that general signs and symptoms start to appear in the infected host. these symptoms are general hence cannot be directly linked to a specific disease. 3. illness period: during this time the specific signs and symptoms for a disease start to show, the infected individual is clinically ill and may manifest mild and/or severe symptoms of disease. 4. decline period: due to the host immune system and/or treatment the signs and symptoms of disease start to decline at this stage. the infected individual is now progressing into recovery. 5. convalescence stage: this is the recovery period, the signs and symptoms of disease have disappeared and infected individual is showing signs of recovery.lack of potable water and poor sanitation is directly and indirectly associated with infectious diseases. in developing countries and regions where potable water is scarce, communities have developed and adopted ways to purify and/or make the water safe to drink. below are some of the methods that have been used.it was a tradition that was passed on from generations in rural villages of sub-saharan africa, to boil water before drinking in order to kill microorganisms. most people would boil drinking water because that is what they saw their mother do as they were growing up; while others knew that they were boiling the water in order to kill microorganisms that could have contaminated the water. with time, those who did not understand why they had to boil their drinking water would relax and stop especially if there was not enough firewood to perform the task. those who knew that they had to boil their water to kill microbes, worked hard to do so even when there was little firewood.boiling water is one of the easy ways of making water safe to drink. it is a method that can be easily adopted by rural population who face the problem of lack of safe drinking water.this is one of the methods taught by health workers from village to village in developing countries. these health workers explain the dangers of drinking water from the water sources be it a river, lake, well or borehole without boiling and the importance of filtering the water before consumption. the filtration method removes tiny soil particles that are mixed with the water, especially in the rainy season. during the rainy season, water from rivers and collects soil particles and debris, filtering the water through a cotton/muslin cloth helps remove these particles. in order to kill microorganisms, the water needs to be boiled and again re-filtered using another clean cloth, rendering it ready for consumption.there are also other water filtration methods that are carried out in many parts of developing countries, depending on the available materials in the respective communities. it is interesting to see that these methods are used as survival methods in the bush in developed countries, while in most parts of developing countries this is a way of life. people have to do this everyday to have safe drinking water. the challenges are enormous; from time to time people drink water from unsafe sources without any treatment and sometimes they do get sick if the water is contaminated. in the worst case scenario cholera outbreaks are common in the rainy season due to surface run-off which collects faecal matter which is then deposited in unprotected water sources that people use on a daily basis. and if the water is not properly treated an outbreak is eminent.in recent years, in some developing countries, doses of chlorine are commercially available. the bottles come with directions on how to treat the water. this method is safe and fast but there is need for training on how to use it. since this is a commercial product only those who can afford use it, making it a luxury for rural populations living on less than a dollar per day.governments in most developing countries are working hard together with ngos to provide safe drinking water to the rural populations at large. the efforts are commendable but the burden is enormous.in sub-saharan africa, cholera outbreaks are a common occurrence. these outbreaks have often been controlled and the sick people treated in the affected nations. due to the frequency of cholera and the campaigns that are carried out to bring awareness of the disease, many people are able to seek medical attention but there are still fatalities in most cases. the major challenge is transportation. because some villages are quite isolated, the sick have to travel several kilometres to find the nearest health facility.drilling of boreholes has helped to bring safe water to most rural communities in developing countries. efforts are being made by ngos and well-wishers all over the world who come and drill these boreholes. the only problem is that when the pumps break down the community members have no expertise and knowledge on how to repair the pumps. the rural populations lack the knowledge, equipment and materials that could help isolate and fix the problem, hence return to their old water sources which may not be as safe.availability of sanitary facilities such as latrines/toilets and proper garbage disposal sites are important in curbing infectious diseases that are spread due to poor sanitation. poorly disposed garbage attracts flies that carry disease causing microorganisms and spread them as they land on food thereby contaminating the food with the microorganisms. lack of latrines/toilets results in open defecation that also attract flies which will also contaminate anything they come into contact with including food.the squatting toilet (pit latrine): due to poor sanitation, campaigns have been launched encouraging people to dig latrines instead of using open defecation. in a typical rural setting in most sub-saharan countries, there is a grass thatched or tin roofed residential house, an outside bathroom, which is usually a square or rectangular space demarcated by grass and wooden poles/bamboo for privacy and a pit latrine which could have a similar demarcation as the bathroom or could be enclosed in a tiny mud hut with a grass thatched roof. even though latrines/toilets 46 3 infectious diseases are constructed differently in different rural communities in developing countries around the world, they serve the same purpose. due to lack of running water in most of the poor rural areas of the world, latrines/toilets are dug in the ground and a slab is placed on top of the pit. the slab has a hole located at the centre where people can pass out urine and faecal matter. if a pit latrine is deep enough it can be used for 2-5 years or more before it fills up, this also depends on the number of people using the latrine. if a pit latrine is used properly, cleaned regularly and is properly covered, it reduces the incidence of infectious diseases especially those spread by vectors such as flies. if the hole of the pit latrine is left open flies come out and they land on fruits and food contaminating them with microbes which can cause diseases to those who consume the food. proper hygiene is needed in order to safely use and manage pit latrines. in rural schools of sub-saharan africa, these are the toilets that are available and students from different villages who attend the school use these facilities. if these facilities are poorly maintained there is a high risk of infectious disease outbreaks. since most of the children in these schools come from poor families, most of them do not have shoes; if the toilets are dirty the children would opt to go and use the surrounding bushes instead of the toilets. this also encourages the spread of diseases fig. 3 .3 poverty and rural sanitation in the top 10 poorest countries in the world in 2014. this graph compares poverty head count ratio, percent rural population with access to improved sanitation as of 2012 in the 10 poorest countries of the world to the world average and the percent population below national poverty line between the countries as the flies will be feeding on these faecal matter and will carry these to the food in their homes, making them sick in return.it is therefore necessary to understand this vicious cycle of poverty, sanitation and infectious diseases, how infectious diseases have resulted in increasing poverty among the poor populations of the world, which has further resulted in poor living conditions including sanitation. poor sanitation presents a high risk for infectious diseases, hence the cycle is maintained (fig. 3.3) .poor sanitation has allowed for disease vector breeding grounds. some of the most deadly and dangerous infectious diseases are transmitted by mosquitoes. these include malaria, dengue and filariasis (elephantiasis) which are prevalent in sub-saharan africa and the tropics. mosquitoes breed in stagnant water, which may collect in water pools around the homes and in unused utensils around the home that are hollow and can collect water. mosquitoes lay their eggs that hatch and develop to the adult stages in these water pools. since the water is not moving, there is plenty of food for the developing mosquito stages. here are some of the possible places where water collects; holes/pools on the ground, old utensils that are lying around in the open, e.g. pots, plates, cups, cans, water fountains, bases of flower pots, on big leaves and hollow stems in tree trunks, old tyres and anything that is hollow and can collect water.it is therefore very important to drain and/or turn upside down all things that can collect water fill all water pools.for the past decade, campaigns to bring awareness on association of mosquito bites and the transmission of malaria, dengue and filariasis have been ongoing in the affected regions. these campaigns aimed at equipping populations in rural communities with vital information on how to protect themselves from mosquito bites thereby preventing disease, have proved to be a great success. for example since the introduction of insecticide treated bed nets (itns), there has been a drop in malaria incidence in those areas where people are using them effectively (who| world malaria report 2013 shows major progress in fight against malaria, calls for sustained financing, n.d.).people in rural areas cannot afford insect repellent as this is costly. in a typical rural setting, people work during the day in their farms and around the home, but gather together in the evening to socialize. it is during this time that these people are at risk of being bitten by mosquitoes that transmit malaria. because people are usually moving around during this time they may be bitten by mosquitoes but not compared to how much they can be bitten when they are asleep. that is why sleeping under itns is one of the strategies that have helped reduce the incidence of the disease. in some countries, prices of itns have been subsidized so that most people can afford them. some are handed out free, especially to expectant mothers and to mothers with children under 5 years of age.other infectious diseases associated with poor sanitation include epidemic typhus. outbreaks of epidemic typhus have been associated with poor hygiene in some developing countries (fournier et al. 2002; mokrani et al. 2004) . poor body hygiene results in incidence of body lice which can be passed on within the household and the community through contaminated clothing and contact. the lice transmit the pathogens responsible for epidemic typhus during feeding, and as the lice are passed on from one individual to another they pass on the disease. proper body hygiene can reduce the incidence of body lice.clean surroundings and proper garbage disposal will reduce the incidence of houseflies that can transmit microorganisms associated with diarrhoeal diseases.good sanitation goes a long way in reducing the risk of spread of infectious diseases.other factors that have contributed to poverty and poor living conditions include: environmental factors such as natural disasters, population growth; political factors including civil wars and tribal conflicts, and social factors. the world bank indicators on improved sanitation facilities in rural areas estimated that in the year 2012, 46.5 % of the world rural population had access to improved sanitation facilities, with 33.2 % in low income countries, 33.9 % in low medium income countries, 61.5 % in upper middle income countries and 92.8 % in high income countries having access to improved sanitation. according to the world bank, improved sanitation facilities include, flush/pour flush (to piped sewer system, septic tank, pit latrine), ventilated improved pit (vip) latrine, pit latrine with slab, and composting toilet http://data.worldbank.org/indicator/sh.sta.acsn.ru/ countries/1w-xm-xn-xt?display=map.the democratic republic of congo and madagascar have the highest percent of population living under $1.25 per day at 87.7 % (poverty head count ratio). national poverty lines, calculated from weighted household surveys, show the actual population within a country that is poor. the national poverty lines vary between countries (fig. 3.3 ).infectious diseases that coincide with the rainy season have a great impact on agricultural production. families will spend time taking care of their sick instead of working on the farm. the disease lowers the capacity of the farmer to work on the farm; this in turn affects the crop productivity and yield. guinea-worm disease for example is known as "the disease of the empty granary", this is because an individual suffering from the disease is non-functional for months and since the disease coincides with the farming season, those infected are not able to take care of their fields hence low crop production (who|about guinea-worm disease, n.d.).due to illness in the family, redistribution of labour and responsibility occurs. if the head of the household and/or a family member falls ill, the family has to shift the responsibilities, including taking care of the sick and finding extra work to earn the needed income. this results in older children missing out school and/or dropping out of school in search of piece work to support their families while the parents take care of the sick. if the disease is chronic, this may result in long-term hospitalization thereby changing the equilibrium of the household completely. death of a parent or both parents due to infectious diseases results in orphans making the situation worse in the household.loss of labour due to death and/or sickness directly affects livelihoods. when an individual is chronically ill they are not able to carry out their normal day-to-day work resulting in a gap in the workforce. this loss of labour impacts the productivity and output of the household and the community. at the household level, complete loss of labour due to death affects the income of the household due to expenditures to meet costs of taking care of the sick and funeral costs. this further plunges the household into financial stress and poverty.in order to meet the extra financial needs created by disease in a household, the family may be forced to sell off their assets in order to pay for transportation of the sick member to the hospital, to pay for hospital bills and/or to settle funeral costs. this further plunges the family into poverty and may result in loss of their livelihood to lack of capital, hence poverty for the household.death in a household, especially of the head of the family and/or breadwinner, results in orphans. these orphans will require support from other family members to survive. this puts stress on the remaining family members. if the surviving family members are not able to take up the extra dependants, the orphans will drop out of school to find ways and means to support themselves. usually, the oldest of the orphaned children will take on the responsibility of taking care of the family.infectious diseases can cause malnutrition; this lowers the productivity of the individual and my affect output. apart from malnutrition, infectious diseases are associated with displacement of populations as people try to move away from areas where disease is rampant. this in turn results in loss of property, poor housing and lack of other resources necessary for their survival such as safe drinking water and proper sanitation.infectious diseases have resulted in weakening of the immune system of the affected individuals, making them vulnerable to other infectious diseases. these opportunistic infections further weaken their bodies and affect their productivity.even if an individual recovers from an infectious disease, some of these diseases cause crippling and debilitating effects which result in disability. these disabilities could lead to partial or complete loss of a livelihood. since the rural poor are the most affected by infectious diseases, these ailments further plunge these populations into poverty.infectious diseases are an important aspect in human development and livelihoods. the impact of infectious diseases on the human population has been felt for centuries and has led to discoveries that have preserved and allowed for survival of the human population. due to exposure to these diseases, humans have developed immunity to infectious diseases. the impact of infectious diseases also led to biomedical research, which has resulted in development of vaccines and understanding mechanisms of disease. despite these discoveries there are still millions of people affected by infectious diseases worldwide, most of them living in poor rural regions of developing countries. rural populations suffer the huge impact of infectious diseases. these rural communities are vulnerable to infectious diseases and their livelihoods are greatly affected by the impact of these diseases.with varying modes of transmission, infectious disease pathogens have been able to survive in different hosts and environments. sanitation plays an important role in the success of infectious diseases. poor sanitation provides a breeding ground for infectious disease pathogens. these diseases affect livelihoods, including health and economic growth.